
Foot and ankle 
Forefoot 


Jones (zone 2) proximal fifth metatarsal fracture: Frontal radiograph demonstrates a minimally displaced fracture at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction. 
Anatomy (blue) and overview of common fractures (red) 
phalanges 
metatarsals 

• Metatarsal base avulsion (zone 1) is a fracture at 
the most proximal base of the fifth metatarsal. Treatment is conservative, with a boot. The peroneus brevis and lateral aspect of the plantar 
aponeurosis attach at the fifth metatarsal base. 
• Jones fracture (zone 2) is a fracture of the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction. A Jones fracture carries a worse prognosis compared to an avulsion fracture due to reduced blood supply 
at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction. Treatment is variable and may require surgery. 
• The metatarsal shaft (zone 3) is a common location for stress fracture. 
great toe distal phalanx fracture 
most common phalangeal fracture 
Zone 3 (shaft fracture) Zone 2 (Jones fracture) 
metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction 
Zone 1 (avulsion fracture) 

Freiberg’s infraction: 
Frontal radiograph demonstrates subchondral irregularity, sclerosis, and collapse of the head of the second metatarsal (arrow) in this skeletally immature child. 
• Freiberg’s infraction is avascular necrosis of the second metatarsal head. It is caused by repetitive stress or poorly fitting shoes (such as high-heels) and usually occurs in young women. 
Metatarsal stress fracture 


Initial radiograph Axial T2-weighted MRI with fat 
supp. obtained two weeks later Metatarsal stress fracture: Initial radiographs demonstrate extremely subtle periosteal reaction and endosteal thickening (yellow arrow) of the lateral cortex of the second metatarsal. MRI performed two weeks later demonstrated interval development of a fracture line (red arrow), with exuberant callus formation, intramedullary edema, and surrounding periosteal edema. Follow-up radiographs performed after the MRI demonstrate interval progressive healing with solid-appearing periosteal reaction (yellow arrows) but persistently evident fracture lucency (red arrow). 
• The first radiographic sign of a metatarsal stress fracture is a barely perceptible linear cortical lucency. Usually, stress fractures are not apparent on radiographs until periostitis and callus have begun to form. 

Fibular hallux sesamoid fracture: 
Radiograph (left image) shows either a bipartite fibular (lateral) hallux sesamoid, versus a sesamoid fracture with slight distraction (arrows). MRI was performed, and sagittal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression demonstrated an acute-appearing sesamoid fracture (note absence of cortication at the fracture margins) with distraction of the fragments (yellow arrows), tear of the inferior joint capsule (red arrow), and surrounding edema. 
• Fracture of the great toe sesamoid bones is typically caused by extreme hyperextension or dorsal dislocation (which may be transient) of the first metatarsophalangeal joint. 
The flexor hallucis brevis attaches to the sesamoids; the medial head attaches to the tibial (medial) sesamoid and the lateral head attaches to the fibular (lateral) sesamoid. 
• 
A bipartite sesamoid is a normal variant that may simulate a sesamoid fracture; however, a bipartite sesamoid will be round in shape and its margins will be completely corticated. Additionally, the sum of the parts of the bipartite sesamoid will be larger in size than the other sesamoid. 

• 
The term turf toe has been used to describe a wide range of injuries at the first MTP joint including sesamoid fracture. The anatomy of the great toe MTP is complex, but it is important to note that the flexor hallucis longus tendon courses plantar to and between the sesamoids. 



Anatomy of the great toe metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint. LCL: Lateral collateral ligament; MCL: medial collateral ligament. Illustrations by Luis Beltran, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 

Frontal radiograph of the foot shows a homolateral dislocation at the Lisfranc joint, with fracture of the base of the second metatarsal (arrow). 
• 
The tarsometatarsal joint is the Lisfranc joint, named after the French surgeon in the Napoleonic wars who performed amputations at this joint. The stability of the joint depends on multiple ligaments, with the Lisfranc ligament being the most important. The Lisfranc ligament is an interosseous ligamentous complex attaching the medial cuneiform to the second metatarsal base. 

• 
A Lisfranc fracture-dislocation is a fracture-dislocation of the tarsometatarsal joint. The treatment of a Lisfranc injury is surgical. A missed or untreated Lisfranc injury can lead to debilitating osteoarthritis and flattening of the longitudinal arch. 

• 
Lisfranc injuries are classified into homolateral and divergent based on the direction of dislocation of the first metatarsal. In a divergent Lisfranc injury, the first metatarsal is medially dislocated and the second through fifth metatarsals are laterally dislocated. In homolateral injury, all metatarsals will dislocate laterally. 




divergent 

homolateral 



• Subtle malalignment of the tarsometatarsal joint may signal serious ligamentous injury. Weight-bearing radiographs are the most sensitive. Careful evaluation of the alignment of the Lisfranc joint must always be performed, as in this normal example below. 


• lateral base of 1st metatarsal should be aligned with lateral aspect of 1st cuneiform 
• 
medial base of 2nd metatarsal should be aligned with medial aspect of 2nd cuneiform 



• medial base of 3rd metatarsal should be aligned with medial aspect of 3rd cuneiform 

easier to see on oblique
• medial base of 4th metatarsal should be aligned with medial aspect of cuboid 

the dorsal proÿle of the tarsometatarsal (Lisfranc) joint should be uninterrupted 
Navicular osteonecrosis 

Kohler disease: 
Oblique radiograph of the foot in a child demonstrates irregular sclerosis of the navicular (arrow), in keeping with Kohler disease. 
• Osteonecrosis of the navicular is called Kohler disease in childhood and Müeller-Weiss disease in adults. Kohler disease is typically self limited and occurs more commonly in boys, while Müeller-Weiss disease is more severe in course and occurs more commonly in adult women. 


Midfoot and hindfoot trauma 
Overview of common fractures 
Chopart fracture-dislocation 
talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints 

Kohler disease (children) Mller-Weiss disease (adults) 
avascular necrosis of the navicular 
talar neck fracture 
classiÿcation: Hawkins 

calcaneal fractures 
multiple classiÿcations: 
    Essex-Lopresti
    Sanders (CT-based) 

forefoot midfoot hindfoot 
Chopart fracture-dislocation 

Frontal radiograph Lateral radiograph 


Sagittal CT Sagittal CT 
Chopart fracture-dislocation: Radiographs show incongruity of the talonavicular (yellow arrows) and calcaneocuboid (red arrow) joints, and a longitudinal fracture of the navicular (blue arrow). CT shows true extent of injury, with comminuted fracture (blue arrows) and dorsal dislocation of the navicular (yellow arrows) and comminuted fracture of the anterior calcaneus (green arrows). 
• 
The Chopart joint is formed by the talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints. 

• 
Chopart fracture-dislocation is typically caused by high-impact trauma. Associated fractures of the calcaneus, cuboid, and navicular bones are often present. 

• 
The calcaneus is the most commonly fractured tarsal bone. 

• 
Traumatic fractures of the calcaneus are typically the result of a high-impact injury, such as a fall from height, in which case the fracture is known as the lover’s fracture. In such cases, there is a high association with other serious injuries including lumbar spine fractures, traumatic aortic rupture, and renal vascular pedicle avulsion. If a traumatic calcaneal fracture is identified, further imaging of the lumbar spine and/or abdomen is recommended. 

• 
Subtle fractures may not be directly visible; however, a decrease in the Boehler angle to less than 20° is diagnostic of a calcaneal fracture. 



posterior tuberosity of calcaneus 
.      superior aspect of anterior process of calcaneus to superior aspect of posterior subtalar articular surface 

The Boehler angle is formed by drawing two lines: 
.      superior aspect of posterior tuberosity of calcaneus and the superior aspect of posterior subtalar facet 
A Boehler angle <20° is diagnostic of a calcaneal fracture. A normal Boehler angle (20-40°) does not exclude a calcaneal fracture. 
• 
The Essex-Lopresti classification divides calcaneal fractures into those sparing the subtalar joint (25%) and fractures extending into the subtalar joint (75%). 

• 
The Sanders classification is based on the number of comminuted fragments at the talonavicular joint, as seen on coronal CT. 


Calcaneal stress fracture 

Calcaneal stress fracture: 
Sagittal STIR MRI demonstrates diffuse edema of the calcaneus with a low signal intensity fracture line (arrow) posteriorly. 
Note the typical orientation of the fracture line perpendicular to the calcaneal trabeculae. 
• A stress fracture of the calcaneus typically appears as a fluffy band of sclerosis within the calcaneus, with an intact cortex. Boehler’s angle is normal. The sclerosis tends to be oriented perpendicular to the calcaneal trabeculae. 

Talar neck fracture: 
Lateral radiograph shows a minimally displaced fracture through the talar neck (arrows). 
• 
Fractures of the talus can be divided anatomically into lateral process, posterior process, head, body, and neck fractures. 

• 
Fractures of the talar neck are classified by the Hawkins classification. A talar neck fracture may disrupt the blood supply to the talus and predispose to osteonecrosis. 

• 
The Hawkins sign describes a subchondral lucent band seen on the frontal ankle radiograph 6–8 weeks after ankle immobilization. The lucent band represents increased bone reabsorption from active hyperemia. The presence of the Hawkins sign implies an intact blood supply to the talar dome and is a good prognostic indicator in talar neck fractures. 



Hawkins sign: 
Frontal radiograph shows a subtle subchondral lucent band of the talar dome (arrows), indicating healing. 
Osteochondral lesion of the talus 

Osteochondral lesion of the lateral talar dome: Mortise radiograph (left image) shows a subtle lucency of the lateral talar dome (arrow). Coronal T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression shows a linear fluid signal intensity subchondral lesion (yellow arrow), with irregularity of the overlying subchondral bone plate (red arrow). The fluid undercutting the lesion indicates instability. 
• 
The term osteochondral lesion is a broadly used general term to describe a variety of acute or chronic abnormalities of the cartilage, the subchondral bone plate (cortex underneath the cartilage), and the subchondral bone. 

• 
Osteochondral lesion of the talus can describe either osteochondritis dissecans from chronic repetitive microtrauma (typically in younger patients) and acute traumatic osteochondral defect. 

• 
Osteochondral lesions and their staging are discussed in the knee section. 

• 
In the talus, an osteochondral lesion appears on radiography as a crescentic lucency of the talar dome. MR imaging is similar to MR imaging of knee osteochondral lesions, where fluid undercutting the lesion or cystic change deep to the lesion indicates instability. 


Hindfoot (tarsal) coalition 
• 
Abnormal fusion of two tarsal bones may be a cause of hindfoot pain. Hindfoot coalitions often present in adolescence as the coalition begins to ossify. A coalition may be fibrous, cartilaginous, or osseous. 

• 
The vast majority of hindfoot coalitions are either talocalcaneal (fusion of the talus and calcaneus) or calcaneonavicular (fusion of the calcaneus and navicular). 

• 
Talocalcaneal coalition occurs most commonly at the middle subtalar facet. 



Talocalcaneal coalition: Lateral radiograph of the ankle (left image) shows the classic C sign (yellow arrows) due to fusion of the medial talus and sustentaculum tali. A fibrous coalition (red arrows) is confirmed on the coronal CT (right image), with sclerosis and subchondral cysts of the middle subtalar facet. 
The C sign on the lateral radiograph represents a continuous C-shaped contour of the fused middle subtalar facet (medial talus fused with the sustentaculum tali). The C sign is not sensitive for the detection of talocalcaneal coalition, but may be helpful when seen. 
The talar beak sign on the lateral radiograph describes a triangular-shaped beaking at the anterior-superior aspect of the talus. 
• Calcaneonavicular coalition is fusion between the anterior process of the calcaneus and the navicular. 
The anteater sign represents the elongated anterior process of the calcaneus which looks like an anteater’s nose on the lateral view. 

Ankle anatomy for MR 
Cross-sectional ligament anatomy on MR: Sequential PD-weighted images 
Superÿcial deltoid ligament 

Anterior tibioÿbular (anterior syndesmotic) ligament Deep deltoid 
Note ˜at medial margin 
ligament 
of ÿbula at the level of the syndesmotic ligaments 
Posterior tibioÿbular (posterior syndesmotic) ligament 

Anterior taloÿbular (ATFL) ligament 
Note comma-shaped medial margin of ÿbula at the level of the collateral ligaments 
Posterior taloÿbular (PTFL) ligament 

Spring ligament 

Spring ligament is 
located just deep/lateral Posterior tibial 
to the posterior tibial tendon (PTT) tendon 


The CFL is the most caudal lateral collateral ligament, located just deep/medial to the peroneals 
Peroneal tendons 
Calcaneoÿbular (CFL) ligament 




ÿbula 
peroneus brevis muscle 
Achilles tendon 
Lateral ankle tendons and ligaments 

runs under foot, attaches to medial cuneiform and ÿrst metatarsal 
(only medial cuneiform attachment shown) 
• The lateral collateral complex involves the ATFL, PTFL, and CFL. These ligaments are commonly injured in ankle sprains (typically inversion injury), but are not usually injured in the most common ankle fracture patterns (most commonly external rotation on the talus with the foot in supination). 

spring (calcaneonavicular) ligament complex 
several components, but most important is called superomedial oblique (drawn), which is located directly deep to posterior tibialis tendon (not shown). 
sustentaculum tali (part of calcaneus) 
along with the posterior tibial tendon* (not drawn), the spring ligament complex functions to maintain the arch of the foot 
*most common cause of acquired ˜at foot is posterior tibial tendon tear 
Medial ankle tendons 
contents of tarsal tunnel, from anterior to posterior: Tom, Dick, ANd Harry 

posterior tibial tendon (only main component is drawn) main component inserts on navicular tuberosity and medial cuneiform plantar component inserts onto bases of 2nd - 4th metatarsals (not drawn) recurrent component inserts on sustentaculum tali of calcaneus (not drawn) 
Anterior extensor tendons 
• Arranged from medial to lateral, the anterior extensor tendons can be remembered with the 
mnemonic “Tom, Harry, and Dick”: Tibialis anterior. Extensor Hallucis longus. Extensor Digitorum longus. 
• 
The anterior tibial artery runs anteriorly with the extensor tendons. 

• 
The syndesmosis is a fibrous ligamentous complex that connects the distal tibia and fibula, where the distal fibula fits into a groove in the distal tibia. 

• 
The major ligaments of the syndesmosis are the anterior and posterior tibiofibular ligaments. Other ligaments interposed between these are less important. 

• 
Injury to the syndesmosis tends to occur like opening a book, with tear of the anterior tibiofibular ligament, followed by tear of the posterior tibiofibular ligament in higher-grade injuries. There are usually ankle fractures by the time the posterior tibiofibular ligament is torn, but the anterior tibiofibular ligament can tear without fracture. 



Anterior tibioÿbular ligament 
Ankle sprains 
• 
Sprains are the most common ankle injury. These are usually due to ankle inversion, and the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) of the lateral collateral ligamentous complex is the most commonly torn ligament in ankle sprains. 

• 
A “high ankle sprain” is a colloquial/informal term for injury to the syndesmosis (most commonly the anterior syndesmotic (anterior tibiofibular) ligament, without fracture. 


Ankle fractures 
• 
Injury to the lateral collateral ligaments is much less common in ankle fractures. The syndesmotic ligaments are the most commonly torn ligaments in ankle fractures. 

• 
The Danis-Weber classification (commonly shortened to the Weber classification) is the simplest classification of ankle fractures and divides ankle fractures based on the level of the fibular fracture relative to the syndesmosis. 


Weber A is a distal fibular fracture with an intact syndesmosis. Usually treated conservatively. Weber B is a fibular fracture at the level of the ankle joint, with indeterminate status of the syndesmosis. 
Although by far the most common, this is the least useful classification because the status of the syndsmosis is unclear. Treatment depends on stability of the syndesmosis. Weber C is a high fibular fracture above the level of the syndesmosis, with functional deficiency of the 
syndesmosis. Usually treated surgically. 
• The Lauge-Hansen classification divides ankle fractures based on the position of the foot at the time of injury, and the direction of the force acting on the talus. At first glance it is a complicated system, but approximately 90% of ankle fractures are supination-external rotation (SER) pattern, so it makes sense to focus on this pattern of injury, as discussed on the following page. 

SER stage I: Note supinated position of the foot, with external rotation force on the talus. First stage of injury is tear of the anterior tibiofibular (anterior syndesmotic) ligament. 





SER stage IV: Tear of the deltoid ligament OR horizontal fracture of the medial malleolus. 
Supination-external rotation (SER) stages I through IV: This classification is helpful to predict the ligaments torn. For instance, in stage IV (identified by widening of the medial clear space or medial malleolus fracture), one can predict there is also either a posterior syndesmotic ligament tear or fracture of the posterior malleolus. 

Supination-external rotation (SER) stage IV ankle fracture: 
Mortise (left image) and lateral ankle radiographs show an oblique fracture (red arrows) through the distal fibula at the level of the syndesmosis (blue star). There is widening of the medial clear space (yellow arrow). 
Widening of the medial clear space is indicative of deltoid ligament disruption, indicative of a stage IV injury. We can also presume that the anterior and posterior syndesmotic ligaments are torn, and this is an unstable pattern of injury. 
• 
Tillaux fracture is a Salter Harris III fracture of the lateral tibial epiphyses, typically seen in adolescents. 

• 
Triplane fracture (also known as a Marmor-Lynn fracture) represents three distinct fractures through the distal tibia: a vertical epiphyseal fracture, horizontal physeal fracture, and oblique metaphyseal fracture. 

• 
Wagstaffe-LeFort fracture is an avulsion of the anterior distal fibula at site of insertion of the anterior tibiofibular (anterior syndesmotic) ligament. 

• 
Maisonneuve fracture is a high (proximal) fibular fracture associated with an interosseous membrane tear or medial malleolar fracture. Isolated imaging of the ankle may only detect subtle widening of the ankle mortise, which should prompt a more proximal radiograph. 



Maisonneuve fracture: Frontal radiograph of the ankle (left image) demonstrates an oblique fracture of the medial malleolus (yellow arrow). More proximal imaging of the ipsilateral knee shows an oblique fracture of the proximal fibula (red arrow). 
• Pilon fracture is a comminuted vertically oriented fracture of the distal tibia, with resultant disruption of the tibial plafond. A pilon fracture is caused by axial loading. 

Pilon fracture: Frontal (left image) and lateral (right image) radiographs of the ankle show comminuted oblique and vertically oriented fractures (yellow arrows) of the distal tibia with disruption of the ankle mortise and tibial plafond (red arrow). 

Achilles tendon rupture: 
Two sagittal ultrasound images in a different patient demonstrate full thickness disruption of the Achilles tendon (yellow arrows). There is associated hematoma (red arrows) interposed between the torn and retracted tendon and the calcaneal tuberosity. There is a small stump of tendon remaining attached to the calcaneal tuberosity (blue arrow). 
• 
The Achilles tendon is the most commonly injured ankle tendon. 

• 
Achilles tendinosis can sometimes be evident on radiography as thickening of the tendon. 


Achilles thickening is not specific for tendinosis. Thickening of the Achilles tendon can also be caused by xanthomas in patients with a hyperlipidemia syndrome. 
• 
Complete Achilles rupture is usually evident on clinical exam. Radiography shows discontinuity of the tendon contour, with increased soft tissue in Kager’s fat pad. 

• 
The differential diagnosis of increased soft tissue in Kager’s fat pad includes: Achilles tendon injury. Accessory soleus muscle (most common soft-tissue mass seen in Kager’s fat pad). Haglund disease, which is retrocalcaneal bursitis associated with thickening of the distal Achilles tendon. 


Poorly fitting shoes may be a cause, leading to the nickname pump bumps. 

Posterior tibialis tendon (PTT) split tear: 
Axial PD-weighted image with fat saturation demonstrates a split tear of the posterior tibial tendon (arrow), with surrounding tenosynovitis (red arrow). 
Note slight irregularity and thinning of the spring ligament (blue arrow). 
• 
Along with the spring ligament, the posterior tibialis tendon (PTT) provides crucial support to the longitudinal arch of the foot. Posterior tibialis tendon dysfunction (typically due to chronic degeneration) is implicated in acquired adult flatfoot deformity. 

• 
The PTT courses along the retromalleolar groove posterior to the medial malleolus, and subsequently traverses the tarsal tunnel underneath the flexor retinaculum. Chronic inflammation of the PTT can cause periosteal reaction of the medial malleolus with soft-tissue swelling. 

• 
The major attachment of the PTT is the navicular, but important fibers continue and insert more distally on the cuneiforms and second through fifth metatarsal bases. 

• 
Imaging finding of PTT dysfunction includes tenosynovitis, tendinopathy (enlargement of the tendon or intermediate signal), and tearing (intrasubstance fluid signal). Secondary imaging findings include spring ligament injury and pes planus. 


Anterior tibialis injury 

Anterior tibialis full-thickness tear: Axial T2-weighted image with fat suppression (left image) and sagittal STIR MRI demonstrate a full-thickness tear of the anterior tibialis tendon, with proximal retraction (arrows). 
• 
Injury to anterior tibialis is much less common compared to the posterior tibialis tendon. Rupture of the anterior tibialis may be traumatic or atraumatic in the setting of tendon degeneration. 

• 
An anterior ankle mass is a classic clinical presentation of anterior tibialis rupture.  



Mortise radiograph Coronal  PD-weighted MRI 

Coronal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression Axial PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression 
Deltoid ligament avulsion: Radiograph shows a subtle linear avulsion of the medial talus at the expected insertion site of the deep deltoid ligament (yellow arrow). MRI confirms avulsion of the deltoid ligament, which appears to remain attached onto the avulsed fragment of bone (yellow arrows). There is tearing and periosteal stripping of the superficial deltoid ligament (red arrows), with edema extending to the medial malleolus. 
• 
The deltoid ligament is the predominant ligamentous stabilizer of the medial ankle. 

• 
The deep deltoid is relatively simple anatomically, connecting the tibia and the talus and only spanning one joint. It normally appears striated with interspersed regions of near fluid signal and fat. 

• 
The superficial deltoid ligament is much more complex anatomically, and spans multiple bones, including tibiotalar, tibionavicular, and tibiocalcaneal components, and there is also a tibiospring component that connects the tibia to the spring ligament. This ligamentous complex merges with the medial malleolus periosteum. These individual components are not usually individually distinguishable by MR. 





