Elbow and forearm 
Elbow and forearm trauma 
Elbow dislocation 


Posterior elbow dislocation “terrible triad”: 
Presentation radiographs demonstrate an elbow dislocation with perching of the humerus on the coronoid process. 
Sagittal CT images show a displaced fracture of the coronoid process (yellow arrow) and minimally displaced fracture of the radial head (red arrow). 
The combination of posterior elbow dislocation and fractures of the coronoid process and radial head is known as the “terrible triad”. 
• Following shoulder dislocations, elbow dislocations are the second most common joint dislocation in adults. Posterior dislocations are by far the most common pattern of dislocation. In posterior dislocation, soft tissue damage typically first involves the lateral 

Illustration showing tear of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) in the initial stages of posterior elbow dislocation. 
The LUCL normally cradles the radial head, connecting the lateral epicondyle to the ulna and provides important stability to the lateral elbow. 
Illustration by Luis Beltran, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
• 
Radial head fractures and coronoid process fractures are commonly seen, and the “terrible triad” refers to elbow dislocation with both of these fractures. 

• 
If a radial head fracture is seen in the setting of instability, CT should be performed, as a coronoid process fracture (even if tiny) results in elbow instability. 


MSK: 1065 
Radial head fracture 

Radial head fracture: Lateral radiograph shows an elbow effusion, with a sail sign (yellow arrow) representing anterior displacement of the anterior fat pad. There is also slight posterior displacement of the posterior fat pad (red arrow). 
Frontal elbow radiograph shows a nondisplaced radial head fracture (blue arrow). 
• 
A radial head fracture is the most common elbow fracture in adults. 

• 
The fat pad sign is elevation of the anterior and/or posterior fat pads due to an elbow effusion. Elevation of the posterior fat pad is considered nearly diagnostic for fracture (most commonly radial head fracture in adults). The sail sign represents elevation of the anterior fat pad only and is less specific for fracture. 

• 
If a fat pad sign is present and no fracture is seen, additional views (typically of the radial head) or CT should be obtained. 


Supracondylar fracture 
• Supracondylar fracture is the most common elbow fracture in children. 
Essex-Lopresti fracture-dislocation 
• Essex-Lopresti fracture-dislocation is radial head fracture and tearing of the interosseous membrane with ulnar dislocation at the distal radioulnar joint. 
Monteggia fracture-dislocation 

Monteggia fracture-dislocation: 
Frontal radiograph of the proximal forearm shows a mid­diaphyseal ulnar fracture (yellow arrow) and radial head dislocation (red arrow). 
Case courtesy Stacy Smith, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
• Monteggia fracture-dislocation is an ulnar fracture and radial dislocation at the elbow. MSK: 1066 

Galeazzi fracture-dislocation 

Galeazzi fracture-dislocation: 
Frontal and lateral radiographs of the forearm show a radial diaphyseal fracture of the distal 1/3 of the radial diaphysis (yellow arrows) and distal ulnar dislocation (red arrows). The radial shaft fracture has radial and volar angulation and foreshortening. 
Case courtesy Stacy Smith, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
• Galeazzi fracture-dislocation is fracture of the distal third of the radius with ulnar dislocation at the distal radioulnar joint. 

Colles fracture 
• 
Colles fracture is a distal radius fracture with dorsal angulation. The fracture is usually intra-articular. Colles fracture is the most common injury to the distal forearm. 

• 
Colles fracture typically results from fall on an outstretched hand (FOOSH). 



Barton fracture 
• 
Intra-articular oblique fracture of the dorsal distal radius. 

• 
Associated with dorsal subluxation/dislocation of the radiocarpal joint. 



Smith fracture 
• 
Type I – Reverse Colles fracture: extra-articular transverse fracture (most common). 

• 
Type II – Reverse Barton fracture: intra-articular fracture with volar displacement. 


Hutchinson (Chauffeur’s) fracture 
• Fracture of the radial (lateral) aspect of the distal radius extending into the radial styloid and the radiocarpal joint. 
MSK: 1067 


Elbow MRI 
Medial (ulnar) collateral ligament tear 

Medial (ulnar) collateral ligament partial tear: 
Coronal T1-weighted MRI with fat suppression from an arthrogram with injection of dilute gadolinium-containing contrast demonstrates subtle undersurface stripping (yellow arrow) of the attachment of the MCL onto the sublime tubercle of the ulna. This appearance is known as the T-sign (a sideways T). 
The humeral origin of the MCL (red arrow) is intact. 
• The medial collateral ligament (MCL) of the elbow, also known as the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL), is the ligamentous stabilizer against valgus stress. Valgus stress is a force directed against the lateral elbow, putting tensile stress on the medial side. 
• MCL tears are due to valgus stress. In distinction to the knee, when the valgus stress is typically a single traumatic event (for instance, in the knee, a force on the lateral knee), in the elbow MCL injuries are usually the result of chronic stress from the late cocking phase of throwing. On radiography, valgus stress (“Telos”) views can bring out widening of the medial joint space. Illustration demonstrates the mechanism of how valgus stress causes MCL tearing. 
Force on the lateral elbow (large red arrows; such as in the late cocking phase of throwing) causes tensile force on the MCL, ultimately leading to failure. 
In this diagram, the mid-substance of the MCL is torn. More commonly seen is tears of the humeral attachment or ulnar attachment (as in the case above). 


Frontal radiograph Frontal radiograph with valgus stress applied 
MCL deficiency: Frontal and valgus-stress radiographs of the elbow (different patient as the MRI case above) show relative widening of the medial compartment (arrows) with valgus-applied stress, indicating MCL deficiency. Note partially imaged valgus stress device (red arrow). 
• Tears of the MCL may involve the humeral attachment, the ulnar attachment onto the sublime tubercle, or may be mid-substance. A common pattern injury is undersurface stripping of the sublime tubercle attachment, creating the T-sign as shown in the MRI case above. Surgical treatment is the Tommy-John surgery, which is highly effective. 
MSK: 1068 
Triceps tear 

Lateral radiograph Sagittal PD-weighted MRI 

High-grade triceps tear: 
Radiograph shows subcutaneous edema posterior to the olecranon (yellow arrow). There is no bony avulsion. 
MRI shows extensive edema posterior to the distal triceps (yellow arrows), with high-grade tearing (red arrows). 
• 
Triceps tears are relatively rare. Athletic injuries are usually seen in the setting of weightlifting and high-level football players. Non-athletic traumatic injuries often have a predisposing factor such as olecranon bursitis or steroid use. 

• 
The three heads of the triceps insertion distally on the olecranon of the ulna. Triceps tears commonly involve a bony avulsion of the olecranon. 


Distal biceps tear 

Axial T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression Sagittal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression 
Full-thickness distal biceps tear: MRI images show tear of the distal biceps (yellow arrows) from its attachment of the radial tuberosity, with retraction of the torn tendon proximal to the lacertus fibrosus. 
• 
The long and short heads of the distal biceps insert adjacent to each other on the radial tuberosity. 

• 
The bicipital aponeurosis (known as the lacertus fibrosus) is located at the level of the myotendinous junction. When intact, it helps prevent proximal retraction of the biceps. Conversely, if proximal retraction is present then the lacertus fibrosus is presumably torn. 


MSK: 1069 




