Wrist and hand 
Common hand and wrist injuries 

boutonniere deformity 

volar plate fracture 
associated with dislocation 


gamekeeper’s thumb 
ulnar collateral ligament injury injury 

Bennett fracture 


trapezium fracture 

triquetral fracture 
best seen on lateral 


Kienbock disease
scaphoid fracture 




Wrist 
Carpal anatomy and alignment 

trapezium trapezoid capitate 
scaphoid 

In DISI (dorsal intercalated segmental instability), the lunate is tilted backwards (dorsally; yellow arrow), typically due to scapholunate ligament tear or scaphoid problem. 
In VISI (volar intercalated segmen­tal instability, the lunate is tilted forwards (volarly; red arrow), typically due to lunotriquetral ligament tear. 
Intercalated means something interposed or inserted between something else. This is just a fancy way of saying that the radius and capitate are in normal alignment and the lunate is not. 
Arcs of Gilula should be smooth and continuous. Disruption may be a sign of ligamentous injury or fracture. 
hamate pisiform 
triquetrum 
lunate 


Lunate and perilunate dislocation 

• 
In a perilunate dislocation, the lunate is aligned with the radius, but capitate is not aligned with the lunate. Dislocation is next to the lunate (peri-lunate). 

• 
In a lunate dislocation, the lunate is dislocated volarly, but capitate is still relatively aligned with the radius. The lunate itself is dislocated (lunate dislocation). 


Scapholunate ligament injury 
• 
Scapholunate ligament injury is one of the many patterns of injury caused by fall on outstretched arm. 

• 
The scapholunate ligament is U-shaped, with dorsal, central, and volar components. The dorsal component is the strongest and most important for carpal stability. 

• 
The Terry Thomas sign represents increased distance of scapholunate interval, thought to resemble the gap between the front teeth of the famous British actor from the sixties. 

• 
With scapholunate deficiency, other imbalanced forces on the wrist pull the lunate backwards, resulting in DISI deformity as discussed on the previous page. 

• 
Scapholunate advanced collapse (SLAC) wrist is a sequela of chronic scapholunate ligament injury, which may be secondary to osteoarthritis, CPPD arthropathy, or chronic untreated scapholunate dissociation. The capitate migrates proximally to fill the abnormal gap between the scaphoid and lunate. 



Scaphoid fracture 

Scaphoid fracture: Radiograph of the wrist shows a minimally displaced fracture of the scaphoid (arrow). 
• 
The scaphoid is the most frequently injured carpal bone, commonly due to a fall on outstretched hand. Prompt identification is critical, to allow optimal treatment decision-making (casting versus surgical repair); however, scaphoid fractures are often occult on radiography. 

• 
MRI plays an important role in detection of suspected occult scaphoid fracture. 



Scaphoid fracture (different patient from above): 
Coronal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression demonstrates edema throughout the scaphoid and a low-signal intensity line (yellow arrow) through the scaphoid waist. 
This fracture was occult on 
radiography (not shown). 
• Blood supply to scaphoid is interosseous, from distal to proximal in a retrograde fashion. The proximal pole of the scaphoid has a tenuous blood supply and proximal fractures have the highest risk of avascular necrosis. 

Frontal radiograph Coronal T1-weighted MRI 
Chronic scaphoid fracture with avascular necrosis (in a third patient): Radiograph shows a chronic-appearing scaphoid fracture with cystic change in the distal pole (yellow arrow). There is subtle sclerosis of the proximal pole on radiograph corresponding to diffuse low signal intensity of the proximal pole on MRI (red arrows), in keeping with avascular necrosis. 
Triquetral fracture 

Triquetral fracture: Frontal radiograph (left image) of the wrist is normal. Lateral radiograph shows an avulsion fragment dorsal to the triquetrum (arrow). 
• Fracture of the triquetrum can be subtle to detect on the frontal radiograph. Triquetral fractures are best seen on the lateral view of the wrist as an avulsion fragment dorsal to the triquetrum. 

Kienbock disease 

Kienbock disease: 
Frontal radiograph of the wrist demonstrates a diminutive and irregular appearance of the lunate (yellow arrow), with severe radiolunate joint space loss. There is slight ulnar negative variance (red arrow). 
• Kienbock disease is avascular necrosis of the lunate. It is associated with negative ulnar variance (i.e., ulna shorter than the radius), and thought to be caused by increased load on the lunate. 


Wrist MR 
Anatomy – extensor tendons 


Wrist extensor compartments: 
Compartment 1: APL (abductor pollicis longus) EPB (extensor pollicis brevis) 
Compartment 2: ECRL (extensor carpi radialis longus) ECRB (extensor carpi radialis brevis) 
Compartment 3: 
EPL (extensor pollicis longus) 
Compartment 4: ED (extensor digitorum tendons) EI (extensor indicis) 
Compartment 5: 
EDM (extensor digitorum minimi) 
Compartment 6: 
ECU (extensor carpi ulnaris) 
De Quervain’s tenosynovitis: 
Axial T2-weighted MRI with fat suppression demonstrates edema surrounding extensor compartment 1 (arrows), consistent with de Quervain’s tenosynovitis. 
Triangular fi brocartilage (TFC) anatomy 
TFC disc proper 
Meniscal homolog 
Ulnar styloid and foveal attachments (not well seen on this slice) 
Ligamentum subcruentum 
Annotated magnified image (FOV yellow box) 
Normal TFC anatomy: The triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) is a complex structure comprised of multiple confluent ligamentous structures supporting a fibrocartilaginous disc (the TFC proper). On the radial aspect, the TFC disc attaches to the radial articular cartilage, and on the ulnar aspect the TFC is attached to both the ulnar styloid and ulnar fovea (depression at the radial base of the ulnar styloid). Dorsal and ulnar attachments are from the dorsal and volar radioulnar ligaments (not shown above). 
The ligamentum subcruentum is normal high signal intensity connective tissue at the ulnar aspect of the TFC disc, which is important not to confuse for a tear. 
A confusingly named structure, the meniscus homolog is loose fibrovascular tissue that is not typically individually evaluated on MR. It is not related to the knee meniscus. 


Triangular fibrocartilage (TFC) tear 

Traumatic TFC tear: 
Coronal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression shows a focal slit-like perforation (yellow arrow) in the central aspect of the TFC disc, consistent with a Palmer IA lesion. The TFC is normal in thickness, the radial articular cartilage is normal, and there is no surrounding degenerative change. 
• 
TFC tears can be traumatic or degenerative. Traumatic tears can involve the TFC disc proper, the radial attachment, the ulnar attachments, or the dorsal or volar radioulnar ligaments. 

• 
The Palmer classification provides a helpful framework to classify TFC tears. In the Palmer classification, traumatic (type I) lesions are described based on their location, and include central perforation (IA; as shown in the case above left), ulnar avulsion (IB), distal avulsion (IC), and 


radial avulsion (ID). Degenerative (type II) lesions are graded by the degree of radiolunate chondral degeneration/arthritis, as shown in the case above right. 
• 
Degenerative tears are associated with radial and lunate cartilage degeneration. 

• 
A key imaging finding on arthrography is abnormal communication of the radiocarpal joint space (where contrast is injected) with the distal radioulnar joint. When this communication is seen, a TFC tear is present. 




Fingers and hand trauma 
Extension tendon injuries 
mallet ÿnger boutonniere deformity normal anatomy 

disruption of extensor tendon 
lateral extensor slips 
converge on base of distal phalanx 
middle phalanx 
central band of  extensor tendon 
boutonniere deformity 
inserts on base of middle phalanx disruption of extensor tendon at middle phalanx 

• Mallet finger: Mallet finger is disruption of the extensor tendon at the distal phalanx. It is caused by direct impact on the tip of the finger. Mallet finger may be associated with an avulsion fragment of the distal phalanx. 
Mallet (extensor injury) contrasted with Jersey (flexor injury) fingers, in two patients: 
Mallet finger involves the dorsal aspect (extensor tendon). Note the dorsal avulsion fragment (arrow). 
Jersey finger involves the volar aspect (flexor tendon). Note the volar avulsion fragment (arrow). A memory aid: People from Jersey shore are known to flex. 
• 
On physical exam, the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint cannot be straightened. 

• 
Boutonniere deformity is injury to the medial slip of the extensor tendon. It is seen most commonly in the setting of rheumatoid arthritis, but it may be post-traumatic. The proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint herniates through the lateral slips of the common extensor tendon and becomes entrapped, causing fixed flexion of the PIP and extension of the DIP. 




Boutonniere deformity in the setting of rheumatoid arthritis: 
Fixed flexion of the PIP (yellow arrow) and hyperextension of the DIP (red arrow). 
Gamekeeper’s thumb (skier’s thumb) 

Gamekeeper’s thumb with associated nondisplaced avulsion fragment: 
Radiograph of the thumb demonstrates a nondisplaced avulsion fragment at the base of the thumb proximal phalanx (arrow). 
• 
Gamekeeper’s (also known as skier’s) thumb is injury to the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) at the base of the thumb proximal phalanx. It is caused by forced abduction of the thumb. Gamekeeper’s thumb may be associated with an avulsion fragment of the base of the proximal phalanx. 

• 
Incomplete UCL tears can be treated conservatively; however, complete UCL tears must be treated surgically. 

• 
The Stener lesion is a complication of UCL injury and represents complete UCL disruption with interposition of the adductor aponeurosis. The Stener lesion must be treated surgically. 



Stener lesion: 
Coronal PD-weighted MRI with fat suppression shows a characteristic Yo-yo on a string sign indicating a Stener lesion, where the adductor aponeurosis (yellow arrow) is trapped underneath the balled-up and retracted UCL (red arrow). 
When this occurs, the adductor aponeurosis appears like a “string” and the UCL is the “yo-yo.” 
Bennett fracture 
• A Bennett fracture is an intra-articular fracture of the base of the thumb metacarpal. 
Rolando fracture 

Rolando fracture: PA radiograph of the hand demonstrates a comminuted intra-articular fracture at the base of the thumb metacarpal (arrows). 
• A Rolando fracture is a comminuted Bennett fracture. 
Boxer’s fracture 

Boxer’s fracture: PA radiograph of the hand shows a fracture of the fifth metacarpal neck (arrow). 
• A Boxer’s fracture is a metacarpal neck fracture, most commonly occurring in the fifth metacarpal. 
Volar plate fracture 

Volar plate fracture: Lateral radiograph shows a subtle tiny avulsion fragment (arrow) of the volar aspect of the middle phalanx at the PIP joint. 
• A volar plate fracture is an avulsion fracture of the volar aspect of the proximal middle phalanx, caused by hyperextension. 


