Autoimmune disorders 
Autoimmune encephalitis 
• 
Autoimmune encephalitis, also known as autoimmune limbic encephalitis, is an antibody-mediated inflammatory disorder which typically affects the limbic system. 

• 
This class of disorders is classified into two broad categories, paraneoplastic or non­paraneoplastic, based on the presence of an underlying malignancy. In addition, they can be characterized as either group I or group II, based on the location of neuronal antigens. Group I antibodies target intracellular antigens and group II antibodies target antigens on 


the cell surface. 
• 
Paraneoplastic syndromes are most often seen in small-cell lung cancer, but can be seen in the setting of many malignancies, including neuroblastoma, testicular germ cell tumor, breast cancer, thymoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, and ovarian teratoma. 

• 
Group I antibodies are more closely associated with paraneoplastic syndromes and are 


associated with worse clinical outcomes due to decreased response to immunomodulatory 
therapy and increased irreversible neuronal damage. Anti-Hu encephalitis is the most common paraneoplastic form of autoimmune encephalitis. It is associated with small-cell lung cancer in most cases and has a relatively poor prognosis. MR imaging findings include hyperintense lesions on FLAIR sequence in the medial temporal lobes with variable involvement of the 
cerebellum and brainstem.  Other group I antibodies include Anti-Ma/Ta and Anti-CV2, which are commonly associated with testicular cancer and malignant thymoma, respectively. Additional areas of involvement on imaging include the 
thalamus and striatum. 
Anti-GAD (glutamic acid decarboxylase) is a group I antibody but is not typically associated with 
malignancy. 

Anti-GAD autoimmune encephalitis: Axial FLAIR (right and middle images) show hyperintensity in the right temporal operculum and mesial left temporal lobe, with associated gyriform restricted diffusion (right image, arrow). Patient was found to have high level of GAD-65 antibodies in the serum and CSF. 
• Group II antibodies are more closely associated with non-paraneoplastic syndromes and are associated with better clinical outcomes. Patients with non-paraneoplastic encephalitis associated with group II antibodies frequently have an underlying autoimmune disorder or develop symptoms following a viral infection or vaccination. The most common form is NMDAr (N-methyl D-aspartate receptor) encephalitis. It is classically seen 
in young women and children and is non-paraneoplastic. The clinical presentation is unique in that the majority of patients have no abnormality on imaging on initial presentation. When MR imaging abnormalities are present, they typically show a wide distribution and degree of hyperintense lesions on FLAIR sequence with mild cortical enhancement and without restricted diffusion involving areas such as 
the inferior temporal lobe, insular cortex, and cingulate gyrus cortex. 
Neuro Brain: 744 


