



Aortic anatomy and variants .................540 
Acute aortic syndrome .........................543 
Traumatic aortic injury .........................547 
Thoracic aorta ......................................549 
Abdominal aorta ..................................555 
Mesenteric and pelvic vessels ...............561 
Upper extremity vessels .......................574 
Lower extremity vessels .......................579 
Vascular ultrasound..............................584 

Aortic anatomy and variants 
Anatomy o. thoracic aorta  
aortic arch  
ascending aorta  
 
sinotubular  aortic isthmus  
junction  
sinuses of  ductus “bump”/  
Valsalva  diverticulum  
aortic annulus  descending  
thoracic aorta  
pulmonary artery  
aortic hiatus  
ligamentum  
arteriosum  
Aortic arch and variants  

Normal aortic arch branching 
right left 
right 
common common left 
vertebral
 carotid carotid vertebral 
thyrocervical trunk thyrocervical trunk right subclavian internal 
left 

mammary 
brachio-subclavian 
internal mammary 

ascending descending aorta aorta 

• The normal aortic branching pattern is seen 66% of the time and features three arteries arising from the aortic arch: Brachiocephalic trunk (innominate artery), left common carotid, and left subclavian artery. 

Common origin of the brachiocephalic artery and left common carotid artery 
right right left vertebral common common left carotid carotid vertebral 
right subclavian 

left 
brachio­
subclavian 

cephalic 
descending 

ascending 
aorta 

aorta 


• A common origin of the brachiocephalic artery and left common carotid artery is seen in 13% of patients (more commonly in black patients) and is often incorrectly referred to as a “bovine aortic arch.” The term “bovine aortic arch” is a misnomer and is not the preferred description of this anomaly, as a true bovine arch in cattle features a single great vessel arising from the aortic arch. 
Aberrant right subclavian 
right left

right left
common common

vertebral
 carotid carotid vertebral 


• An aberrant right subclavian is seen in 1% of patients. The right subclavian artery arises directly from the aortic arch distal to the left subclavian and loops behind the esophagus on its way into the right arm. 

Aberrant right subclavian (continued) 
• A diverticulum of Kommerel represents a small bulge at the origin of the aberrant subclavian artery. 

Diverticulum of Kommerel: Axial CT angiogram (left image) and 3D volume rendered reformat (right image) show a dilated vascular structure at the origin of the aberrant right subclavian artery (arrows) known as a diverticulum of Kommerel. 
• 
It is very uncommon for an aberrant right subclavian artery to cause symptoms, but this anomaly may rarely be a cause of dysphagia via esophageal compression, called dysphagia lusoria. Barium esophagram features a posterior indentation on the esophagus. 

• 
Although usually incidental, it is important to mention the presence of an aberrant right subclavian artery when reading a neck CT. If thyroid surgery is planned, then the position of the recurrent laryngeal nerve will not be in its usual location. 


Left vertebral origin off aorta 
right left 
right left common common 
vertebral vertebral 

• 
A 4-vessel arch with direct origin of the vertebral artery off of the aorta is seen in 6% of the population. The left vertebral is the third aortic branch, proximal to the left subclavian. 

• 
In approximately 1/3 of patients with left vertebral artery arising from the aortic arch, the vertebral artery terminates as the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) instead of contributing to the circle of Willis. 

• 
Vascular anomalies of the aortic arch have implications for surgical repair of aortic aneurysms because occluding a branch may result in end-organ ischemia. 




