                                         S E C T IO N 4:

                                   W eaknesses and S trengths

                                         "C o n fro n tin g fe a r is the destiny o f the Jedi. "

First we must understand that fear in itself is not something to be ashamed of or embarrassed by. Without
fear there can be no courage. Courage is only possible when one confronts and overcomes fear. It is no
coincidence that the Lion is the symbol for courage. It is also no coincidence that you will find the
iconography of courage throughout these texts.

"You may think that you are scared. But you are not. That is your sharpness. That s your power "- Drummer

Now 1want to take a few minutes taking some trouble with words, to help explain the various
strategies for controlling fear, and obliterating the negative causatum o f anxiety on your game
day performance.

Controlling fear involves two things: (1) choice, and (2) strategy.

The "choice" is the conscious decision to confront your fear. Once you have made the decision
to confront it, you can then begin to im plem ent a "strategy". The strategy that I am going to
suggest is to not consider this as an effort to elim inate fear. Fear is normal. Only crazy people
don't have fear. The goal is to increase courage.

^ M echanism 1: Generating Courage Through Purpose

One powerful mechanism to increase courage is to have a goal or purpose that is worthy. For
example, a mother may run into a burning building to save her child. Does she do this because
she is no longer afraid o f fire? Or does she do it because her purpose as a m other out weighs the
fear and allows her to generate extreme courage?

Purpose  Courage

^ M echanism 2: Games are Best Played as Games.

Another mechanism for overcoming fear is to begin to view the world from a certain point o f
view. A point o f view similar to that o f the Court Jester.

The point o f view o f the Jester (or Joker) is to view not just the various social institutions, but all
formations o f the natural world as games. You must be careful o f the word "game." When
people use the word "game" they often mean "frivolous." There can be important games.

Imagine that you were playing a game o f Super Mario Brothers. W hat if you believed that if you
fell into a cavern or were bit by one o f those plant things (or a turtle) that you would actually
die ? Do you think this w ould make you better at the gam e ? You'd be terrible at it. You
w ouldn't be able to relax, you w ould second guess every m ovem ent, and ultim ately your
performance would be awfiil. All because you believed this game was real and the dangers
within it were real.

                                                                  15
^ M echanism 2: The Perspective o f the Joker - continued...

Hopefully you can begin to understand the benefits o f this strategy. In viewing stressful
challenges as games you can diminish the effects o f fear. This is not the only benefit though.
The sincerity that exists in the nature o f play - the act o f doing things simply for themselves
actually improves your performance. Later we will discuss methods to improve focus and
concentration - the ability to "enjoy" the thing you are doing is also very useful in combating
procrastination. Games are best played as games.

^ M echanism 3: "The Art o f Not Giving a Fuck".

In discussing the perspective o f the Joker, people will often become upset and insist the
consequences o f failure are very real. That the fear o f failure is justified. Remember that your
fear lives in ju st one place - your head. Fear o f a thing that h asn 't yet occurred - "Negative
Imagination " is the cardinal sin o f the 4th Way (discussed later).

Confront the fear rationally. Are you afraid of being embarrassed? I can only be embarrassed if
the people I think I've em barrassed m yself in front o f have my respect. If I don't respect you -
your opinion means very little to me. As the Lebowski says "th at's ju st like your opinion m an."
Someone worth respecting would understand the difficulty o f the task and not judge you poorly
for failure. The only people who never fail are the people who d o n 't try.

Remember, the Joker sees the whole world as game playing. That's why, when people take their
games seriously - the people who make stem and pious expressions - the Joker can't help but
laugh. It's hard to not laugh w hen you see people pretending that w hat they do is so very
serious. As Bill Hicks w ould say "It's Just a Ride."

I also hear this a lot: " if I fail the test I 'll lose my fellowship." First o f all, you don't need one -
the necessity o f a fellowship is a lie propagated by the institution that wants you as a slave for an
extra year. Even if you really w ant to do one - you w on't lose it. They w on't even know you
failed, and passing is not required to be accredited at hospitals or work as an Attending.
Probably some o f your Attendings are international grads who haven't even sat for the CORE
exam yet - I know some o f mine were. No one gives a shit - they just want you as a slave. If
they "take" your fellowship away they might have to do your work - and that would defeat the
entire purpose o f having fellows. There is nothing really on the line other than your ego. The
ego is the enemy o f excellence. I w ouldn't waste time defending it.

This idea couples well with John D anaher's "parable o f the plank. " Danaher tells the story o f a
Daredevil who walked across a plank positioned between two tall buildings. Those who
w itnessed the perform ance were am azed by the D aredevil's agility. A t the end o f the show the
same plank was brought out and placed on the ground. Spectators were allowed to walk it and
found it to be very easy, though none were willing to try it when it was again placed upon the
two tall buildings. It was the same plank. The only thing that changed was the perception of
danger. There is no danger. It is ju st a game. Games are best p la y e d as games.

                                                                  16
