   S E C T IO N 1:

   DETAIL A SSESSM EN T

^  AND PLANNING

Before we get started with the "when" and "how" of the exam you need to have a clear
understanding o f the "what. " Let us begin with the most important topic - "passing. "

The official stance is that everyone can theoretically pass the examination - which sounds good if
you are simply testing for safety and competence. The problem occurs when you bring in
professional statisticians and test metric experts (which all professional exams do). These people
insist on creating a normalized curve to validate the exam. An examination with 100% pass rate
is statistically invalid (it wasn't sensitive enough to detect the "dangerous radiology trainees").

If they passed everyone they would totally invalidate their own exam. They would risk public
perception perceiving the exam as a cash grab disguised as a formality. If they failed more than
20 or 25% they would have a full revolt to deal with (lead by Program Directors who want you
reading nodule follow ups, not studying for a repeat exam). Let us not forget the entire reason the
US boards were restructured was to eliminate off service study time for the more senior residents
(oh sorry, I meant "trainee" or maybe "learner"). They can't set a hard number or they risk one
o f these two scenarios. So, like every other standardized exam you've ever taken, it's curved.
They may not "curve" the exam in the traditional sense, but questions will be removed until the
statistics provide an acceptable yield o f passing and failing scores. This is standard operating
procedure on any exam of this magnitude.

Which leads me to my second point. Frequently I am asked "what do I need to score to pass ? "
Or "how many can I miss ? '' You can't think about this exam as requiring a certain raw score
(even though they will give you one - constructed via space magic). You can't say I got 9/10
correct so 1 passed. What if everyone else got 10/10 right ? You just got the lowest score in the
country. If anyone is gonna fail it is you - despite getting 90% o f the questions right. You need
to think about it as your score relative to the rest o f the room. Historically around 10% o f people
fail, and 1-2% o f people condition physics. So, if you score in the 15th percentile or higher you
are probably safe.... probably.

Another common question is, "how many subjects can I condition ? " On the old oral boards
there was a certain number of subjects that you could condition (fail) without having to retake the
entire exam. You would just have to come back in a few weeks and be tested on that subject (or
subjects) to meet criteria for a pass. The original official statement on the CORE exam was
something similar, that you could fail up to five categories. However, when no one ever
conditioned anything other than physics after 5-6 years people started to notice that was probably
bullshit. Now, there has been an official statement that onlv physics can be conditioned. Your
clinical totals are lumped into a raw score and then compared to a "predetermined" minimal score
(that is later presumably adjusted to fail around 10% o f people). This may sound bad, but it
presents a potential opportunity to bolster weaker sections with stronger ones. As such, I 'd
strongly advise you to capture all low hanging fruit (don't ignore the silly parts like "non­
interpretive skills").

You may be thinking to yourself "That doesn't sound hard. I 've never scored bottom 10% on
anything. " Sports psychologists will often say "the greatest enemy o f future success is previous
success." People are easily seduced by the fruits of their labor without remembering the labor
that was originally necessary.

Do Not Underestimate Your Opponent - this is a central tenet in the art o f war.

                                                                  10
I'll repeat this critical point -- the art o f war cautions greatly against underestimating your enemy.

You haye neyer competed at this level before. Your shelf exam scores , USMLE, etc... don't
mean shit because you were competing against Family Medicine , Peds, Psych, etc.... This time
you are competing against Radiology Residents only. Yes, it is less competitive compared to the
"glory days" but Radiology still has a lot o f smart people in it. Smart enough to realize how to
avoid the worst parts of medicine anyway. Plus, you are dealing with an extremely motivated
group. Most reasonable people are terrified to fail this exam and will therefore be putting
considerable effort into passing.

But Prometheus!? I heard someone say "allyou need to do is take call to pass. "

Yes... someone did famously say that. Everyone has an agenda in this life. My agenda is to help
you pass, and perhaps find happiness in this world. Other people... perhaps they want you to take
call for them.

In previous editions o f this text, I wasted words making a plea to those in power to simply write a
fair test on intermediate level topics. Unfortunately, people that are bom square rarely die round.
It requires focus to break free o f your intrinsic programming. These people aren't capable o f that.
They can't help themselves - and so the spirit o f the warrior will continue to call on me. I have no
choice but to answer.

The Goddess o f Rhamnous isn't finished with me y e t....

She isn't finished with you yet either my friends. We have much work to do. So let us waste no
time pleading with the enemy. We will ask for no mercy and we will show no mercy.

Let us switch gears and discuss the structure o f the exam. The exam is a multiple choice test
consisting o f around 600 questions. The punishment is administered over two days, the first is
typically longer than the second (7.5 hours and 6 hours respectively). They give you 30 mins
"break time" but that is built into the exam. You can take this 30 mins in any interval or ratio you
want - (example -- you could take thirty 1 min breaks, six 5 min breaks, etc...).

The CORE Exam covers 18 categories (sometimes 17 - in Chicago). The categories include:
breast, cardiac, gastrointestinal, interventional, musculoskeletal, neuro, nuclear, pediatric,
reproductive/endocrinology, thoracic, genitourinary, vascular, computed tomography, magnetic
resonance, radiography/fluoroscopy, ultrasound, physics, and safety. This book is outlined to cover
the above sections, with the modalities o f CT, MRI, Radiography, Fluoroscopy, and Ultrasound
integrated into the system based chapters as one would reasonably expect. Radioisotope Safety
Exam (RISE) trivia is also distributed appropriately in my various texts.

On the exam. Physics questions are integrated into each category with no distinct physics
examination administered. However, the physics section is still considered a virtual section, and
you can fail / condition it. In fact, the physics portion is actually the overall largest section. My
book "The War Machine" is dedicated to review o f physics and the various non-interpretive skills.

                                                                  II
