                                    S E C T IO N 6:

                                   Use of Energy

Let's switch gears and talk about specifics on how to plan a strategy and use resources.
Goals: Goals set direction - Systems make progress.
We should discuss how to set goals by first learning about the types of goals. There are three types:

PROCESS                            PERFORMANCE                         OUTCOME

Goals for the tasks you need to    Goals for the level of performance  Goals for the end result
complete to improve.               you want to achieve.                you want to achieve.

You HAVE CONTROL over this.        You HAVE some CONTROL over          You DON'T
                                   this. You baseline cognitive        CONTROL this.
 Example: I will read 10 pages a  abilities and other factors are     However, if you set and
  day.                             independent of your effort.         meet process goals
                                                                       (things you can
 Example: I will make 50 flash     Example: I will answer 90% of     control), the likelihood
  cards a day.                       the questions in the MSK Q-       of achieving success is
                                     Bank correctly.                   much higher.
 Example: I will complete 25
  practice questions a day.         Example: I will answer 90% of     If you have ever heard
                                     the Neuro cases in conference     someone say "trust the
 Example: I will perform the        correctly.                        process" - this is the
  self remembering exercise 10                                         idea.
  mins a day.                      If you aren't meeting these goals,
                                   you need to adjust your process.

So, the idea is that you outline for yourself a schedule.                       Outcome
You set specific process goals with corresponding short                         Goal
term performance goals. This is the system.
                                                           Performance I
For example, you might give yourself 3 weeks to            Goals
review materials on MSK, make flashcards, and
complete a certain number of practice questions.
Then you test yourself with a certain metric (a certain
percentage correct, or an internal review session).

If you meet your performance goals you can feel
confident that you are on the right course. If you aren't
then you need to perform a root cause analysis and
understand why - then adapt. It is ok to fail, but you
must adapt.

                                   29
A Goal Setting -- Hacking the Machine                                     Set Precise Goals:

Remember that you are mechanical and operate              I will [behavior] at [time] in [this location].
primarily on reflex. Just like a dog that can be trained
to salivate at the sound of a bell, you can train         Bad example: "I will read in the mornings."
yourself to enjoy studying and not avoid it. When you
make your morning reading or question goals - they        Good example: "I will read pages 305-310
must be realistic but challenging. If you make it         at 5:30am at the kitchen table - while my
unrealistic (I will read 50 pages an hour) you will       adversaries sleep comfortably in bed
always fail. This will create negative emotions and       hugging their teddy bears."
make the process undesirable.

If you instead make the goal challenging but realistic (I will read 15 pages an hour) you can succeed and
get that small dopamine bump from achieving your goal. Over time you will want to wake up early to
meet these goals - because winning feels good. Compete with yourself and win. Use the intermittent
reward systems discussed in the prior section.

Habit Stacking and Tracking:

We are only as good as our habits. Developing and maintaining good habits is critical to victory.

 Habit Stacking: Tethering to an existing habit. After I perform [current habit] I will then [new
  habit].

   - Example: After I wake, I will empty my bladder - being careful to not drag my enormous penis
      on the floor (current habit), then I will grab my book (strategically left in the bathroom as a
      trigger) to begin my morning reading session (new habit).

 Habit Tracking: Whenever I start a new task (for example updating this text), I like to use a visual
  method of tracking and rewarding my progress. Check boxes work well. Red marbles are better.

- Application: I have a large glass jar and a box of red marbles. When I complete 5 pages of the
   text I place a red marble in the jar. Over time the jar begins to fill with red marbles. The color red
   is visually stimulating - it is the color of ripe fruit, awesome sports cars, and it is a simple fact that
   women look best in red.

The jar of red marbles generates a subconscious           Ring Card Girl walks by in a Red Bikini
desire to add more red marbles, and the only way          Stephen Quadros: What do you think of that ?
to do that is to write more amazing dialogue for          Don Frye: What ?
you to enjoy. This trick can be used to reward            Stephen Quadros: The Girl in Red
daily progress on good habits. If you want to             Don Frye: Well, I don't know. Can She Cook ?
fill that empty jar with visually stimulating red
marbles then you gotta get your ass up and study.

A Peak and Off Peak Time: A common reason for failing to meet performance goals is not
       understanding how to effectively use the available mental energy that you have in a day.

  Peak Time: The hours of the day when you are most capable of studying and learning. For most
  people this is the morning (but this is individual). You do NOT want to waste this time doing things
  like folding laundry or washing dishes. Also, I would not use this time making flash cards. This is
  the time to review and learn new stuff. This is the time to do practice questions.

  Off Peak Time: The hours of the day when you are fatigued and least capable of studying and
  learning. For most people this is the evening (but this is individual). You do NOT want to use this
  time trying to learn a new topic or perform practice questions. This is the time to make flash cards,
  fold laundry, etc..

                              30
       Environmental Zoning

Environment is more important than motivation. Designing your environment to decrease bad habits
and encourage the new ones will get you better long term results then listening to rock music. Put your
phone somewhere it is hard to reach. When possible study with paper books and notes rather than using
a computer - to avoid how easily you can access YouTube cat videos.

Zoning: If possible create a relationship with the spaces. That chair is where I read sleazy romance
novels. That couch is where I watch Star Trek TNG re-runs on Netflix. That brown table is where I eat
salty pretzels. That grey table is where I study. I don't eat salty pretzels at that grey table - we don't
have that kind of relationship. Salty pretzels get eaten at the brown table. I would never study on the
couch - that's for Star Trek reruns. Captain Jean Luc Picard would probably send me to the brig for
studying on that couch... or worse be disappointed in me.

Creating these kinds of relationships with our environment might sound silly, but it helps us create
habits and habits dictate the life we lead (so we must make good ones). "One Space - One Use" - is
how this principal is often described.

Example - 3 Hour Block Schedule:

***Always begin the session by outlining 6 cycle specific goals. The optimal time to do this is at the
end of the prior session. Have your potential intermittent reward activity planned as well.

Pre-Cycle: Drink caffeine (tea, coffee, tablets). Preform a Vigorous Scalp Message

20-30 Deep Breaths (and / or thinking of someone you hate)

10 bodyweight squats
                    Dilate you vision to peripheral - then cone it in on the book or computer screen.
                    Start the timer

     Cycle 1 & Cycle 4                  Cycle 2 & Cycle 5                            Cycle 3 & 6
25 minutes - Focused Work          25 minutes - Focused Work
                                                                            25 minutes - Focused Work
10 Push-ups                        10 Hindu Squats
                                                                            10-20 Lunges (or kettle bell
Stretch and touch your toes        Squeeze a gripper, do both hands -                   swings)
   - hold for 30 seconds              (grip like a man - no cupcake
                                                     grips)                 Stretch and touch your toes
                                                                                - hold for 30 seconds
Preform a Vigorous Scalp Message 1Preform a Vigorous Scalp Message
                                                                       Preform a Vigorous Scalp Message
Dilate you vision to peripheral -  Dilate you vision to peripheral -
 then cone it in on the book or     then cone it in on the book or       Dilate you vision to peripheral -
         computer screen.                   computer screen.               then cone it in on the book or
                                                                                   computer screen.
Start the Timer                    Start the Timer                                  Start the Timer

Did you achieve your goals ? If you fucked up / got distracted by something perform a root cause
analysis and think of a solution. Verbalize your pledge to do better. If you were successful - Flip the
coin - if it is heads you get your treat. Before you leave - plan clear goals for you next session.

                                                                 31
When to Begin Studying:

Frat Answer: Most people put in a 6 month training camp. They        Mad Man (Woman)
will tj^ically begin aggressive studying starting in late December           Tactics
or early January in preparation for the June exam.

I think the amount of time necessary to pass depends on how strong   Set your alarm for 2am and
you are as a multiple choice test taker, how much studying you did   study for 30 mins once a
in the first 2 years of training, the amount/quality of teaching at  week.
your training institution, and your own ability to retain trivia.
                                                                     Why? Because everyone
My recommendation would be between 9 and 6 months. Any               else is asleep while you are
longer than 9 months and you risk forgetting the trivia you learned  working hard. This kind of
at the beginning of your training camp. I like the analogy of a      thinking is how you get an
bucket with a hole in the bottom. You pour water (knowledge) in      edge - see Law 2.
the bucket and it slowly drips out the bottom. You want the bucket
to be filled to the brim the morning of the exam.

 9 Months = The upper limit of trivia retention

 6 Months = Average

 3 Month = You better be a trivia machine

 Less than 3 Months = Go ahead and register for the repeat exam.

                           Now... having said that - this is a critical point:
                        "Don't just work longer hours" -- `Work smart'
                      -i.e. Stay productive and don't get distracted." - Dan Pena

This leads us to my next critical point:

       What to do Prior to Starting to Study:

You need to come up with a game plan. The specifics of this plan is not something I can help you
create because each one of you has unique social circumstances and backgrounds. Some of you have
kids. Some of you have jealous wives / husbands. Some of you have program directors who will not
give you one minute off service to study but will still throw you in the pillory if you fail.

Whatever your social situation you need 3 things:

(1) Somewhere quiet to study that isfree o f distractions.

(2) Time in this ideal study environment

(3) Resources to study (books, questions, videos, and Google).

(4) Prepare clear goals before each session -- train with purpose.
   D on't trainfo r close calls. Train to dominate. Train to destroy.

                                                  32
       The Ideal Study Environment:

There is a person inside you that does not want to study. This person doesn't care that you will be
humiliated if you fail. This person believes in nothing Lebowski. He/She only wants to eat, read
celebrity gossip, watch internet pom, and sleep.

When it comes to successful preparation this person is your greatest enemy. For me at least, it
seems that dealing with this person (your inner hungry, sleepy, pom crazed, Justin Bieber fan) is
like dealing with a meth addict. D on't leave the meth lying around where he/she can see it. If he/
she gets ahold o f it... the study session is over.

What is "the meth " ? It varies from person to person. It most cases it's your fucking phone.

Do NOT bring your phone into the study environment. If you must bring your phone (for
child care reasons, etc...) then put it on a shelf on the other side o f the room.

Other Tips:

 Don't show up hungry. Eat prior to going into the study environment. Avoid sugar as it will
  make you crash.

 Caffeine is your friend. If your religion forbids the use o f caffeine - dig around in your sacred
  text for loop holes. Most major religions allow you to ask for forgiveness later. The best time
  to ask for forgiveness is after you pass the exam.

 How much caffeine ? There is at least one paper that showed that small hourly doses o f caffeine
  (0.3mg per kg o f body weight [approx 20 mg per hour] is optimal). Caffeine tablets - cut can
  help you keep this accurate. Stay away from energy drinks and all that bullshit - you want to
  keep the dose steady. Consider keto coffee (bullet proof coffee) or other coffee brands with high
  fat content to help improve bioavailability.

 No music in the environment. This feeds the lazy person inside you and is a distraction.
  I will listen to music prior to studying. Like a pro wrestler walk out song.
  "Battle Cry" by the Jedi Mind Tricks is my current suggestion.

 No "Study Buddies." You need to be alone in this room. Your inner lazy person will try and
  small talk with your study partner's inner lazy person. It will start out innocent with you asking
  them a legit question about radiology / physics. 30 seconds later you will be chatting about
  Kardashians (or that reality tv show with the pro wrestlers girlfriends).

 If you must study in a public location, you should make it clear to your classmates that you
  don't want to be intermpted - snarl at them. You should also bring ear plugs for when they start
  talking to each other.

                                                                  33
       How Many Hours Per Day Should You Study ?

You need about 2-3 hours on weekdays, and 8-12 hours a day on the weekends. This is the
minimum. The real answer would be "however much would kill you, minus one second."

For me, studying early in the morning is superior to the evening. A fter w ork you are tired,
your family is the most needy, and you are the m ost distractible. M ost days w hen I left w ork
as a Resident I was angry about something. Usually one or more o f my asshole Attendings
having no regard for my need to study. All that hate (although motivating) was also
distracting. It's hard to study when you are trying to plot revenge.

I understand some people are just not wired for early morning studying, but it is ideal if you
can make yourself do it.

Along those lin es.. .Sleep is fo r pussies. See prior discussion on optimizing your sleep.

A Stealing an Hour During the Day.

Most programs have a noon and / or morning lecture. At this point in your training you know
when these are useful and when they are a waste o f time. I would have zero remorse about
ditching a low yield lecture to study. If you feel bad for even one second just think about what
will happen to you if you fail. If you do decide to ditch a lecture make it count. Have your
hiding place / study environment picked out. Have your goals for what you want to get
through clear. The more productive that hour is the less bad you will feel about doing it.

 "Morgen, morgen, nur nicht heute, sagen alle fa u len leute. "
-- Roughly translated as "tomorrow, tomorrow, not today.... say all lazy people."
N ever -- N ever -- Never put o ff or delay an opportunity to study. Thinking "I 'll have time to
study later" is a huge mistake. I w ant to encourage you to adopt the idea o f Prem editatio
Malorum - where you consider all the things that can go wrong in your day and fuck up your
plans. Maybe your kid will get sick tonight, or you will have a pipe break in your apartment or
who knows what the fuck can happen. Maybe your little sister will break up with her high
school boyfriend and suck you into an unescapable whirlwind o f teenage drama. Recognize
that the world can fuck up your plans pretty easily. Never procrastinate. If you have a chance
to do it now - then fucking do it.

                                                                 34
       Resources:
Essentials: Crack the Core Vol 1, Crack the Core Vol 2, Physics War M achine, Crack the
Core Case Companion. Combat Ready - my new Q and A book -- hopefully have this
released by the late Spring -- .
Highly Recommended: TitanRadiology.com / RadiologyRonin.com - Board Review Course
and Clinical Mastery.
Supplemental: Google Images - No single book can match the power o f the internet.
Q Banks: I released a Q Bank via TitanRadiology. I 'm hoping to im prove and expand the
question bank this year. Obviously that is going to be the one I 'll endorse. Regardless, my
opinion is that more questions are better. I w ould do as m any practice questions as possible
which will likely mean using multiple commercial q banks.

       How To Use the Resources:
Everyone is starting from a different place depending on your individual background and
interests. Having said that nearly everyone has 5 tasks to accomplish:
(1) F ill in the large holes. Everyone sucks at something. There are probably 3-4 sections

     (maybe more) that you feel particularly w eak in.
(2) Accumulation o f Random Trivia. Even if you think you are strong in a certain subject

     there is almost certainly a laundry list o f trivia that you d o n 't have available for recall.
(3) Physics. Nearly everyone starts out knowing almost zero physics.
(4) Non-Interpretive Skills. This is another topic that pretty m uch no one has any exposure to.
(5) Biostats. You will have to review the basics on this as well.

                                                                  35
       Suggested Strategy for the Clinical Portions:

(1) Make a list o f the subjects you suck the most at.

(2) Read the corresponding sections / chapters in Crack. Read them slowly. Google image
     anything you've never seen before.

(3) Watch the corresponding videos to these chapters on TitanRadiology.

(4) Start at the beginning o f Crack Vol 1 and work your way to the end o f Vol 2. D on't skip the
     Chapters you read already - this is your second time through those. Annotate and mark up the
     books. I've purposefully provided lots o f room for extra notes. Also, the paper is not glossy
     for a reason - 1 did this so you can write in the books without smearing shit everywhere.

(5) Start back at the beginning o f Crack Vol 1. This time we are going to add practice questions.
     Pick a Q Bank, they are all pretty similar (mine is best obviously). Read a chapter in Crack
     (example Peds) then do the corresponding Peds questions. Make notes in the book as needed.
     Work your way all the way through the book. This process can be supplemented with the
     corresponding Titan Videos.

(6) Start to switch over to 90% questions - 10% reading. Now is the time to read the Case
      Companion. You should be doing 150 + questions a day. Go ahead and make them random,
      that will simulate the exam.

A Practice Questions:

Practice questions do two things for you. (1) They help expose holes in your knowledge.
(2) They help you practice your timing and discipline.

I think it's important to backload questions until you have a foundation. There is no point in doing
practice physics questions if you have never read a page o f physics. It's a total waste. Clinical
radiology is the same way. Don't mess with questions until you have read the chapter in Crack at
least once.

Once you have entered "phase 2" - which would correspond with step 6 above. It's time to start
doing questions with a timer. Average one minute per question. Practice your disciplined
approach (reading the entire question, reading all the choices, never change your answer). You
should be doing more and more questions every week leading up to the exam - revising the
material as needed.

It is CRITICAL that you practice a disciplined systematic approach. Practice does not "make
perfect" it makes "permanent." If you practice rushing through questions then that is how you
will perform on the exam. Refine your skills at eliminating distractors, and reading answer
choices carefully.

In the volume 2 strategy chapter I discuss the ``Genius Neuron. " He (She) is your closest friend
and you must learn to trust his/her advice.

                                                                 36
       Learning Physics / Non-Interpretive Skills:

There are two strategies. Both are equally valid depending on your personality.

Strategy 1: Learn it all at once. Blocking out 6-8 weeks o f your study schedule and ju st hit
physics every day.

Strategy 2; Ration it in with the clinical reading. For example if you study for two hours, 1
hour in physics, 1 hour in clinical.
Regardless o f which strategy you pick you should follow the same steps:
(1) Read the War M achine cover to cover once. Titan videos may help solidify topics. If

     necessary google topics that remain confiising.

(2) Start over and read each chapter - then do corresponding questions.
(3) Continue to do practice questions to keep the material fresh.
(4) Reviewing the A B R 's NIS source docum ent will still be necessary (make sure you are

     using the most up to date version). Read the War M achine's discussion first - it will likely
     make the document more digestible.

       The Last Month:
(1) Most (90%) o f your time should be spent on timed practice questions.
(2) The other 10% you should spend preparing your high yield review. You should start by

     putting together a list o f all the random trivia that you will forget immediately after the
     exam. This is a list o f all the numbers, half-lives, photon energies, etc.. The back o f the War
     Machine has a good start on this but you will likely want to add to it.

       The Last Week:
(1) Continue doing practice questions.
(2) Study your high yield numbers / trivia every day. Try and concentrate it to 1-2 pages o f

     stuff you are having trouble remembering.
(3) Review Biostats, and skim the A B R 's Non-Interpretive Skills study guide.

       The Morning of the Exam:
Look at your highest yield notes (the 1-2 pages o f trivia you have boiled down). Read it over
and over and over again until they make you get rid o f all your notes.

                                                                 37
       When You Sit Down To Take The Exam:

(1) Check to make sure your markers work. If you got a dud fix it now. You don't want "dead
     marker rage" to make you drop a question mid exam. If you are doing this "remote testing
     stu ff' - I 'm not sure if you will be providing your own markers. If this is the case -- buy
     nice ones and make sure they work.

(2) Scribble down all the formulas and numbers you can remember on one o f the dry erase
     boards. Six hours into the exam that information w on't be in your short-term memory any
     more.

(3) Give yourself a vigorous scalp massage - like 30 seconds. This increases blood flow to the
     brain and reduces stress. Seriously, it really works. I learned this from Ivan Vasylchuk
     (Ukrainian Sambist, Merited Master o f Sport, World Champion, and Winner o f the Sport
     Accord World Combat Games).

   D on't forget to do this on the second day o f the exam also.

        The Night Between Exam Days:

Anticipate the subjects that haven't been tested yet and review your notes on those. Avoid
drinking or socializing. This is war. The people in the hotel lobby aren't your friends, those are
the people trying to push you into the bottom 15%. You can be friends with them after you pass.
Plus, arguing over who missed what will only increase your anxiety.

 Avoid alcohol - even if you are "sure you failed." A strong performance day 2 can resurrect
   you. In general, most people feel like they did terrible after day 1. Remember, it is all about
   how you did relative to your cohort.

 Study 2-3 hours.

 Don't eat anything that will give you diarrhea.

 15 minutes on the treadmill can be tremendously helpful to reduce stress.

 Get 6-8 hours sleep.

As a general rule, people who think they failed the exam typically pass -- so don't jump in front of a
train before your results come back (don't jump in front o f a train if you fail either -- you have to live
to take revenge on your enemies). After all your enemies are slain and you've achieved total and
absolute victory - then if you still want to jump in front o f a train, I won't stop you -- but not before.

"A man should not allow his enemies to out live him "
                                                    - E n ab ra n Tain, former head of the Obsidian Order

                                                                 38
