S E C T IO N 2:

W aging W ar                                                  ^

In the previous section, I attempted to introduce the idea that the exam should not be viewed as
a test in which a certain "minimum score" is required to pass. Instead, I want you to look at the
exam as a contest in which you must finish in the top 85% to achieve victory.

I 'm not trying to scare you. I 'm just trying to help you understand that you must take this
exam seriously. It's tough and smart people fail it every year.

Over the next 6-12 months, when you are out partying and horsing around - remember that
someone else out there at the same time is working hard. Someone is learning, getting smarter,
and preparing to win.

Life is a struggle. Everybody fights - and that doesn't mean getting punched in the face. That
means not hitting the snooze button, managing your personal relationships, dealing with
disability, trying to do the right thing for your children - e tc ... e tc ... and everyone gets asked
the same question - "Can I move on, or am I going to give up on my dreams ? "

Transform a threat into a challenge. A life free o f struggle is a life free o f meaning. We are
bom for battle. Battle against the beasts o f the jungle. Battle against the rival tribes. A n d ...
y e s... battle against each other on the glorious field o f multiple choice questions. I encourage
you to embrace this as a great opportunity to weaponize your will.

When I was little my mother would tell the story of how my    Father, how do you do that ?
father worked 72 hours straight in the limestone quarry.      Do what ?
They kept offering overtime shifts, so he just kept staying.  Stay awake for 3 days and work
He seemed to have a super natural ability to endure fatigue   I 've done itfo r 4 days.
and discomfort.                                               How?
                                                              It's not that hard.

You must leam to "harness y o u r hate. "                     Then he leaned in real close and
                                                              whispered in my ear
"'Hate was all I knew, it built my world, it imprisoned me,
taught me how to eat, how to drink, how to breathe.           "what makes you angry?'*
I thought I'd die with all my hate in my veins. " - V
                                                              Heroes are not bornfrom happiness.

I 'm trying to teach you to access the awesome utility o f activating your adrenaline pathways. In
times o f crisis there is a tendency towards sadness. Sadness is the vampire o f energy. Sadness is
not useful. It does nothing. If you are feeling overwhelmed then focused rage is the emotion you
want to cultivate. Turn off the Coldplay. Turn on the DMX (start with "Intro" to It's Dark A nd Hell Is
Hot.) This is the fiael you need to drive the engine o f domination. You must become one o f those
science fiction radiation monsters that only gets stronger the more it is attacked. Every bomb they
drop on you just makes you stronger. The capacity to suffer is perhaps the greatest superpower.

The time has come my brothers (and sisters) to show no mercy.
Retribution is at hand.
Let fiiry guide you and let vengeance be your song.
Thank all the Gods o f War for providing you with this opportunity to prove your greatness.

12
