                                         S E C T IO N 3:

                                             Attack B y stratagem
                                    "Victorious warriors win first and then go to war "

As we begin our discussion of specifics, I will now share with you my 3 Promethean Laws for success
on this exam and in life. These laws are the beginning of understanding "the way," and once you
know "the way" you will begin in see it in all things.

m LAW 1 - You must do anything your opponents are willing to do.

Example: If everyone is reading a certain book, then you must also. If everyone is using a particular
q-bank (or banks) then you must also. If everyone is studying a certain amount per day then you must
also.

m LAW 2 - You must do things your opponent is NOT willing to do.

Terry Brands once told me the secret to being a world champion is actually very simple - all it takes is
doing something no one else is doing - and then do it every day. It doesn't even matter what it is, as long
as no one else is doing it. This principal has more to do with developing a mental edge than cultivating a
specific skill set.

Examples - Setting your alarm at 2 am to study for 20 minutes while everyone else is asleep. Listening
to lectures while driving to work, while in the shower, while pooping. Taking short showers. I time my
showers - never longer than 3 mins. I turn the water on and get in (while it's freezing cold) - 1play the
game of enduring the cold shower as it heats up. If my 3 min timer goes off and I have shampoo in my
hair... I'm going to work with shampoo in my hair. This may sound crazy but it is a method for
callusing the mind. It helps me remember my priorities. I want to win more than I want to enjoy a
warm shower. Warm showers don't help me win. Less extreme examples would be never touching the
snooze button. Not watching any tv, movies, news, comics, etc... until victory is achieved.

This is not punishment - and should not be looked at as such. You are simply reminding your mind
who is actually in charge. Later in the chapter we are going to discuss "The 4th Way" and the idea of
the many "I"s. By subjecting yourself to discomfort you are letting the weaker members of your
consciousness know they are not in charge.

These are habits of the ultra-successful. People who are competing for Olympic gold medals tend to
know dick about anything other than their sport. I remember seeing an interview with a female gold
medalist (I don't recall the sport) but the reporter asked her who she was supporting in the presidential
election and she didn't even know who was running. She acted embarrassed and people watching that
probably thought to themselves "Dumb jock! Doesn't even know who is running for President!" The
people thinking that will never understand what it's like to achieve an elite level of success at
anything. Knowing political trivia doesn't help her win at gymnastics (or whatever) and time spent on
anything other than her craft is wasted. Consider treating your preparation for this exam as if you were
in training camp for an Olympic title (or world championship boxing / MMA fight). This mentality is
very useful for maintaining your priorities. So remember - while you are wasting time the enemy is
training and you can't allow them to work when you are not (see Law 1). Minimize distractions -
Maximize productivity.

                                                                  13
m LAW 3 - Performance on "Game Day" must equal performance in practice

Let us take a few minutes and discuss                    In brightest day, in blackest night,
"test anxiety. "                                         No evil shall escape my sight
                                                         Let those who worship evil's might.
"A nxiety" is a dishonest w ord though isn't it?         Beware my power, Green Lantern's light
Let's use a more accurate word. FEAR
                                                         Members o f the elite Green Lantern Carp
N o ... I'm not afraid. I 'm way too macho to            harness the power o f "w ill''to combat the
be afraid o f things. There is a difference              evilforces o f `fe a r ''
between being afraid, and being a coward.
Only crazy people don't experience fear. It's
ok to be afraid. If you let that fear dominate
your decision m aking... that is when you run
into problems.

The inability to control fear is the root cause o f the
"text anxiety " problem. Fear more than anything
else keeps people from achieving their full potential
in sports, life, business - in everything.

Fear o f what?? Fear o f failure right? Nope... That is not it. That is not w hat you are afraid of.
It's not faihng. It is the fear o f a perceived threat to your ego, your self esteem. The fear o f
looking bad and getting embarrassed in front o f your peers. The fear o f being exposed as a
fraud. N ot really smart enough to be a Radiologist. "Im poster Syndrome "

Agree?

N o w ... let us talk about how to conquer fear and channel all that psychogenic energy into a
powerful motivated force.

14
