                                         S E C T IO N S:

                                   Variations a n d A daptability

I have many hobbies. Disco Dance, Ping Pong, Sunbathe.

But my primary hobby is trying to be the best version of myself - maximizing my potential as a human
being. Since this is a competition, I thought it might be helpfijl to share with you some of my ideas on
this topic.

I'll start off by saying that I can't necessarily help you be "the best." What we are talking about here is
being "the best you." We are talking "the quest" - the struggle to be the best version of ourselves. I
like to imagine that people are bom as various shaped and sized canisters. Not all of these canisters
will hold the same amount o f liquid. "All men were NOT created equal." It's just a fact that some
people are better at certain things than others. Some people have greater potential than others. We
can't all be Tony Stark. The point is to try and be the best version of yourself The best you. You
want to fill that canister all the way up to the brim. Don't be the half full bottle, that is only half a life.

       M ethod 1: M ental Optim ization - The Sly Man

Gurdjiefif's idea of "The Sly Man" - sometimes referred to as "The Forth Way," is a complex framework
that can help you understand yourself and maximize your potential. I'll give you an introduction and then
we can discuss how this might be helpfiil for your preparation. There is a lot to this - I'm just covering
the basics.

Gurdjieff has several basic tenets that are necessary to discuss before you can apply the teaching.

1. Nearly every human exists in a semi-hypnotic waking sleep. If you have played video games you
     may be familiar with the term "NPC" or non-player-character. This would be a character controlled
     by the computer who simply reacts to its environment. It might seem alive because it chases you
     around, but it is really just reacting and following a pre-recorded program. It isn't consciously
     making any choice, it simply reacts. People in this state can be thought of as "mechanical." Just
     think about the last time something "made" you angry or sad. It just sorta happened didn't it ? You
     had a stimulus and you reacted reflexively with a response.

   Stimulus; Someone disagrees with your well informed political opinions.
   Response: You become angry and compare them to the bad guys from WW2.

2. While in this state of semi-hypnotic waking sleep you have no free will. Everything that you do is
     simply a reflex. You are attracted or repelled by influencing forces in your environment. Things
     happen to you - and you react. The culmination of these actions and experiences makes you the
     person you are today. You had no choice in the matter. When it rains, the sidewalk becomes wet.
     You are the sidewalk.

3. Humans are liars. The study of man is the study of the lying animal. No other animal practices
     dishonesty in the way we do. We are dishonest to others, but mostly to ourselves. We lie to ourselves
     about how we are perceived and how others perceive us - the defense of the ego is paramount. We lie
     to ourselves about our influence over things and even the true nature of our reality. The entire concept
     of cognitive dissonance, holding contradictory beliefs simultaneously, is a great example.

                                                                  17
Once you accept those things, only then are you capable o f becoming awake. You cannot wake up
until you realize that you are asleep. Unfortunately, many people have no desire to wake up - they
enjoy the lies. The lies bring them comfort. As Morpheus said in the Matrix most people are not
ready to be unplugged. They are so hopelessly dependent on the system, that they will fight to
protect it. It is understandable, I 'm still pissed off that Santa Claus wasn't real.

The forth way offers a pathway to free will, but you have to wake up first and that is not an easy
thing. There is a constant pull back to the sleeping state. Don't believe me ? Let us try the self
remembering exercise. Concentrate on being 100% present in the moment. Feel your socks. Feel
the chair under your butt. Feel the air in your lungs. Now - while being present in this moment,
detach yourself - try and imagine yourself from the third perspective. See yourself as a fly would see
you. When you try and do this - you will feel yourself become unstuck - "separate" from the rest of
the world. This is self remembering. The sensation o f existing separate from the world. Like
changing from first person to third person perspective. N o w .... try and hold that state. It's difficult.
You will start to lose focus and become distracted by the chattering of your mind. Constant fucking
daydreaming. A constant pull to sleep.

The capacity to maintain this state requires "work." In fact, Gurdjieff refers to this as "the work."
You must apply constant resistance against the impulse to sleep. It takes practice - you have to
really try and do it. The more you do it the easier it gets (like everything). Be present in the moment
and observe your own thoughts. You are a machine - a reactive machine. Study yourself without any
need to defend your actions or ideas. They aren't actually yours anyway, so there is no need to
defend them.

The second exercise necessary to "wake" is the ability to recognize in yourself the many versions o f
you. For most people they think o f themselves as a single unit. In fact, you refer to yourself as "I."
But ask yourself which "I" are you referring to ? The "I" that wants to get up early ? Or the "I" that
wants to stay up late ? The "I" that wants six pack abs ? Or the "I" that wants to eat ice-cream. The
"I" that wants to pass this exam ? Or the "I" that wants to watch youtube and not study ? Notice that
we are full o f contradictions - we are liars. We aren't even honest about how we think. We exist as
many competing versions o f ourselves, all with separate agendas. There are many "I"s.

If you attempt to "self observe" what you are thinking you will be able to begin to recognize which
one o f these voices is doing the talking. You may even be able to recognize why certain things give
you anxiety or make you angry. Is this my limbic system talking ? Is this my frontal lobe ? What am
"I" reacting to ?

There are so many benefits to this understanding. It can free you o f guilt and shame. It can help you
control your emotions. It can help you improve your interpersonal dynamics. It can allow you to
enter the flow state and concentrate deeper and longer (that's what she said). When you approach
yourself as a machine you can use the same logic an engineer would use in identifying problems and
appropriate solutions. Understanding your various internal agendas and reflexes to align them
towards a single goal. Even 15 minutes a day practicing the self remembering exercise will
massively improve your ability to focus for longer periods o f time.

There are three traditional ways to develop "super powers," assuming you can't get your hands on
some compound V. (1) Extreme mental control (the way o f the Yogi), (2) Extreme emotional control
(the way of the Monk), (3) Extreme physical control (the way o f the Fakir). All three traditional
masteries require decades of training and social isolation. This forth way (the way of the Sly Man)
can give you access to the same abilities in shorter time and without the need for isolation. The
capacity to truly control your mind and your body. To free yourself o f all the reflexive actions and
negative imagination. With the appropriate amount o f "work" you may also find the fourth way is a
path to many abilities some consider to be unnatural.

                                                                  18
There is another facet to this - which I touched on earlier in the chapter. Some people refer to this as the
way of the Joker. Once you understand that people are machines which simply react, you may begin to
become fairly amused by the serious nature that many people take. The way they try to force and control
things they have no control over really can be very funny. The way they take credit for things that simply
happen to them. People love to brag about things. People will even brag about being tall. It is hilarious to
witness the total lack of self awareness. This was the original purpose of the court Jester - to keep the
King from taking himself too seriously.

As you start to see the "code in the matrix" you will notice that life begins to take on the appearance of a
series of games. Games that are to be played. Through self observation you will see that when you play
you are doing things onlyfo r the purpose o f doing them.

For example, when you listen to music you aren't trying to get to the end of the song, or count the notes,
or derive meaning in the lyrics. You are listening to the music only for the purpose of listening. The other
thing that happens as you play, or dance, or listen to music is that you become present (mentally) for the
process. This in itself is a method to increase focus, and energy in daily life. This is a method for
minimizing day-dreaming and absent mindedness. This is the way of the Sly Man.

The Joker does not participate in the cardinal sin of the forth way - negative imagination. This is the
process of imaging a dreadful outcome in the future -- worrying about things that have not happened yet.
This behavior must be self observed and halted immediately. The Joker never does this. He is fully in the
moment - he plays for the sake of playing.

Study only for the purpose of studying. Avoid the mentality of "getting through the material." Read the
material the same way you would if you were reading a novel for pleasure. If done correctly you will find
your studying endurance and recall ability improve. Games are best played as games.

A Method 2: M ental Optim ization - N europhysiological M anipulation

Dopamine controls your ability to exert              Classic Experiment (they really did this):
effort. People think about dopamine as the
chemical that causes pleasure, but it has        Rats in a cage are given a lever. If they push it they get
more to do with effort. We aren't interested     a delicious snack. The rats like to push the lever.
in pleasure. We are interested in increasing
our capacity for effort. It is true that         Rats in a different cage are injected with a chemical
Dopamine is released in large amounts            that destroys dopamine producing cells in their brains.
during sex or drug use - things that feel        They hurt these rats for science (and fun). These rats
good. But when you actually look at the          were given a similar lever. They also liked to push the
science of how it works in the brain             lever (despite having no dopamine).
dopamine is more about motivation to
pursue more of something in order to relieve     N ow ... the real cruelty begins.
or exclude pain. This is in line perfectly
with my father's philosophy on life - that       The Rats were moved into a larger cage. The healthy
there is no such thing as pleasure or            rats (the ones who didn't get neurotoxin injected into
happiness in this world , only times when it     their brains for science / fun) walked across the cage
hurts less. Our pleasure seeking behavior is     and pressed the food lever - to get a delicious snack.
actually motivated to relieve pain - and this
is even more obvious if you've been around       The Rats who were injected with a Dopamine
anyone with a true addiction. They
experience agony in the absence of the thing     neurotoxin (for science / fun) just looked at the lever.
they are addicted to and seek to relieve that
pain through that dopamine releasing             They wouldn't even move one rat length to push it.
activity (drug use, eating candy, pom, etc...).
                                                 They said - "fuck it dude, let's go bowling.'

                                                 The scientists had created lazy, lazy

                                                 (presumably communist) rats.                        ^

                                                 Point: Dopamine is Not about           __

                                                 Pleasure, it is about

                                                 Motivation.

                                                 19
Dopamine creates a bias where we are focused on "what we don't have.

Let us take a slightly deeper look at this - so that we can                                       TASK
weaponize our will; and not live our lives as communist rats -
hoping someone will push the lever of Radiology Board exam            D e fa u l^ ^ ^ ^ ^
victory for us. There are two basic networks that govern how we              rS l
function. "Default Mode Network" - The network of circuits in
your brain that is active when you aren't doing anything. ``Task                ,, t.
Mode Network" - The network of circuits that allows you (and                    Dopamine
motivates you) to focus on a specific task.

These networks should work in anti-correlation -like a see-saw.
Dopamine regulates the switching between these.

There are 2 Types of Procrastinators:                                      Weaponized Anxiety

(1) Those who leverage internal stress: The people who "enjoy"        Set achievable (but difficult)
or "require" the stress of a deadline. These are the people who are   goals in your study blocks -
using stress to tap into the fight or flight epinephrine system.      something you can barely get
Remember when I was talking about harnessing anger to give you        done in time. This creates an
energy to combat fatigue ? This is the same biochemical mechanism     artificial deadline to cultivate
- but instead of requiring a deadline you activate this system by     enhanced focus.
focusing yourself first on any number of cruelties bestowed upon
you by this hatefiil world. Remember that your revenge is success.    Example: Complete 5 pages
If you have no room for anger in you heart and you've lived a life    of reading with the
full of good times (and noodle salad) you can try to access this      construction of an
pathway by hyper-oxygenating with 20-30 deep breaths - this tends     abbreviated outline (or
to active the same pathway. If you are prone to panic attacks then    flashcard set) within 30
maybe don't try this. Caffeine can also help - more on this later.    minutes.

(2) Those who perhaps have general apathy and don't have enough dopamine on board. These are the
communist rats. We can't blame everything on Karl Marx (and the liberal media), in many cases you may
have become dopamine resistant in the same way fat people become insulin resistant. Assuming you
haven't been injected with a dopamine destroying neurotoxin (for science / fun) the solutions here are
probably two fold.

 First you can do things to increase dopamine production. There are ways to supplement this with
  precursors (L-Tyrosine or Mucuna Pruriens / Velvet B ean). Dietary tyrosine is found in high protein
  foods (tyrosine is an amino acid). Examples: sesame seeds, cheese, soy beans, meat, poultry - etc...
  If you have schizophrenia or other dopamine sensitive conditions maybe don't try this.

 Second strategy, and probably the more effective one, is to go on a dopamine fast. It isn't actually a
  fast, it is more like impulse training. Things that produce dopamine spikes include social media,
  gambling, pornography, stress eating, etc... You can try and employ the Pareto 80/20 rule of figuring
  out what 20% of your behaviors are causing 80% of your problems - with regards to compulsive
  monkey mind behaviors. I discussed in the 1st method of mental optimization the way of the sly man
  and the capacity to self observe. This can be put into practice here to help you figure out what to
  eliminate or restrict. In most cases this is compulsively checking your phone every 5 minutes and
  wondering onto YouTube to watch cat videos or argue about complex geopolitical topics you don't
  really understand on social media.

20
       Method 3: M ental Optimization - Impulse Control

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is considered the gold standard treatment for impulse control
disorders. In particular exposure and response prevention types of CBT. Lets us take a look at a practical
application.
Pre-Game -- set a timer for 5 minutes

Step 1: Get your phone out and place it on the table in front of you.
Step 2: Notice when the impulse to watch cat videos on YouTube / TikTok arises, and what thoughts and
feelings you're experiencing in that moment.
Step 3: Practice self observing the desire to engage in the conditioned response come and go without
giving into it. People with PhDs in the pseudo-science of psychology call this "urge-surfing."
Do this shit multiple times a day -- every day.

Almond Meditation

This can also be done with a raisin if you have a Kryptonian weakness to tree nuts. This is a technique
described as "Visceral Awareness" which I find to be very helpful in training impulse control.
Pre-Game -- set a timer for 5 minutes

Step 1: Place a single almond (or raisin) in your mouth

Step 2: Notice the impulse to chew it up and grab another one (or spit in out because almonds are vile).

Step 3: Practice self observing the desire to engage in the conditioned response come and go without
giving into it.
Step 4: After 5 minutes chew it up or spit it out.
Do this shit once a day -- every day. Morning time is an excellent time to practice this.

"Self Remembering Exercise"
Remember most people exist in a state of semi-hypnotic "waking sleep." Studying or performing like this
is not ideal. The "SelfRemembering Exercise " is a tool to harness power and increase your focus, but
simply practicing "being presenf' is still very effective.
How this works is that in the morning (or prior to entering the study hall, or exam room) you must spend
5-10 mins being present in the moment. Close you eyes and repeat to yourself "I am here in this place."
Generate the sense of being present in the current moment. Concentrate only on your breathing. Do not
force or push thoughts from your mind. Thoughts are "sticky" if you touch them. Let them float by and
continue to concentrate on your breathing.

M e d ia te until nothing c a n disrupt you, so that you see a n d feel noth in g - e x c e p t your o w n energy.
-- Shidoshi Senzo Tanaka

                                                                  21
Why waste time doing this? M editation makes my penis soft!

I agree, it's not alpha and typically I only endorse alpha male behavior.. .but this thing really works.
Samurai meditate -- it's really not that beta. Remember how I said that all your feeling of dread or
anxiety are focused on the future - the consequences which result after you have failed ? If you center
your mind on the present, all that shit melts away. It is really just that simple. Anytime you feel anxiety
and dread building inside yourself perform the breathing exercise. Eyes closed - say "I am here in this
place," build a sense of presence in the current moment, focus on your breathing, then return to the exam /
practice room and proceed to kick ass.

Repeat as needed. If necessary add the       Then I heard the voice o f the Lord saying, "Whom

phrase "retribution is at hand" or "only in  shall I send and who will go fo r us? "A nd I said,
death does duty end" or my personal          ,,,, . r. .
favorite "happiness is a delusion of the
                                               Here am I. Send me."
weak," after centering yourself in the
present moment.                              - Isaiah 6:8

       M ethod 4: M ental Optim ization - The W ay o f the Slot M achine

If you want to know the best way to trick yourself into doing something all day long, then consider the
addictive behavior of gambling. The "intermittent reward" is the ultimate method for keeping that task
oriented pathway lit up. If you won every game it would be boring. If you lost every game it would also
be boring. But... winning sometimes and not knowing when it will happen - that locks you right in. It's
the same reason people can sit in a fishing boat for 12 hours straight (besides being drunk).

Method for applying this; Later in the chapter I'm going to provide you with a potential study work block
of 3 hours. If you are able to complete the block without distraction (getting onto YouTube to watch cat
videos), then you flip a coin. You could use this for any difficult task (a set of 100 MCQs, going through
a deck of flash cards, consistently waking up early to study, etc...). If you do the difficult thing you get
to flip the coin. If the coin is heads -- you are allowed some form of reward (whatever you are into --
watch a TV show, eat a bowl of ice cream, sexual favor for your partner... etc..). This only works if you
actually deprive yourself of these rewards at baseline.

If you fail at completing the block - you don't flip the coin. BUT, just because you completed the block
doesn't mean you get your ice cream and / or sexual favor -- it is still random and not predictable. This
taps into the cave person brain and motivates. The same way a cave man doesn't know if he will find
apples in the next valley if he looks -- and the not knowing / intermittent reward creates a drive. Casinos
figured this shit out along time ago -- now it is time to make it work for you. Addict yourself to doing
difficult things.

       M ethod 5: M ental O ptim ization - Blinks & Visual Focusing

"Attentional Blinks" is the term used to describe lapses of attention. This doesn't just apply to the lack
of impulse control and wondering mind but also in the idea of "satisfaction of search." When you make a
finding and are so pleased with your effort that you miss all the other findings. This can occur in the
realm of multiple choose as well -- it is why I stress to always read every choice before answering.

There is literature to support the use of Vipassana meditation / mindfulness of breath practiced 17 minutes
a day to reduce the number of attentional blinks. Meditation is made overly complicated - but just sitting
and trying to focus on your breathing is necessary if you are serious about getting better at concentration
and having an edge on the exam over those un willing to put the time in to improve.

                                             22
       M ethod 5: M ental Optim ization - Blinks & Visual Focusing - continued

"IntentionalBlinks" is the term used to describe exactly what you'd think it describes - how often you
bhnk your eyes. There is research to support the act of intentional blinking (closing your eyes) allows
you to "reset your perception of time." The rate of blinking is controlled by dopamine. You can hack this
relationship through "fixation focused training activity" - this is a real thing, published in literature. A
short time focused on a specific visual target, has been shown to improve the ability to focus on other
types of information.

Application:

Step 1; Physical Activity first - do a few body weight squats (hindu squats are my preference)

Step 2: Focus on an object close to you (your hand) for 30-60 seconds. You can blink *but try not to.

Step 3: Focus on an object at an intermediate distance for 30-60 seconds.

Step 4: Focus on an object far away for 30-60 seconds.

This is training - this is done daily. -- Less blinking = More focus

"Open Monitoring" - When thinking about your visual system, you can focus intensely on the thing
directly in front of you or you can widen your focus and take in the entire room (the side walls, the
ceiling, etc..) - sometimes called "panoramic vision." This visual change can be used to hack your
overall sensory process. By deliberately opening up your peripheral vision and then changing it to your
coned in central vision you can experience improved mental focus. I would recommend doing this before
every question block or prior to each study session.

"Visual Focusing" - Training to improve greater visual focus
also gives you the capacity to establish and sustain
concentration over longer periods of time.
Application:

Step 1: Sit upright in a chair. Gaze at the spiral for 1 minute.
Step 2: Close your eyes and see how long you can hold the
image of the spiral before it fades. Use a timer to track your
progress.
Step 3: Repeat the process 3-5 times daily.

** More advanced training - when this becomes too easy

Step 2: Close you eyes and hold the image of the spiral.
Rotate the spiral in your mind - first clockwise then
counterclockwise.
Step 3: Continue to rotate the image in your mind, then change the spiral to white and the background to
black. Continue to hold the image. Continue to rotate it with the colors inverted.
Once that is easy - then you can try catching a fly with chopsticks. A man who can catch fly with
chopsticks can do anything.

                                                                  23
A Method 6: M ental Optimization - The A ccountability M irror

This is a mechanism I learned from David Goggins. Goggins is the fucking man - if you d on't
know about him, h e 's worth a google. Similar to John Wick, he is a man o f focus,
commitment, and sheer will. He really hates him self - in a way that only someone who shares
the psychopathy can understand. That weak person in the m irror is the enemy and he m ust be
held accountable.

The accountability mirror works like this. In the morning you put sticky notes of the things
you want to accomplish in that day on the mirror. We will talk later about the different types
o f goals and how to set them - but as a concept you should not limit yourself to individual
tasks but also include goals on how you handle yourself and behave. At the end o f the day
when you are getting ready for bed, brushing your teeth (or tooth - if you are from West
Virginia), you have to look in that mirror and answer for your progress. You either
accomplished your goals or you didn't. You have to look at it and face it down. The only way
you can improve outcomes is to be 100% honest about the effort that you put in and the
outcomes that resulted. Hearing "you did great!" even when you didn't isn 't helping. Be
honest with yourself Make the changes you need to make and get better. Be brutally fucking
honest -- show no mercy. Hurting feelings is sometimes necessary if you want to stimulate
change, and who better to do the hurting than you.

Failing is ok. N ot adapting to failure is not ok.

When you fail to reach your goals you need to spend time figuring out why (self observation).
Make the necessary adaptations and try again. Repeat as necessary. Be accountable to yourself

        Method 7: Physical Optim ization - Sunlight

I know that nerds bum easily when exposed to the sun and the primary benefit o f being a
Radiologist is to w alk in shadow and move in silence (to guard against extraterrestrial
violence).

Seriously - you only need like 5 mins a day. Your pineal gland demands it. I don't care if it's
freezing cold outside - get your ass out there and look at the sun for 5 mins. Be mindful in
the mom ent and play the standing outside in the sun game. I 'll discuss the use o f a wakeup
light later in this section - that doesn't replace the need for actual sunlight. You don't have
Xeroderma pigmentosum - get your ass outside.

If you are unable to get outside or you've been telling people " I 'm allergic to the sun" for so
long that you have started to believe it - at the very m inim um consider a Vitamin D
supplement. A few pearls on vitamin D. Take it in the morning (some people think it binds
up natural m elatonin and can fuck up your sleep). Take it with oil or fat (it is better absorbed
that way). Take it with a vitamin K pill (supposedly it is synergistic).

                                                                 24
A Method 8: Physical Optim ization - Sleep

I have trained m yself to sleep 4.5 hours a night by mapping and understanding my REM cycles.
People will say they "c a n 't do that. " People use the phrase "c a n 't do th a t" w hen they really
mean "I d o n 't w ant to do that because it will hurt too much. " Callous your mind.

This takes some effort and practice. If I get 3.5 hours sleep I feel terrible. I d o n 't really care
about "feeling terrible." A w arrior does not com plain o f physical discom fort. The problem is I
can't concentrate. I also feel this w ay with 5.5 hours sleep. A t 4.5 hours I find that I am readily
able to transform my water sw ord.... into a fire sword.

The trick is to map your sleep patterns. There are apps that can do this. Alternatively, you can
go full retard and buy a ``sleep shepherd, " which is my endorsem ent if you really w ant an
accurate map plus the added benefits o f binaural beats.

Take two weeks and create a sleep journal. W hat you are looking for is how long it takes you to
go through two REM cycles. Then you can plot your bed time and wake up time to maximize
productivity. If you do this right you can potentially get 4 extra hours a day to study.

       Get Up Here

       (the enemy is weak and still sleeping
       earn your tactical edge)

AWAKE

     Deepest

                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                Hours of Sleep

After I mastered this and freed up multiple additional hours o f study time in the morning I really
began to break away from the pack in m orning case conference. I 'm not going to say how many
asses I kicked, only that I kicked every single ass. W hen people ask my secret -- I would tell
them - " Sleep journaling bitch. D on't make me show you m y fucking sleep journal. I keep it in
a drawer with my other creepy journals (my poop journal, my ear wax journal, my belly button
lint journal)." They thought I was jo k in g ...

                                                                 25
A M ethod 8: Physical Optim ization - Sleep - Continued

Sleep Induction: A nother com ponent to getting the most out o f your sleep is the abihty to
fall asleep rapidly. All that time you m ight be spending staring at the ceiling is time wasted.
Here are a few strategies:

 Temperature Optimization: Your hypothalamus will lower your body temperature in the natural sleep
  induction process. You can help optimized this temperature shift by first taking a warm bath or shower
  - followed by entering a cool bedroom ~ typically 60-67캟 (15.6-19.4캜). This nightly hot shower /
  bath ritual is also an excellent time to practice the various meditation and impulse control exercises
  discussed earlier I also find it to be a good time to do some stretching - just don't slip and bust your
  ass, that would be counter productive to sleep induction. I'm actually serious about being careful if you
  are going to stretch or exercise in the shower. My Uncle Jamal told me that he was doing some
  exercises in the shower and he slipped and a shampoo bottle got stuck up his butt. He had to go the ER
  to get it out. Uncle Jamal is a bit clumsy - because that same thing happen a few times. Like another
  time he told me he was doing the vacuum cleaning and the phone rang and he slipped on an orange and
   the vacuum extension went up his butt. A lot of people didn't believe that story when he tells it - but he
   said these things happen a lot (like 4-5 times). So... just be careful.

 Avoid looking at vour phone in bed and if you must install one of those blue light filters.

 1recommend the following nightly supplements:

    Chamomile tea has sleep inducing properties- or you can take 50 milligrams of apigenin (which is a
     derivative of camomile)

    Magnesium Glycinate: You want to take it 1-2 hours before bedtime, with a dose ~ 350 mg. Taking
     it with some food may decrease nausea if you have a sensitive belly. Also make sure you are getting
     the correct magnesium. Magnesium citrate is a great laxative... but not so good at inducing sleep.

    5-HTP (5-hydroxytryptophan): Doses up to 600 mg per day
    Melatonin. Doses of 0.5-5 mg taken 2 hours before your desired bedtime -- this tends to give people

     vivid dreams - so get ready to wake up hoping you didn't really take a shit on your program director's
     desk (this was a recurring dream / fantasy of mine -- 1assume everyone has similar thoughts around
     boards).
    L-Theanine: Doses of 400 mg per day
    GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid): Doses of 250-500 mg

 The use of a "sleep induction mat." It's basically a porcupine. This is most helpful if you have a
   "busy mind" - full of distracting thoughts. How this works: It's a bunch of sharp (dull) plastic
   points. You take your shirt off and lay on them. It hurts. The pain distracts you from all the random
   shit you might be thinking about. Practice the self remembering exercise. In about 5 mins you will
   notice that it doesn't hurt anymore. That is because your body is releasing a low level of
   endorphins. Sit up - roll the thing up - and go to sleep. Some people will tell you that it takes 30
   mins to work. That's a bunch of baloney ~ 5 mins tops.

 Reveri is a free app on Android and Apple that has short (10-15 min) hypnosis protocols. This may be
  helpful if you are having a lot of anxiety and that is preventing you from sleeping. It sounds like hocus-
  pocus but supposedly this thing is backed by peer-reviewed research.

                                                                  26
But Prometheus?! The Codex Astartes Does NOT support this action!

Every year I get at least one belligerent turbo nerd email quoting me sleep research and telling
me that I must have the p.Tyr362 His mutation - a variant o f the BHLHE41 gene - and that my
advice to sleep deprive violates both the teachings o f the Emperor Leto II Atreides and described
will of the Emperor o f M an as transcribed by the Imperial Ecclesiarchy / Adeptus Ministorum.

Before the writing o f the annual "I need my teddy bear and 10 hours o f sleep em ail"- allow me to
clarify my points:

 This is about getting a mental edge
 This is about getting a tactical advantage from weaponized will power
 It is possible to maximize your sleep efficiency through REM mapping
 I can do it - and so can other people (you may be one o f them)
 Reduced sleep quantity can be augmented with improved sleep quality - through the methods

  described on the prior page - in addition to optim ized nutrition, hydration, exercise e tc ...

If my provided m ethodology (sleep m apping, diet, hydration, exercise, etc..), doesn't w ork for
you - consider the following:

Alternative approach to overcoming fatigue:
(Step 1) M ake a fist with your brain
(Step 2) Punch sleepy time in the face

M ethod 9: Physical Optim ization - W aking Up Ready to Fight the Dragon

I wrote a lot of words describing methods to reduce the quantity and improve the quality of your sleep.
The second part of this equation is a morning ritual that allows you to optimize productivity while the
enemy is sleeping cuddling their teddy bears.

Step 1: The morning always begins the night before. You should lay out your clothes and have your
morning study area cleaned / organized with clear goals written out. If you are going to do some early
morning cardio (which I strongly recommend) you should have your gear set out ahead of time.

Step 2: Get a bright light. They make wake up lights or you can get
something like one of those LED drawing pads (they tend to be cheap).
You need something bright - like 900 lux, and you need to shine that shit
in your face. Obviously the sun would work, but if you are serious
about summoning the Avatar of Khaine (bloody handed Aeldari God of
War) - that sun isn't rising for several hours when you wake up -- so
you need a bright light.

Step 3: Movement -- if you aren't gonna do some light cardio (you
pussy), you can at least give me 10-20 Hindu squats.

Step 4: Study First -- eat later. I always earn my breakfast with               o f Khaine craves only
movement and productivity - build that into your ritual as well.   battle (and reading about

27
A Method 10: Physical Optim ization - Diet

The human body is designed to operate perfectly... in a w orld that existed 10,000 years ago.
Despite what the primitive "rat brain" may tell you, sugar is the devil. Foosball, school, girls,
and Ben Franklin are also the devil - but that is unrelated to this discussion.

Avoiding highs and lows is key to optimal function. Avoiding IBS cramps and constant
shitting is also ideal. I 'm not going to endorse a particular diet by brand name. I 'll ju st say
there is a lot o f data showing that a Ketogenic diet (or something similar) helps to maximize
mental function. Having said that, Ketogenic diets take some getting used to and if you are
going to go that route consider using your allocated carbs prior to studying.

Foods with Tyrosine (foods with protein) are useful as Tyrosine is a precursor to dopamine --
which we discussed earlier is important to regulating your drive.

Avoid sugar - nothing good comes from sugar. Dehydration is bad - drink water.

A Method 11: Physical Optim ization - M ovement

You need 15 mins a day o f movement. This can be actual alpha male gym stuff, or beta male
yoga - but any form o f m ovem ent works and is necessary to m axim ize your m ental health.
W hen people say they don't w ork out -- this is like saying "I don't brush m y teeth." It is not
optional. No excuses. Make your body stronger. Make your mind stronger.

I will say this - the more vigorous your training the more sleep your body will require. It is
super im portant that you m ove (especially during this stressfiil time in your life) - and I 'm not
suggesting that you avoid working out to sleep less -- so don't get it twisted. I 'm instead
advising you to adjust your study schedule to allow more sleep on nights after you have
worked out super hard. Optimizing physical training and sleep management requires
flexibility, patience, and balance. Having said that -- d o n 't use exercise as an excuse to be
weak. If you plan on hitting an hour long spin class, rolling 2 hours straight at an open mat, or
doing 15 sets o f squats -- plan the night before to sleep 2 extra hours.

No snooze buttons. Snooze buttons are the path to the dark side.

Snooze buttons lead to fear. Fear leads to anger. Anger leads to hate. Hate leads to suffering.

Discipline equals freedom -- Jocko. D on't touch that fucking snooze button.

Also-- don't forget you can also use working out as a weapon against fatigue. The times o f the
day when you are the m ost tire d ... w ork out. Oh, and d o n 't listen to music w hen you w ork out
(that shit is cheating). It is supposed to hurt - that's the point. Em brace silence - people go to
great lengths to avoid silence. You need silence to self observe. Silence is your friend.

                                                                  28
