     S E C T IO N 6:

C o n g e n it a l

Sequestration, CCAMs, and a bunch of other congenital
path is discussed in detail in the Peds chapter. Here are
some other randos.

Poland Syndrome - Unilateral absence of a pectoral
muscle (white arrow). Can cause a unilateral hyper-lucent
chest. Can have limb issues (small weird arms / hands).

Bronchial Atresia - This is a congenital obliteration of a short segment of a lobar, segmental,
or subsegmental bronchus near its origin (most commonly involves the apical-posterior segment of
the left upper lobe). Like many atresias a vascular insult in utero is the probable etiology.

On CT, you will see a hyper lucent region with decreased vascularity.   Bronchial atresia is usually
It is somewhat counterintuitive that loss of the bronchus would make    asymptomatic, although
the lung trap air (hyper lucent). The explanation is collateral flow    they can present with
through the various pores of Kohn and canals of Lambert. You will       recurrent pneumonia.
often see a large "nodule" (sometimes with a branching or "finger in
the glove" morphology) nearby in the hilum -- which represents          Hyperinflated lobe is the
mucoid impaction in the blind ended bronchus.                           most common radiographic
                                                                        appearance (sometimes with
The primary differential would be an endobronchial tumor. If you can    a hilar nodule visible).
measure (or they show you) a low density focus (< 25 HU) in the
mucus plug then you are safe to call it mucoid impaction. If you can't  CT will show a blind ending
make the distinction --> next step = bronchoscopy.                      bronchus, filled with mucus
                                                                        and the distal lung will be
                                                                        Hyper-Inflated (lucent).

AVM - They can occur sporadically. For the purpose of multiple choice when you see them think

about HHT (Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia / Osier Weber Rendu). Pulmonary AVMs are
most commonly found in the lower lobes (more blood flow), and can be a source of right to left shunt
(worry about stroke and brain abscess). The rule of treating once the afferent vessel is 3 mm is
based on some tiny little abstract and not powered at all. Having said that, it's quoted all the time,
and a frequent source of trivia that is easily tested.

Persistent Left SVC - This is the most common congenital venous anomaly of the chest. It
usually only matters when the medicine guys drop a line in it on the floor and it causes a confusing
post CXR (line is in a left paramedian location). It usually drains into the coronary sinus. In a
minority of cases (like 5%) it will drain into the left atrium, and cause right to left shunt physiology
(very mild though). This is typically shown on an axial CT at the level of the AP window, or with a
pacemaker (or line) going into the right heart from the left.

Swyer-James - This is the classic unilateral lucent lung. It typically occurs after a viral lung
infection in childhood resulting in post infectious obliterative bronchiolitis (from constrictive
bronchiolitis). The size o f the affected lobe is smaller than a normal lobe (it's not hyper-expanded).

           Horseshoe Lung: Rare as fuck.

           Defined by fusion of the posterior basilar

I n segments of the lower lobes behind the heart.

The most likely testable points are:
(1) What is it ? and (2) Q: What is the association ?

                              A: Scimitar syndrome

74
