         S E C T IO N 8:
P neum oconiosis

As a general rule, these are inhaled so they tend to be upper lobe predominant. You can have
centrilobular nodules (which makes sense for inhalation), or often perilymphatic nodules - which
makes a little less sense, but is critical to remember * especially with silicosis & CWP.

Asbestos Exposure: The term "Asbestosis" refers to the changes of pulmonary fibrosis -

NOT actual exposure to the disease. The look is very similar to UIP, with the presence of parietal
pleural thickening being the "most important feature" to distinguish between IPF and Asbestosis.
Obviously, the history of working in a ship yard or finding asbestos bodies in a bronchoalveolar
lavage is helpfiil.

Things to know about Asbestos:                                  "Holly Leaf"
 "Asbestosis" = the lung fibrosis associated with

    exposure, NOT actual exposure
 Interstitial pattern looks like UIP + parietal pleural

    thickening
 There is a 20 year latency between initial exposure and

    development of lung cancer or pleural mesothelioma
 There is an association with extrapulmonary cancer

    including: Peritoneal mesothelioma, GI cancer. Renal
    Cancer, Laryngeal Cancer, and Leukemia
 Benign pleural effusions are the "earliest pleural-based
    phenomenon" associated with exposure - still with a lag
    time of around 5 years

Benign Asbestosis Related Changes:                              Round Atelectasis

Pleural effusion is the earliest and most common. Pleural
plaques may develop around 20-30 years, with calcifications
occurring around 40 years.

These plaques tend to spare the apices and Costophrenic
angles. Described as a "Holly L eaf' appearance on CXR.

Round Atelectasis: Atelectasis associated with pleural
findings is sometimes called the "asbestos pseudotumor. "
The appearance of rounded atelectasis is classically
described as a mass like opacity, next to pleural thickening /
scaring, with a swirl or "comet tail" convergence of the
nearby bronchovascular structures.

Gamesmanship: If there isn't adjacent pleural thickening
- its not round atelectasis... it is a cancer.
Next step: PET/CT and "biopsy the motherfucker."

Malignant Mesothelioma - About 80% of them have had asbestos exposure (NOT dose-
dependent). The lag time is around 30-40 years from exposure. I'll discuss this more later in the
chapter with our dedicated section on the pleura.

79
Silicosis: This is seen in miners, and

quarry workers. You can have simple

siUcosis, which is going to be multiple

nodular opacities favoring the upper

lobes, with egg shell calcifications o f the

hilar nodes. You also get perilymphatic

nodules. The comphcated type is called

progressive massive fibrosis (PMF).

This is the formation of large masses in

the upper lobes with radiating strands.

You can see this with both silicosis and

coal workers pneumoconiosis (something

similar also can happen with Talcosis).

These masses can sometimes cavitate -         Progressive Massive Fibrosis
but you should always raise the suspicion     -Large Apical Masses with Radiating Strands
of TB when you see this (especially in the

setting of silicosis).

                                                           M R I: Cancer vs PMF

Silicotuberculosis: Sihcosis actually raises your          Cancer = T2      PMF = T2
risk o f TB by about 3 fold. If you see cavitation in the  Bright           Dark
setting o f silicosis you have to think about TB.

Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis: This is the result o f exposure to "w ashed coal."
Just like silicosis there are simple and complicated forms. There is also an increased risk of
TB (just like silicosis). The simple form was multiple nodular opacities, with calcifications
showing a central nodular dot. The small nodule pattern tends to have a perilymphatic
distribution. The com plicated form gives you a progressive m assive fibrosis that is
similar to that seen in silicosis.

Additional Inhalational Diseases - Not Worthy of a Full Discussion

                                      j

Berylliosis             Metal used in aircraft and  Generalized granulomatous disease
                        space industries            with hilar adenopathy and upper lobe
                                                    predominant reticular opacities.

Silo Filler's Disease N itrogen Dioxide             Pulmonary Edema Pattern. Recovery
                                                    is typically within 5 weeks.

                        Filler in tablets, sometimes Hyperdense micronodules, with

Talcosis                injected (along with drugs) conglomerate masses (similar to PMF).

                        in IV drug users.           Ground glass opacities

                                              80
