                                      S E C T IO N 9:

                                  ILDS

                                          D o n 't Be S cared H o m ie

Everyone seems to be afraid o f interstitial lung diseases. The concept is actually not that
complicated, it's ju st com plicated relative to the rest o f chest radiology (which overall isn't
that com phcated). The trick is to ask yourself two m ain questions: (1) Acute or Chronic ? -
as this narrows the differential considerably, and (2) W hat is the primary finding ? - as this
will narrow the differential further. Now, since we are training for the artificial scenario o f a
multiple choice test (and not the view box). I 'll try and keep the focus on superficial trivia,
and associations. Remember when you are reading to continue to ask yourself "how can
this material be written into a question?"
Vocab: Like most o f radiology, the bulk o f understanding the pathology is knowing the
right words to use (plus, a big vocabulary makes you sound smart).
· Consolidation ==Density that obscures underlying vessels
· Ground Glass Opacity = Density that does NOT obscure underlying vessels
· Secondary Pulmonary Lobule = The basic unit o f pulmonary structure and function.

     It is the smallest part o f the lung that is surrounded by cormective tissue. In the middle
     runs a terminal bronchial with an accompanying artery. Around the periphery runs the
     vein and lymphatics.

                   Anatomy of the Secondary Pulmonary Lobule

                                                                                            outlining tine septa
           Anatomy Questions = Fair Game and Easy to Write for MCQs
            Stuff like "what goes around the periphery ?" or "what goes through the middle of the lobule T

                                                                  81
Nodule Vocabulary (Random, Perilymphatic, Centrilobular)

Random                        Perilymphatic           Centrilobular

Telling them apart can be done byfirst asking i f they abut the pleura?

If the answer is no they are                          Subpleural and
centrilobular.                                        Peribronchovascular

If the answer is yes, then    Pleural Nodules         No Predominance         Perilymphatic
ask do they follow a                                                          Random
peribronchovascular
pattern,

if the answer is no then      No Pleural Nodules      Centrilobular
they are random, if the
answer if yes then they are
perilymphatic.

    Nodule Pattern                                            Key DDx
Perilymphatic
Random                        ·Sarcoid (90%),
Centrilobular                 ·Lymphangitic Spread of CA
                              ·Silicosis

                              ·Miliary TB
                              ·Mets
                              ·Fungal

                              ·Infecdon
                              ·RB-ILD
                              ·Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis (ifground glass)

                                                  82
                       Patterns

Interlobular Septal Thickening:                  Smooth &   Nodular &
Reticular abnormality, that outlines the         Symmetric  Asymmetric
lobules' characteristic shape and size (about 2
cm). It's usually from pulm onary edem a
(usually symmetric and smooth), or
lymphangitic spread o f neoplasm {often
asymmetric and nodular). Kerley B Lines
are the plain film equivalent.

Honeycombing: Cystic areas o f lung destruction in a subpleural location. This is a
hallmark o f UIP. Paraseptal em physem a is a mimic, but the distinction is made by how
many rows o f bubbles.

 One Row of Bubbles =                            Two-Three Rows of Bubbles
Paraseptal Emphysema                                      = Honeycombing.

                                                       [

                                 Pathology

Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias - These are NOT diseases, but instead lung reactions to
lung injury. They occur in a variety o f patterns and variable degrees o f inflammation and
fibrosis. The causes include: idiopathic, collage vascular disease, medications, and
inhalation.

For practical purposes the answer is either (a) UIP or (b) N ot UIP. Not UIP will get better
with steroids. UIP will not. UIP has a dismal prognosis (similar to lung cancer). Not UIP
often does ok. The exam will likely not make it this simple, and will instead focus on
buzzwords, patterns, and associations (which I will now discuss).

                                                                 83
UIP (Usual Interstitial Pneumonia) - The most common ILD. W hen the cause is
idiopathic it is called IPF. On CXR the lung volume is reduced (duh, it's fibrosis). Reticular
pattern in the posterior costophrenic angle is supposedly the fir s t fin d in g on CXR.

  Buzzwords include:                                           Definite UIP Criteria:

Apical to basal gradient (it's worse in the          Honeycombing (must be present)
lower lobes)                                          · +/- traction bronchiectasis
Traction bronchiectasis, and honeycombing            Reticular abnormalities
Honeycombing is found 70% o f the time,             · Subpleural basal predominant distribution
and people expect you to knee jerk UIP when
that term is uttered                                ' Absence of inconsistent features: upper lobe
Histologic Buzzword = Heterogeneous.                 predominance, ground glass > reticulations,
"Histology was heterogeneous" = UIP                  air trapping involving 3 or more lobes

                                                                  Definite UIP Pattern =
                                                      Don't Need to Biopsy to Prove Diagnosis

It's important to know that basically any end       This vs That: Chronic Hypersensitivity
stage lung disease (be it from sarcoid, RA,         Pneumonitis (HP) vs UIP.
Scleroderma, or other collagen vascular disease)    Features that favor Chronic HP over UIP;
has a similar look once the disease has ruined the  · Air Trapping involving 3 more lobes
lungs. ^Technically honeycombing is uncommon        · Mid-Upper lobe predominant fibrosis
in end stage sarcoid - but the rest o f the lung
looks ja c ked up.

The prognosis is terrible (similar to lung cancer). UIP has an association with smoking.

           UIP- Honeycombing, Traction Bronchiectasis, Apical-to-Basal Gradient

            Fibrosis and Cancer Go Together Like Tacos and Tuesdays

Pulmonary fibrosis is a risk factor for lung cancer
(especially if these patients are dumb enough to also smoke).

Cancer in the Fibrotic Lung Trivia;
· Favors the lower lobes
· Favors the interface between the fibrotic cvsts and normal lung
· Progressive wall thickening or a developing nodule within a cyst is suspicious for cancer

  (enlarging pericystic nodules are dodgy as tuck - hide your kids / hide your wife)
· NELSON Lung Cancer Screening Trial showed cancers associated with cystic lesions were

  commonly missed (people thought they were just areas of focal thickening within a bulla).
  -- Then I said "Come on Judge... let him go, h e 's doing his best. "

                                                                84
NSIP (Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia)

Less Comm on than UIP. Even though the nam e infers that its non-specific, it's actually a
specific entity. H istologically it is hom ogenous inflam m ation or fibrosis (UIP was
heterogeneous). It is a com m on pattern in collagen vascular disease, and drug reactions.

It comes in 2 flavors (cellular or fibrotic):

 Ground Glass Alone = Cellular
 Ground Glass + Reticulation = Cellular or Fibrotic
 Reticulation + Traction Bronchiectasis = Fibrotic NSIP
 Honeycombing - uncommon and usually minimal in extent

           Trivia: NSIP is the most common Interstitial Lung Disease in Scleroderma

The disease has a lower lobe, posterior, peripheral predominance with sparing o f the
immediate subpleural lung seen in up to 50% o f cases. This finding o f immediate
subpleural sparing is said to be highly suggestive. G round glass is the NSIP equivalent
of honeycombing.

            UIP                          NSIP
                              Gradient is less obvious
Apical to Basal Gradient  (but still more in lower lobes)
Heterogeneous Histology       Homogenous Histology

      Honeycombing                   Ground Glass
 Traction Bronchiectasis             M icronodules

                          85
RB-ILD and DIP:

I'm going to discuss these two together because some people feel they are a spectrum. For
sure they are both smoking related diseases.

· RB-ILD - Apical Centrilobular ground glass nodules
· DIP - More diffuse GGO, with patchy or subpleural distribution

Some people would just say "fuck it" and stop calling anything DIP. Just call them all RB-ILD and
the bad ones "end stage" -- instead of DIP. Until then - think RB-ILD as mild, and DIP as more
severe.

RB-ILD: This tends to be    DIP: Desquamative interstitial pneum onia is thought
more upper lobe             of as the end spectrum of RB-ILD, and generally seen
predominant (note that      in 50 year old heavy smokers. Extras from 1984
DIP tends to be more        comedy classic "Revenge o f the Nerds" seem to enjoy
lower lobe predominant).    going to radiology conferences to voice their
Localized centrilobular     disapproval o f the term "D IP" because the pathology is
ground glass nodules (due   not desquamation of alveolar epithelium but instead
to macrophages filling up   represents a filling o f alveolar spaces with
the terminal bronchioles).  macrophages. Could these same weirdos be writing the
The pathology tends to      questions ? The dark side clouds everything.
involve the entire cross    Impossible to see the future is.
section o f lung.
                            Just think peripheral lower lobe predominant ground
Respiratory Brochiolitis +  glass, with small cystic spaces.
Symptoms = RB-ILD.
                            You can see
                            consolidations
                            - but they are
                            usually
                            associated with
                            cryptogenic
                            pneumonia.

Localized centrilobular     You can see  DIP - Bilateral Fairly Symmetric Basilar
ground glass nodules -
apical predominant.

                            fibrosis - but it is Predominant Ground Glass

                            rare (like 5-10%) - 1 would not expect that on the exam.

                                         86
Sarcoid:                                    CXR can be used to `^Stage" Sarcoid

This is a m ulti-system disease that creates Stage 0 = N orm al

"non-caseating granulomas." The classic     Stage 1 = Hilar / Mediastinal Nodes Only
age is between 20-40. Along those lines,    Stage 2 = Nodes + Parenchyma Disease
if the header to the question describes an  Stage 3 = Parenchymal Disease

African American female in her 20s-30s      Stage 4 = End Stage (Fibrosis)

the answer is probably sarcoid. The lungs

are by far the most common organ affected       "Acute Sarcoid" is sometimes referred to
(90%).                                          as "Lofgren Syndrome." The name sorta
                                                sounds French to me, making it high yield.

Misc Trivia to know:                            The classic triad is
· Elevated angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)  (1) Bilateral hilar lymph node
· Hypercalcemia
                                                     enlargement,
                                                (2) Arthritis (usually in the ankles), and
                                                (3) Erythema Nodosum

Mediastinal lymph nodes are seen in 60-90% o f patients (classically in a 1-2-3 pattern o f
bilateral hila and right paratracheal). They have perilymphatic nodules, with an upper
lobe predominance. Late changes include, upper lobe fibrosis, and traction bronchiectasis
(honeycombing is rare). Aspergillomas are common in the cavities o f patients with end
stage sarcoid.

· 1-2-3 Sign - bilateral hila a n d right paratracheal
· Lambda Sign - sam e as 1-2-3, but on Gallium Scan
· CT Galaxy Sign - upper lobe masses (conglom erate o f nodules) with satellite nodules

1-2-3 Sign                    Lambda Sign       Panda refers      CT Galaxy Sign
"Garland Triad"               Panda Sign
                                                to the hot
                                                lacrimal glands
                                                (eyes),
                                                nasopharynx
                                                (nose) and
                                                parotid glands -
                                                seen on Gallium

The nodes classically do not  Lambda refers to the Greek         "Galaxy Sign" - refers
abut the cardiac border (in                                      to the CT appearance of
Lymphoma they would).         Symbol that resembles the HOT      a mass-like central core
                              Hilar and Right Paratracheal       with peripheral nodules
                              Nodes on Gallium Scan              resembling a galaxy.
                                                                 Like many thoracic
                                                                 signs - it is nonspecific
                                                                 and you can see
                                                                 something similar with
                                                                 TB.

                                            87
