                           S E C T IO N 13:
                           S ystem ic

Collagen Vascular Disease - Interstitial lung diseases are common in patients with
collagen vascular diseases. The associations are easily tested, so I made you this chart. I tried
to hit the high points o f testable trivia.

          Collagen Vascular Disease Pulmonary Manifestations

Lupus                 More pleural effusions and        Fibrosis is uncommon. Can
*its never Lupus      pericardial effusions than with   get a "shrinking lung."
                      other connective tissue disease
                                                        Reticulations with or without
Rheumatoid Arthritis  Looks like UIP and COP. Lower     honeycombing, and
                      lobes are favored.                consolidative opacities which
                                                        are organizing pneumonia
Scleroderma           NSIP > UIP; lower lobe
                      predominant findings.             Look for the dilated fluid
                                                        filled esophagus.
Sjogrens              LIP
                                                        Extensive ground glass
Ankylosing Spondylitis Upper lobe fibrobullous disease  attenuation with scattered thin
                                                        walled cysts.

                                                        Usually unilateral first, then
                                                        progresses to bilateral.

Caplan Syndrome = Rheumatoid Arthritis + Upper Lobe Predominant Lung Nodules.
These nodules can cavitate, and there may also be a pleural effusion.

"Shrinking Lung" - This is a progressive loss o f lung volume in both lungs seen in
patients with Lupus ( " S" hrinking " L "ung for " SLe"). The etiology is either diaphragm
dysfunction or pleuritic chest pain.

Trivia: Most common manifestation o f SLE in Chest = Pleurifis with/without pleural effusion.

Hepatopulmonary syndrome - This is seen in liver patients with the classic history of
"'shortness o f breath when sitting up.'" The opposite o f what you think about with a CHF
patient. The reason it happens is that they develop distal vascular dilation in the lung bases
(subpleural telangiectasia), with dilated subpleural vessels that don't taper and instead extend
to the pleural surface. When the dude sits up, these things engorge and shunt blood - making
him/her short o f breath. A Tc MAA scan will show shunting with tracer in the brain (outside the
lungs). They have to either tell you the patient is cirrhotic, show you a cirrhotic liver, or give
you that classic history if they want you to get this.

                           98
Wegener Granulom atosis (Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis)

The classic triad is upper tract, lung, and kidneys    This is now called
(although this triad is actually rare). The lungs are  "Granulomatosis with
actually the most common organ involved (95%).         Polyangiitis" because Wegener was
There is a highly variable look.                       a member of the Nazi party.

The most common presentation is also probably the      It is also possible that he worked
most likely to be tested; nodules with cavitation.     with the deep science unit Hydra
The nodules tend to be random in distribution with     which plagued the world with
about half of them cavitating. They can also show      schemes of global domination and
you ground glass changes which may represent           genocide.
hemorrhage.
                                                       Seriously, I 've heard the guy was a
                                                       real asshole. Not just a Nazi, but a
                                                       bad tipper, and a habitual line
                                                       stepper (deliberately didn't wash
                                                       his hands after he took a shit).

Nasal Septum Perforation      Nodules some of which are Cavitated
                              Pleural Effusions (seen ~ 15% of the time)

Goodpasture Syndrome -

A nother autoimmune pulm onary renal syndrome. It favors young men. It's a super
nonspecific look with bilateral coalescent airspace opacities that look a lot like edema (but
are hemorrhage). They resolve quickly (within 2 weeks). If they are having recurrent
bleeding episodes then they can get fibrosis. Pulmonary hemosiderosis can occur from
recurrent episodes o f bleeding as well, with iron deposition manifesting as small, ill-defined
nodules.

                          99
