                         S E C T IO N 16:
         P u lm o n a ry A r t e r ie s & V e in s

The two major forms of anomalous anatomy are described as either Partial (PAPVR) or
Total (TAPVR) anomalous pulmonary venous return. In both forms, pulmonary veins drain into the
systemic system - not the left atrium. Taking blood with oxygen (pulmonary vein blood) which should
normally go into the aorta and dumping it back into the right sided of the heart (left to right shunt) has
the potential to overload that system and potentially cause pulmonary hypertension / right heart
failure (depending on the severity of the shunt).

PAPVR: Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return, is defined as one (or more) of the four
pulmonary veins draining into the right atrium (or the SVC). It is often of mild or no physiologic
consequence. However, there are associations which can cause problems (and are highly testable).

Trivia:

 PAPVR is associated with      Right sided veins (stars)  Sinus venosus ASD. Notice the RV
  ASDs (most classic is the     draining into the SVC      is dilated (it is bigger than the LV) -
  sinus venosus type).                                     dude has right heart failure

 PAPVR + Pulmonary                                                   If reformatted
  Hypoplasia, should make you                                         creatively they
  think Scimitar Syndrome                                             can show the
  (more on this in a bit)                                             classic "vertical
                                                                      vein" (arrow) as
 The most common pattern is                                          the left superior
  the right superior pulmonary                                        pulmonary vein
  vein draining into the SVC                                          empties into the
  (at the junction of the SVC                                         brachiocephalic
  and RA).                                                            (stars).

Left sided PAPVR is less        Left sided PAPVR (arrow) can mimic
common (on multiple choice).    a duplicated SVC at this axial level

When it is shown the classic
look is the "vertical vein"
draining a left pulmonary vein
into the left brachiocephalic
vein

Scimitar Sign (the dilated vein): The dilated right inferior
pulmonary vein (PAPVR) draining into the IVC. The appearance is
that of a Turkish sword - primed and ready to cast terror into the
hearts of those who disbelieve.

Scimitar Syndrome - Sword Vein + Tiny Lung
1 - Big Sword Vein (PAPVR) - arrow*
2 - Unilateral Pulmonary Hypoplasia - bracket*

                                104
TAPVR: Total anomalous pulmonary venous return, is a cyanotic heart disease characterized by all
of the pulmonary venous system draining to the right side of the heart. Really there is nothing I can
say - it's a total eclipse of the heart. I 'll discuss it more in the cardiac chapter.

Meandering Pulmonary Vein: This is the lost Dad vein, refusing to ask for directions
because that is admitting failure. I learned at an early age that "a warrior does not ask for directions."
In the same spirit, this proud samurai vein follows an anomalous course, wandering / "meandering"
around the lungs eventually making its way back to the left atrium. It takes the scenic route, but it
does always return to the left atrium. This is an important detail.

 PAPVR / scimitar veins do NOT drain into the left atrium (they cause left-to-right shunting).

 Meandering Veins DO drain into the left atrium (they do NOT cause left-to-right shunting).

Pulmonary Vein Aneurysm - These are typically referred to as a varix (varix can refer to any
enlarged vessel - but is usually code for vein and is the preferred nomenclature dude).

Classic scenario - Mitral regurgitation causing dilation of the right pulmonary vein - usually inferior.

Classic scenario - Asymmetric pulmonary edema involving the right upper lobe also from mitral
regurgitation. Why upper and not lower ? --The only logical explanation: God did it to confuse
you. Just remember, lower vein grows, and the upper lung shows (it turns white from pulmonary
edema). "He is a grower not a shower" - in this case refers to the inferior pulmonary vein (not a
flaccid penis).

Proximal Interruption of the Pulmonary

Artery: Basically you have congenital absence of the right

(or left) PA with the more distal pulmonary vasculature present.

The side it is on is determined by the side of the arch (it occurs

on the side opposite of the aortic arch). Some people will call

this thing "unilateral absence of the PA", but the preferred

nomenclature is "interruption" because the anomaly only

involves the proximal pulmonary artery - the distal pulmonary        j*-

arterial tree is maintained - supplied by collateral vessels (shown

by the black arrows).

How it could be shown:
 Classically with volume loss of one hemi-thorax (could be on CXR or CT), then a contrast CT

     shot through the heart with only one PA. Normally, you might think one PAis just volume
     averaging - but once you've been shown volume loss on one side your suspicion for this should
     be raised.

Trivia:
 It's seen on the opposite side of the aortic arch (Absent right PA with left-sided aortic arch,

     Absent left PA with right-sided aortic arch).
 Associated with PDA
 Interrupted left PA is associated with TOP and Truncus
 They can get recurrent infections due to the lack of arterial blood supply

                       105
Pulmonary Embolism:                                      r           H istorical

This is a significant cause o f mortality in                Signs o f PE on a C XR
hospitalized patients. The gold standard is
catheter angiography, although this is invasive and      Westermark Regional Oligemia
carries risks. As a result tests like the D-Dimer        Sign
(which has an almost 100% negative predictive
value), and the DVT lower extremity ultrasound           Fleischner  Enlarged Pulmonary Artery
were developed. Now, the CTPA is the primary             Sign
tool.
                                                         Hampton's   Peripheral Wedge Shaped
Differentiating acute vs chronic PE is usefiil.          Hump        opacity

                                                         Pleural     Obviously not specific, but
                                                         Effusion    seen in 30% of PEs.

THIS vs THAT: M assive vs Sub-IVIassive PE: clinical risk stratification

                 THIS v s THAT:Acute VS Chronic PE

Acute                                                    Chronic

Clot is Central                 Clot (if seen) is more Peripheral. May be "web like"

Venous Dilation                 Shrunken Veins with collateral vessels

Perivenous soft tissue edema    Calcifications within the thrombi and within the venous walls

Pleural Effusion is common      Lungs may show a mosaic attenuation pattern

Acute PE can cause sudden       Chronic PE is a well described cause of pulmonary
death from arrhythmia or acute  hypertension (obstruction in the vascular bed causes an increase
right heart failure.            in vascular resistance)

CTPA is the exam of choice.     VQ Scan (believe it or not) is probably superior to CT.

 Massive = Hypotension (SB? < 90)
 Sub-Massive = Stable BP, but RV dysfiinction or positive cardiac enzymes (myocardial

  necrosis).

Rigilt Heart Strain - findings on CT (ECHO is still the gold standard).

                                RV Dilated Larger                       Contrast
                                Than LV                                 Reflux into the
                                -Probably the best sign                 Hepatic Veins
                                -Leftward bowing of                     -Less Reliable.
                                the ventricular septum
                                is also helpful.

                                106
Pulmonary Infarct Mimics: A pulmonary infarct is a wedge-shaped opacity that is going to
"melt" (resolve slowly), and sometimes can cavitate. Obviously a cavitary lesion throws up lots of
flags and makes people say TB, or cancer. When it's an opacity in the lung and the patient doesn't
have a fever, sometimes people think cancer - plenty of pulmonary infarcts have been biopsied.

Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease: Uncommon variant o f primary pulmonary
hypertension, that affects the post capillary pulmonary vasculature. For gamesmanship: PAH +
Normal Wedge, you should think this. The normal wedge pressure differentiates it from other post
capillary causes; such as left atrial myxoma, mitral stenosis, and pulmonary vein stenosis.

Pulmonary Artery Aneurysm/Pseudoaneurysm_- Think about three things for
multiple choice; (1) Iatrogenic from swan ganz catheter *most common (2) Behcets, (3) Chronic
PE. When they want to lead towards swan ganz they may say something like "patient in the ICU."
The buzzwords for Behcets are: "Turkish descent" and "mouth and genital ulcers."

 Hughes-Stovin Syndrome: This is a zebra cause of pulmonary artery aneurysm that is similar
  (and maybe the same thing) as Behcets. It is characterized by recurrent thrombophlebitis and
  pulmonary artery aneurysm formation and rupture.

 Rasmussen Aneurysm: This has a cool name, which instantly makes it high yield for testing.
  This is a pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm secondary to pulmonary TB. It usually involves
  the upper lobes in the setting of reactivation TB.

 Tetralogy of Fallot Repair Gone South: So another possible testable scenario is the patch
  aneurysm, from the RVOT repair.

Pulmonary Hypertension - Pulmonary arterial pressures over 25 are going to make the
diagnosis. I prefer to use the "outdated" primary and secondary way of thinking about this.

Primary: Idiopathic type is very uncommon, seen in a small group of young women in their 20s.

Secondary: This is by far the majority, and there are a few causes you need to know: Chronic PE ,
Right Heart Failure/ Strain, Lung Parenchymal Problems- (This would include emphysema, and
various causes of fibrosis). COPDers with a pulmonary artery bigger than the aorta (A/PA ratio)
have increased mortality (says the NEJM).

Imaging Signs o f Pulmonary HTN: The numbers people use for what is abnormal are all over the
place - if forced I'd pick 29 mm. A superior strategy is to compare the size of the aorta and
pulmonary artery (a normal PA should not be bigger than the aorta). You can also compare the
segmental artery-to adjacent bronchus (> 1:1 is abnormal). Mural calcifications of central
pulmonary arteries (seen in Eisenmenger phenomenon) have been described. Additional nonspecific
signs include right ventricular dilation / hypertrophy, and centrilobular ground-glass nodules.

Two other modem strategies are based purely on morphology.

Banana and Egg:       Carina Crossover:
Visualization of the  Right PA crosses the
main pulmonary
artery (egg) at the   Carina midline
level of the aortic   anteriorly. It normally
arch (banana)         crosses in a more caudal
                      location.

107
