                                      S E C T IO N 18:
                      L ines a n d D ev ices

Central Lines: The main way to ask questions about central lines is to show them
being malpositioned and asking you where they are. An abrupt bend at the tip o f the
catheter near the cavo-atrial junction should make you think azygos. I f it's on the left side
o f the heart, it's either (1) arterial or (b) in a duplicated SVC.

This is a sneaky trick,
related to Central
Lines. They can
show you the pseudo
lesion / hot quadrate
sign (seen with SVC
syndrome), and then
show you a CXR
with a central venous
catheter.

The idea is that central lines are a risk factor for SVC occlusion.

Swan Ganz Catheter:

Used to measure pressures in the left atrium, evaluate cardiac output, and can be used to help
differentiate cardiogenic vs non-cardiogenic (ARDS) forms of pulmonary edema.
The catheter is optimally positioned between the main pulmonary artery and the interlobar arteries-
this can be proximal right or left sided pulmonary artery. As a general rule the line shouldn't go
more than 2cm beyond the mediastinal shadow. On a CXR, the tip at the edge of the mediastinal
shadow is ideal.

Ideal Position - Catheter at the  Distal Migration (too far out)  Proximal Migration (too far in)
Edge of the Mediastinal Shadow              Can Result in         - Can Result in Arrhythmia.
(left or right)
                                        Pulmonary Infarcts

                                  Ill
intra-Aortic Balloon Pump (lABP): This is used in cardiogenic shock to help with
"diastolic augmentation," - essentially providing some back pressure so the vessels of the great arch
(including the coronaries) enjoy improved perfusion.

For the purpose o f multiple choice tests you
can ask three things:

(1) What is thefunction? - decrease LV
    afterload and increase myocardial
    perfusion,

(2) What is the correct location ? the balloon
    should be located in the proximal
    descending aorta, just below the origin of
    the left subclavian artery (balloon
    terminates just above the splanchnic
    vessels)

(3) Complications ? - dissection during         Id e a l Position - in the region o f the left m ain stem bronchus
    insertion, obstruction of the left
    subclavian from malpositioning

CHF: CHF is obviously not an ILD. However, it can sorta look like one on Chest X-Ray so I opted
to lump it in here. Congestive heart failure occurs because of cardiac failure, fluid overload, high
resistance in the circulation, or some combination of the three. There are three phases / stages of
CHF, and these lend themselves to testable trivia.

Stage 1 " Redistribution"  Wedge Pressure 13-18      Cephalization of vessels, Big heart.
                                                     Big Vascular Pedicle

Stage 2 " Interstitial Edema" Wedge Pressure 18-25   Kerley Lines, Peribronchial Cuffing,
                                                     Less distinct Central Vessels

Stage 3 "Alveolar Edema" Wedge Pressure > 25         Airspace "fluffy" opacity,
                                                     Pleural Effusion

*Swan Ganz Pulmonary Wedge Pressures are an indirect measurement o f left atrial pressure. They
can help prove a cardiogenic etiology to pulmonary edema.

Right Heart Failure:

This is less common than left heart failure, which ironically is the most common cause. Left heart
failure causes pulmonary venous HTN which causes pulmonary arterial HTN, which causes right
heart failure. Some other less common causes of right heart failure include chronic PE and right­
sided valve issues (tricuspid regurg). The imaging features of right heart failure include dilation of
the azygos vein, dilation of the right atrium, dilation of the SVC, ascites, big liver, and contrast
reflux into the hepatic veins on CTPA.

Endotracheal Tube (ETT) Positioning - The tip of the ETT should be about 5 cm

from the carina (halfway between the clavicles and the carina). The tip will go down with the chin
tucked, and up with the chin up ("the hose goes, where the nose goes"). Intubation of the right
main stem is the most common goof (because of the more shallow angle) - this can lead to left
lung collapse. You can sometimes purposefully intubate one lung if you have massive pulmonary
hemorrhage (lung biopsy gone bad), to protect the good lung.

                                                112
Locations:      Cardiac Conduction Device                                         Types:
                                                                                  · Pacemakers - thin
             Leads are placed in the RA, RV, and LV.
                                                                                     wire(s) only
                                       RA: These are usually placed in the
                                       right atrial appendage - which is          · Implantable Cardiac
                                       located superior to the body of the RA.      Defibrillators QCDs')
                                       These leads should:                          - the one with
                                       (1) Course inferiorly into the right         "shock coils" - i.e.
                                                                                    the thick bands.
                                            atrium - then
                                       (2) Curve upward and anteriorly -          · Mixed
                                                                                    (Pacemaker + ICD)
                                            on the lateral
                                                                                  · "Cardiac
                                      RV: These are usually placed in the right     resynchronization
                                      ventricular apex. These leads should:         therapy device" is
                                      (1) Have the tip of the lead to the left      the vocab word the
                                                                                    bi-ventricular
                                           of the spine.                            pacemaker (RV + LV
                                      (2) On the lateral view, it should be seen    and usually RA).

                                           pointing anteriorly

                                       LV: The leads get there via the coronary
                                       sinus to the posterior / lateral cardiac
                                       vein - as shown on this awesome
                                       diagram I drew.
                                       (1) The tip of the lead to the left of

                                            the spine.
                                       (2) On the lateral view, it should be

                                            seen pointing POSTERIORLY

Com p lication s:

Acute        Same stuff you get with central line placement: pneumothorax, hemothorax, etc.

Rib Clavicle The leads are mostly commonly fractured in the region of the clavicle, and first

Crush        rib. If you have to look for a broken lead -- look there first.

                                                    Normal                                o--

Generator    Terminal connector pin              Displaced
Related      displacement. This is actually      Terminal Pin
             common.

M yocardial  The number is 3 mm. If the lead is  Sometimes it is shown on a
Perforation  3 mm within the epicardial fat you  lateral CXR - the lead looks
             should suspect penetration.         like its poking through the
                                                 wall (because it is)

Twiddler     The generator pack gets flipped and twisted in the pocket, leading to lead
Syndrome     displacement. This happens because Grandpa just can't leave the thing alone
             (gotta put those dementia mittens on him).
             Can't have him dying on u s... we need those social security checks.

                                                       113
  ?ROM£THEUS

   L iomhart, m .i>.

114
