              S E C T IO N 14:
Pleu ra, C hest W all

Plaque:                                                                    Pleural Calcifications
                                                                            (other than asbestos)
If they show you a pleural plaque they probably want you to say asbestos-   Old Hemothorax
related disease.
                                                                               Old Infection
Remember the plaques:                                                       TB
 Don't show up for like 20-30 years after exposure.                        Extraskeletal
 Typically spares the Costophrenic angles.
                                                                               Osteosarcoma

Malignant Mesothelioma: The most common cancer of the pleura. About 80% of them have
had asbestos exposure, and development is NOT dose-dependent. Lag time is ~ 30-40 years from
exposure.

Key Features:                                             Buzzword = Pleural Rind
 Circumferential Pleural Thickening extending to

  the medial surface of the pleura (near the heart)

 Pleural Thickness > 1 cm

 Extension into the fissure = highly suggestive

Gamesmanship:

 If the lateral pleural is thick - the most common
  cause is a prior trauma. Look for old rib fractures.

 If the m edial pleural is thick - this is not a common

thing. Think mesothelioma. Look for plaques to

suggest prior asbestosis exposure.                        Pleural Rind = Grey Arrows

                                                          Fissure Extension = White Arrow

Evaluating Direct Invasion & Mets:

 Mesothelioma believes in nothing Lebowski with a known tendency for direct invasion.

 MRI with Contrast = For evaluating local chest wall, diaphragm and pericardial invasion
 4
 PET CT = Good for mets. Useful for evaluating treatment response.

Solitary Fibrous Tumor of the Pleura (SFTP) - This is a solitary (usually) tumor arising
from the visceral pleura. The key is to know that they are NOT associated with asbestos, smoking,
or other environmental pollutants. They can get very large, and be a source of chest pain (although
50% are incidentally found).

Trivia:
- Not associated with asbestos, smoking, or other environmental pollutants
- Even when they are big, they are usually benign
- Doege-Potter syndrome occurs in like 5% of cases. This is an episodichypoglycemia (tumor can

   secrete an insulin like growth factor)
- Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy occurs in like 30% of the cases.

Lipoma - This is the most common benign soft tissue tumor of the pleura. Thepatients sometimes
feel the "urge to cough." They will not cause rib erosion. They "never" turn into a sarcoma. The
differential consideration is extra-pleural fat, but it is usually bilateral and symmetric.

                                                     100
Metastases - Here is the high yield trivia on this. As a general rule the subtype of
adenocarcinoma is the most likely to met to the pleura. Lung cancer is the most common primary,
with breast and lymphoma at 2"^ and Remember that a pleural effusion is the most common
manifestation of mets to the pleura.

Pleural Effusion: Some random factoids on pleural effusions that could be potentially testable.
There has to be around 175 cc of fluid to be seen on the frontal view (around 75cc can be seen on the
lateral). Remember that medicine docs group these into transudative and exudative based on protein
concentrations (Lights criteria). You are going to get compressive atelectasis of the adjacent lung.

Subpulmonic Effusion - A pleural effusion can accumulate between the lung base and the diaphragm.
These are more common on the right, with "ski-slopping" or lateralization of the diaphragmatic
peak. A lateral decubitus will sort it out in the real world.

Normal
Comparison

            Right Sided: Notice    Left Sided: The key             Encysted Pleural Effusion
            the high point of the  here is the increased           - It is possible to have pleural fluid
            diaphragm is shifted   space between the
            laterally              stomach bubble and                 collect between the layers of the
                                   lung base.                         pleura creating a oval / round
                                                                      appearance mimicking a Cancer.

Empyema - Basically this is an infected pleural effusion. It can occur with a simple pneumonia
but is seen more in people with AIDS. Usually these are more asymmetric than a normal pleural
effusion. Other features include enhancement of the pleura, obvious septations, or gas.

Empyema Necessitans - This is the fancy                            THIS vs THAT:
Latin word for when the empyema eats through the
chest wall and into the soft tissues. It's classically                         1
seen with TB (70%), with the second most
common cause being actinomyces.                              Empyema              Pulmonary Abscess

Diaphragmatic Hernia - These can be                     Lentiform              Round
acquired via trauma, or congenital. The congenital
ones are most common in the back left                   Split Pleural Sign     Claw Sign
(Bochdalek), with anterior small and right being        (thickening and        (acute angle with pleura)
less common (Morgagni). The traumatic ones are          separation of the
also more common on the left (liver is a buffer).       visceral and parietal
                                                        pleura)

                                                        Treated with chest     NOT treated with chest
                                                        tube                   tube (risk of
                                                                               bronchopleural fistula).

Paralysis - This is a high yield topic because you can use fluoro to help make the diagnosis.
Obviously the dinosaurs that write these tests love to ask about fluoro (since that was the only thing
they did in residency). Diaphragmatic paralysis is actually idiopathic 70% of the time, although
when you see it on multiple choice tests they want you to think about phrenic nerve compression
from a lung cancer. Normally the right diaphragm is higher, so if you see an elevated left
diaphragm this should be a consideration. On a fluoroscopic sniff test you are looking for
paradoxical movement (going up on inspiration - instead of down).

                                                        101
