                           S E C T IO N 10:

                       TRANSPLANT

Lung transplants are done for end-stage pulmonary disease (fibrosis, COPD, etc..)- The complications
lend themselves easily too MCQs, and are therefore high yield. The best way to think about the
complications is based on time.

                       Immediate Complications (< 24 hours)

Donor-Recipient Size   Mismatch up to 25% is ok. You can have a compressed lung (by the
Mismatch               hyperexpanded emphysematous lung). Imaging is usually atelectasis.

Hyperacute Rejection   Secondary to HLA and ABO antigens. It's rapid and often fatal.
                       Imaging shows massive homogenous infiltration

                       Early Complications (24 hours - 1 week)

Reperfusion Injury     Peaks at day 4 as a non-cardiogenic edema related to ischemia-
                       reperfusion. Typically improves by day 7.

Air Leak / Persistent  Defined as a continuous leak for more than 7 days.
Pneumotliorax

                     Intermediate Complication (8 days - 2 months)

Acute Rejection        IGround (Hass opacities and intralobular septal thickening.
                       (No ground glass = no rejection). Improves with steroids.

Bronchial Anastomotic  Leaks occur in the first month, stenosis can develop later (2-4 months).
Complications

                       Late Complications (2-4 months)

CMV Infection          iThe most common opportunistic infection.
                       Ground glass, trec-in-bud. Rare before 2 weeks.

                       Later Complications (>4 months)

Chronic Rejection      Bronchiolitis Obliterans; Affects 50% at 5 years.
                       Brochiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, air trapping.

Cryptogenic Organizing Occurs with chronic rejection (but more commonly with acute

Pneumonia              rejection). Responds to steroids.

PTLD................................. Typically seen within the first year. EBV in 90%.

Upper Lobe Fibrosis    Associated with chronic rejection

Chronic Rejection /Bronchiolitis Obliterans Syndrome: This is the major late

complication, that affects at least half of the transplants at 5 years (most commonly at 6 months).
The term bronchiolitis obliterans is often used interchangeably with chronic rejection. The findings
on CT include bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, air trapping, and interlobular septal
thickening. Just think air trapping on expiration seen at or after 6 months = chronic rejection.

Recurrence of Primary Disease after Transplant: For the purpose of multiple
choice tests know that sarcoidosis is the most common recurrent primary disease (around 35%).
Lots of other things can recur.

Lung Cancer after Transplant: Just remember that the native lung is still diseased, and
can get cancer. The highest rate is with pulmonary fibrosis, and the most common risk factor is
heavy tobacco use.

                       88
