        S E C T IO N 1 1:
        A lveolar

Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis (PAP): Condition where surfactant

accumulates in the alveoli and terminal bronchioles. For the purpose of multiple choice, this is an
Aunt Minnie - always shown as crazy paving lung (interlobular septal thickening with ground glass).
This can be primary (90%), or secondary (10%). The secondary causes worth knowing are cancer or
inhalation (silico-proteinosis).

Trivia  Worth Knowing:
        They are at increased risk of Nocardia infections, and can have Nocardia brain abscesses
        Smoking is strongly associated with the disease
        When seen in children (presenting before age 1) there is a known association with
         alymphoplasia
        Can progress to pulmonary fibrosis (30%)
        Its typically central and symmetric and tends to spare the apices and costo-phrenic angles
        Treatment is bronchoalveolar lavage

Crazy Paving - Interlobular septal thickening and ground glass.

This isn't always PAP, in fact in real life that it is usually NOT PAP. There is a differential that
includes common things like edema, hemorrhage, BAC, Acute Interstitial Pneumonia, and COVID.

Just know that for the purpose of multiple choice tests, the answer is almost always PAP.

                                                                                   CraZy PaviNg
                                                                   Interlobular Septal Thickening + Ground Glass.

Memory A id fo r causes o f crazy paving = C.R.A.Z. Y Paving: COP/Cancer (BAC)/Covid; Respiratory distress (acute);
Alveolar proteinosis; Zipper (lipoid pneumonia - think o f being so f a t (lipoid) that you can't "Zip " up your pants); Y (for Y
are you hemorrhaging? - pulmonary hemorrhage); PCP.

                                                                  89
Lipoid Pneumonia - There are actually two types; endogenous and exogenous.

* Exogenous: A certain percentage of elderly people become absolutely obsessed with
    their bowel movements. If you did Family Medicine addressing this psychopathology
    w ould steal a certain am ount o f hours out o f your life per week. Lipoid pneum onia is
     seen in old people who like to drink/aspirate mineral oil (as a laxative). It can also be
     seen with the aspiration o f vegetable oil or other animal oils. The look on plain film is an
     area o f lung opacification that is chronic or slowly increases with time. The look on CT
     is a dead give away and the m ost likely way this will be shown is with low attenuation /
     fat density in the consolidation. Having said that this is also in the crazy paving
     differential.

* Acute Exogenous L ipoid Pneum onia - This is seen in children who accidentally poison
     themselves with hydrocarbons, or idiots trying to perform fire-eating or flame blowing.

* Endogenous - This is actually more com mon than the exogenous type, and results from
     post obstructive processes (cancer) causing build up o f lipid laden macrophages.

                               Lipoid Pneumonia - Fat Density in the Consolidation

          Gamesmanship: "Why are you showing me the lung on that window?"
             Obviously pulmonary pathology is best shown on a lung window. So anytime the test
            writer is showing you a pulmonary pathology on a non-lung window, that should cue
            you to think about some different things.

    (1); Is the finding in the mediastinum or ribs?
    (2); If it's clearly a lung finding then what window are they using?

        Soft tissue window is classically used to show fat in a lesion
         - think hamartoma or lipoid pneumonia.

        Bone window might be used to show a diffuse process such as
         - pulmonary microlithiasis.

                                                                 90
Organizing Pneumonia (cryptogenic / cause not known "C O P ")

This used to be called BOOP, which was a lot more
fun to say. It's not an active infection (as the name
would suggest) but instead granulation tissue
deposition within the alveolar spaces secondary to
fibroblast proliferation. Because it is not an active
infection antibiotics won't help. However, it does
respond well to steroids, and has an excellent
prognosis.

There are lots of different causes; idiopathic, prior
infection, drugs (amiodarone), collagen vascular
disease, fumes, etc... You will see the word
"cryptogenic" used when there is no specific cause
known. Then it is COP instead of OP.

The history of "persistent symptoms following                Cryptogenic Organizing
treatment for pneumonia" could be a clue to think          Pneumonia- Reverse Halo
OP. The most common "persistent symptoms" are
a cough lasting several months, low grade fever,
SOB, and just generally feeling like shit.

Patchy air space consolidation or GGO (90%), in a peripheral or peri-bronchial distribution
(sometimes a perilobular/arcade-like pattern). Opacities tend to be irregular in shape. Both OP and
Chronic Eosinophilic Pneumonia can present as peripheral consolidations. Findings of fibrosis are

                     typically absent.

R everse Halo (Atoll) Sign is the classic sign - seen in around 30% o f cases;
Consolidation around a ground glass center.

**Reverse Halo Pattern is also a described typicalfinding o f acute COVID.

Chronic Eosinophilic Pneumonia:

Can be idiopathic or associated with a known               

antigen. Peripheral eosinophilia (blood test) is

usually present. An asthma history is found in

about 50% of cases. It looks exactly like COP

(both can present as peripheral consolidations).

When you say COP you should say this one too

(some people think it's the same disease as COP).

Classic Look on CXR:
 Bilateral
 Non-segmental Consohdation
 Favoring the outer 2/3 of the lungs (peripheral)

CT Findings: Peripheral GGO or consolidation.
Upper lobes tend to be favored.

                                                       91
               THIS vs THAT: Halo Signs

                           Halo                          Reverse (Atoll)

-Nodule with ground glass around it     Central ground glass with rim of
-Represents hemorrhage / invasion into  consolidation
surrounding tissues
                                        -C O P (Classic)
- Invasive Aspergillosis (Classic)      -TB
- Other Fungus                          - Pulmonary Infarct
- Hemorrhagic Mets                      - Invasive Fungal and Wegeners
- Adenocarcinoma in Situ (BAC)
- Wegeners                                ** these can also be seen with regular Halo
                                        - COVID

Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis:                                                   THIS vs T H A T :
                                                                         Chronic Hypersensitivity
This is actually common. It's caused by inhaled organic antigens. It    Pneumonitis (HP) vs UIP.
has acute, subacute, and chronic stages. Most of the time it's imaged
in the subacute stage.                                                 Features that favor Chronic
                                                                       HP over UIP:
톁ubacute: Patchy ground glass opacities. Ill-defined Centrilobular
ground glass nodules (80%). Often has mosaic perfusion, and air         Air Trapping involving 3
trapping.                                                                or more lobes

텰hronic: Looks like UIP + Air trappins. You are gonna have traction    Mid-Upper lobe
        bronchiectasis and air trapping.                                 predominant fibrosis

   Buzzword is "Headcheese" - which I guess refers to

   some gross poverty food where all the left overs that

   were going bad in the fridge get mixed together into

'  some kind o f bizarre casserole you'd expect in a book

from the notorious racist Dr. Seuss.

The technical finding is a juxtaposition of 3 different regions

 Ground Glass (increased attenuation),                                Headcheese
 Mosaic Attenuation - From Air Trapping (decreased

   attenuation - worse of expiration),                                 Ground Glass +

 Normal Lung                                                    Air Trapping + Normal Lungs

The explanation for the finding is that the disease causes both

an infiltrative process (ground glass) and also and obstructive process (mosaic attenuation / air-trapping)

                                        92
