                 SECTIO N            15:

M ediastinal                         Masses

THIS vs THAT: Mediastinal Mass vs Big Pulmonary Artery
                                              Strategy 2: Hilum Convergence Sign

Strategy 1: The vessels should  PA Dilation:               Hilar Mass:
be linear in morphology.        Vessels converge onto the  Vessels converge towards
Not "lumpy / bumpy" like a      lateral margin of the      the waist of the heart, below
bulky node or mass.             Bulky Hilum                the Bulk Hilum

Anterior:

T h y m u s : The thymus can do a bunch of sneaky things. It can rebound from stress or
chemotherapy and look huge. It can get cysts, cancer, carcinoid, etc...

 Rebound - Discussed in detail in the Peds chapter. After stress or chemotherapy the thing can
  blow up 1.5 times the normal size and simulate a mass. Can be hot on PET.

 Thymic Cyst - Can be congenital or acquired. Acquired is classic after thoracotomy,
  chemotherapy, or HIV. They can be unilocular or multilocular. T2 bright is gonna seal the deal.

 Thymoma - So this is kind of a spectrum ranging from non-invasive thymoma, to invasive
  thymoma, to thymic carcinoma. Calcification makes you think it's more aggressive. The thymic
  carcinomas tend to eat up the mediastinal fat and adjacent structures. The average age is around
  50, and they are rare under 20. These guys can "drop met" into the pleural and retroperitoneum, so
  you have to image the abdomen.
   Associations: Myasthenia Gravis, Pure Red Cell Aplasia, Hypogammaglobinemia.

 Thymolipoma - 1only mention this zebra because it has a characteristic look. It's got a bunch of
  fat in it. Think "fatty mass with interspersed soft tissue. "

G e rm C e ll T u m o r: Almost always Teratoma (75%). Mediastinal Teratoma - This is

the most common extragonadal germ cell tumor. They occur in kids (below age 1) and adults
(20s-30s). They are benign, but carry a small malignant transformation risk. Mature subtypes are
equal in Men and Women, but immature subtypes are exclusively seen in men (which should be easy
to remember). There is an association with mature teratomas and Klinefelter Syndrome. The
imaging features include a cystic appearance (90%), and fat. They can have calcifications
including teeth - which is a dead give away.

                                102
Pericardial Cyst:
This is uncommon and benign. The classic location is
the right anterior cardiophrenic angle. This classic
location is the most likely question.

Fibrosing Mediastinitis (Sclerosing Mediastinitis):

This is a proliferation of fibrous tissue that occurs within the
mediastinum. There are two described subtypes:

(1) Granulomatous (the one everyone thinks about)
classically caused by histoplasmosis). Other causes include
TB, and Sarcoid.
This will look like a soft tissue mass with calcifications that
infiltrates the normal fat planes of the mediastinum.

(2) Non-Granulomatous, is the more rare subtype that people read about once and then
forget. Some people will call this form "idiopathic" although the subtype is better thought of as a
response to an autoimmune disease (SLE, RA, Behcet, etc...) or a complication to radiation therapy.
There is also a testable association with the headache medication methvsergide. It's associated with
retroperitoneal fibrosis when idiopathic.
This subtype also looks like a soft tissue mass but tends to be more infiltrative, lack calcifications.
and can enhance post contrast.

      Both subtypes have been known to cause superior vena cava syndrome.

Bronchogenic Cyst - These congenital lesions are usually within the mediastinum (most
commonly found in the subcarinal space) or less commonly intraparenchymal. For the purpose of
the exam, they are going to be in the subcarinal region, causing obliteration of the azygoesophageal
line on a CXR, and being waterish density on CT.

Lymphadenopathy - Could be mets, could be infection, could be reactive. It is generally
abnormal to be larger than 2cm in short axis (makes you suspect cancer).

Mediastinal Lipom atosis - Excess unencapsulated fat seen in patients with iatrogenic
steroid use, Cushings, and just plain old obesity.

Thyroid: - see the endocrine chapter. Lymphoma: - see the cancer section o f this chapter

Posterior Mediastinal Masses:

Neurogenic - The most common posterior mediastinal mass is one of neurogenic origin. This
includes schwannomas, neurofibromas, and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Bone Marrow - Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH) is a response to failure of the bone
marrow to respond to EPO. Classic conditions include CML, Polycythemia vera, myelofibrosis,
sickle cell, and thalassemia.

                                                                 103
