S E C T IO N 17:
 T rauma

Diaphragm atic Injury: There is a lot of testable trivia regarding diaphragmatic injury and
therefore it is probably the most high yield subject with regard to trauma:

Things to Know:
 Left side is involved 3 times more than the right (liver is a buffer)
 Most ruptures are "radial", longer than 10 cm, and occur in the posterior lateral portion
 Collar Sign - This is sometimes called the hour glass sign, is a waist-hke appearance of the

  herniated organ through the injured diaphragm
 Dependent Viscera Sign - This is an absence of interposition of the lungs between the chest wall

   and upper abdominal organs (liver on right, stomach on left).

Tracheo-Bronchiai Injury: Airway injury is actually pretty uncommon. When it does
occur it's usually within 2 cm of the carina. Injury close to the carina is going to cause a
pneumomediastinum rather than a pneumothorax - that is a testable fact. When you get a tracheal
laceration, it most commonly occurs at the junction of the cartilaginous and membranous portions of
the trachea.

Most Common Site of Injury: injured site
 Penetrating Trauma = Cervical Trachea
 Blunt Chest Trauma = Distal Trachea (within 2.5 cm of the carina)

Macklin Effect: This is probably the most common cause of pneumomediastinum in trauma
patients (and most people haven't heard of it). The idea is that you get alveolar rupture from blunt
trauma, and the air dissects along bronchovascular sheaths into the mediastinum.

Boerhaave Syndrome:                                                                 When you see air in
You probably remember this from step 1.                                             these locations (white
The physical exam buzzword was                                                      outlines) you need to
"Hammonds Crunch." Basically you have a                                             think about ruptured
ruptured esophageal wall from vomiting,                                             (1) Alveoli or
resulting in pneumomediastinum /                                                    (2) Ruptured Trachea or
mediastinitis.                                                                      Esophagus

Vomiting & Chest Pain: Next Step =            History of vomiting should make you think Esophagus
Esophagram with Water Soluble Contrast

Pneumopericardium:                            Pneumomediastinum   Pneumopericardium
                                              -Air Extends Above  -Air does NOT extend
This is air confined to the pericardial sac.  the Great Vessels   above the Great Vessels
The most common causes are:
 Mechanical Ventilation (PEEP)
 Thoracic surgery
 Penetrating Trauma
 Infectious pericarditis with

  gas-producing organisms

This vs T H A T : The difference between

Pneumopericardium and Pneumomediastinum
is highly testable.

                                              108
Flail Chest: This is 3 or more segmental (more than one fracture in a rib) fractures, or more than
5 adjacent rib fractures. The physical exam buzzword is "paradoxical motion with breathing."

Classic History: "Thrown o ff a balcony after giving a married woman afoot message. "

Hemothorax: If you see pleural fluid in the setting of trauma, it's probably blood. The only
way I can see them asking this is a density question; a good density would be 35-70 H.U.

Pneumothorax: This will look different depending on if it is upright or supine.

                             Look at the Apex - The
                             Bubble of Air Rises in
                             the Upright Position

IPRIGHT  Hard Rule: Thin
         pleural line that curves
         at the apex. Make sure                                           Look at the Base -In the
         its not the scapula                                              supine position the highest
         dummy.                                                           part of the pleural space is at
                                                                          the lung base under the
Soft Rule: Lung Markings don't go past the        Look for the "deep      inferior surface of the lung.
pleural line (sometimes they do - if they are in  sulcus" as the
front of or behind the pneumothorax).             costophrenic angle is
                                                  abnormally deepened by
                                                  pleural air

Tension Pneumothorax: Intrapleural air accumulates through a valve

type mechanism during inspiration/expiration. The the pressure builds and stuff
gets pushed over (squishing the heart) and causing the classic physical exam
findings of distended neck veins and a deviated trachea.

Classic CXR signs include:
(1) Deviation of the Trachea / Mediastinum

(2) Flattening or Inversion of the ipsilateral diaphragm

Treatment: Needle thoracostomy (4G needle - inserted at the 2nd intercostal space midclavicular

Extrapleural Hematoma:                                                          4-N''j'..

This is a little tricky, and they                                ^ A
could show you a picture of it.                           Extrapleural Hematoma-
If you have an injury to the                              -- Arrows on the Displaced Fat 
chest wall that damages the
parietal pleura then you get a
hemothorax. If you have an
injury to the chest wall, but
your parietal pleural is still
intact, you get an extrapleural
hematoma. The classic
history is "persistent fluid
collection after pleural drain/
tube placement." The
buzzword / sign is displaced
extrapleural fat.

There is a paper out there that suggests a biconvex appearance is more likely arterial and should be
watched for rapid expansion. This may be practically useful, but is unlikely to be asked. Just
know the classic history, and displaced extrapleural fat sign.

                                                  109
Pulmonary Contusion: This is the most common lung injury

from blunt trauma. Basically you are dealing with alveolar
hemorrhage without alveolar disruption. The typical look is non-
segmental ill-defined areas of consolidation with sub pleural sparing.
Contusion should appear within 6 hours, and disappear within 72 hours
(if it lasts longer it's probably aspiration, pneumonia, or a laceration).

Pulmonary Laceration: So a tear in the lung will end up

looking like a pneumatocele. If they show you one it will probably
have a gas -fluid (blood) level in it. These things can be masked by
surrounding hemorrhage early on. The major difference between
contusion and laceration is that a laceration resolves more slowly and
can even produce a nodule or a mass that persists for months.

Fat Embolization Syndrome: This is seen in the setting of a long bone fracture or
Intramedullary rod placement. You get fat embolized to the lungs, brain, and skin (clinical triad of
rash, altered mental status, and shortness of breath). The timing is 1-2 days after the femur
fracture. The lungs will have a ground glass appearance that makes you think pulmonary edema.
You will not see a filling defect - like a conventional PE. If they don't die, it gets better in 1-3
weeks.

Barotrauma: Positive pressure ventilation can cause alveolar injury, with air dissecting into
the mediastinum (causing pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax). Patients with acute lung injury
or COPD have a high risk of barotrauma from positive pressure ventilation. Lungs with pulmonary
fibrosis are actually protected because they don't stretch.

Malpositioned
Chest Tubes:

The most common look

for the "malpositioned"

chest tube is "side holes

outside the pleura."

These tubes have an        Good                                             Unacceptable
end hole (black arrow)                                                      (100 years dungeon - no
but also side holes
(white arrows).

Those side holes are supposed to be inside the pleura (overlying the black part of the chest on a
CXR). If they aren't - you'll get leaks etc... I will talk more about chest tubes in the IR chapter.

The placement of a tube in a fissure is sorta controversially bad (might be ok). Hopefully they
won't ask that -- if they do, simply read the mind of the person who wrote the question to
understand their preexisting bias.

Other more serious com plication: The ED will occasionally ram them into the parenchyma.
At no point during that procedure (which I imagine feels like pushing a straw into an orange)
could they possible think this is normal.... But yet it does happen. Truth is it's more likely to
occur in the setting of background lung disease or pleural adhesions. You'll see blood around the
tube. Bronchopleural fistula may occur as a sequela, as will a lawsuit in which the CXR will be
"exhibit A."

Blunt Cardiac Injury: If you have hemopericardium in the setting of trauma, you can
suggest this and have the ED correlate with cardiac enzymes and EKG findings.

                           110
