         S E C T IO N 7:
NON-lSCHEMIC HEART

Dilated Cardiomyopathy: Defined as dilatation with an end diastolic diameter greater than
55mm, with a decreased EF. Can be idiopathic, ischemic, or from a whole list of other random crap
(Alcohol, Doxorubicin, Cvclosporine. Chagas, etc...). The ischemic variety may show
subendocardial enhancement. The idiopathic variety will show either no enhancement or linear
mid-myocardial enhancement. There is often an association with mitral regurgitation due to
dilation of the mitral ring.

Restrictive Cardiomyopatliy: Basically anything that causes a decrease in diastolic

function (inability to "fill")- Can be the result of myocardium replaced by fibrotic tissue (endocardial
fibroelastosis), infiltration of the myocardium (Amyloidosis), or damage by iron (hemochromatosis).
The most common cause is actually amyloid.

Amyloidosis.- Deposits in the myocardium causes abnormal diastolic                Restrictive =
function with biatrial enlargement, concentric thickening of the left             Myocardial Process
ventricle and reduced systolic function of usually both ventricles. Seen          Constrictive =
in 50% of cases of systemic amyloid. Has a terrible prognosis. You can            Pericardial Process
sometimes see late Gd enhancement over the entire subendocardial
circumference. Clues: pt with hx of multiple myeloma, RA, Crohn's.

Amyloid Classic Scenario: A long TI is needed (like 350 milliseconds, normal would be like 200). TI
will be so long that the blood pool may be darker than the myocardium.

· Buzzword: "Difficult to suppress myocardium".
· Buzzword: "Abnormal urinary light chains (AL)"

Eosinophilic Cardiomyopathy (Loeffler).-Bilateral Ventricular thrombus is the classic
phrase / buzzword. You will need a long TI to show the thrombus.

Constrictive Pericarditis: Historically this used to                         Constrictive Peals
be TB or Viral. Now the most common cause is iatrogenic              Most common cause in the first
secondary to CABG or viral (seems that "idiopathic                   world = idiopathic presumed viral
presumed viral" is often listed as the most common cause in
the developed world. On CT the pericardium is too thick (>           Most common cause in shit hole
0.4 cm), and if it's calcified that is diagnostic. Calcification is  places ("developing nafions") =
usually largest over the AV groove. "Sigmoidization" is seen         TB
on SSFP cine imaging: The ventricular septum moves toward
the left ventricle in a wavy pattern during early diastole           Classic Finding on CXR or CT =
("Diastolic Bounce"). This "bounce" will be most                     Pericardial Calcifications
pronounced during inspiration - indicating ventricular
interdependence.                                                     Classic Finding on MRI =
                                                                     Diastolic Septal Bounce on CINE
THIS vs THAT: Constrictive vs Restrictive                            imaging

Cardiomyopathy:

· Pericardium is usually thickened in constrictive
· Diastolic septal bounce is seen in constrictive (Sigmoidization of the septum)
· No Abnormal Late Gd Myocardial Enhancement on Constrictive Disease

140
Myocarditis;

Inflammation of the heart can come from lots of causes {often
viral i.e. Coxsackie virus).

The late Gd enhancement follows a non-vascular distribution
preferring the lateral free wall.

The pattern will be epicardial or mid wall
(NOT subendocardial) -- as shown on the case

Sarcoidosis: Cardiac involvement is seen in 5% of Sarcoidosis cases, and is associated with an
increased risk of death. Signal in both T2 and early Gd (as well as late Gd) will be increased. Late
Gd pattern may be middle and epicardial in a non-coronary distribution. Focal wall thickening from
edema can mimic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It often involves the septum. The RV and
papillaries are RARELY affected.

Tai(otsubo Cardiomyopathy - A takotsubo is a Japanese Octopus trap, which looks like a pot
with a narrow mouth and large round base. The octopus will go into the pot, but then can't turn around
and get out (sorta like medical school). A condition with Chest pain and EKG changes seen in post
menopausal women after they either break up with their boyfriend , win the lottery, or some other
stressful event has been described with the shape of the ventricle looking like a takotsubo. There is
transient akinesia or dyskinesia of the left ventricular apex without coronary stenosis.
Ballooning of the left ventricular apex is a buzzword. No delayed enhancement.

                    Cardiac MRI - Late Gadolinium Enhancement (LGE):
                                 The backbone of multiple choice cardiac MRI related trivia.

 Both diseased and normal myocardium will take up gadolinium / enhance - but it depends on when you image.
 Early (1-3 mins) you will see normal tissue drink up contrast. Late (5-20 mins) contrast washes out of the
 normal tissue and is retained by pathology (lots of different pathologies). The patterns that you see is helpful
 for making the diagnosis (picking the answer on multiple choice).

 The classic branch-point is ischemic vs non ischemic:
 · Ischemic: Enhancement starts subendocardially and spreads transmurally toward the epicardial surface - in a

    distribution corresponding to a known coronary artery territory
 · Non-Ischemic: Enhancement is often located in the mid-wall of the ventricle - patchy or multifocal in

    distribution (not corresponding to a known coronary artery territory)

C D ® Subendocardial:                            CD Subendocardial Circumferential:
                                    Transmural:
                                                     Amvloidosis *can also be transmural
Infarct                             infarct

CD                                  ®Midwall: 0 3Epicardial:                           Midwall:
           Midwall:
                                    Myocarditis, Sarcoidosis Myocarditis, Sarcoidosis      HCM
Myocarditis, Idiopathic Dilated CM

                                                 141
