                                       SECTION 4:
                               G reat v ess els

The m ost com mon variant in branching is the
"bovine arch" in which the brachiocephalic
artery and left common carotid artery arise from
a common origin.

                                                                          ovine Arch - Or "Bo-vizzle" per Snoop Dog

The term inology right arch / left arch is
described based on the aortic arch's relationship
to the trachea.
When 1 say Right Arch with Mirror Branching,
You say congenital heart.

There are 5 types of right arches, but only two are worth knowing (Aberrant Left, and Mirror
Branching). The trick to tell these two apart is to look fo r the origin o f the left subclavian.

Originating from the Front of the Arch =
Mirror Image
*this is the bad one (lots o f congenital heart)

Originating from the Back of the Arch =
Aberrant Left Subclavian

                                                                 127
Right Arch with Mirror Branching: Although these are often asymptomatic they
are strongly associated with congenital heart disease. Most commonly they are associated
with TOR However, they are most closely associated with Truncus. Obviously, this tricky
wording lends itself nicely to a trick question.

     * I f there is a mirror image right arch, then 90% w ill have TOF (6% Truncus).
     * I f the person has Truncus, then they have a mirror image right arch 33% (TOF 25%).

                             Right Arch with Aberrant Left Subclavian: The last
                            branch is the aberrant left subclavian artery. This is a vascular ring
                            because the ligamentum arteriosum (on the left) completes the "ring'
                             encircling the trachea.

Left Arch Aberrant Right                      Kommerell
Subclavian: The most common arch
anomaly. Although it is usually
asymptomatic it can sometimes be
associated witli dysphagia lusoria, as the
RSCA passes posterior to the esophagus. The
last branch is the aberrant right subclavian
artery. The origin of the RSCA may be
dilated = Diverticulum of Kommerell.

Double Aortic Arch: The most
common vascular ring. As a point o f
trivia, symptoms may begin at birth and
include tracheal compression and/or
difficulty swallowing. The right arch is
larger and higher, and the left arch is
smaller and lower. Arches are posterior to
the esophagus and anterior to the trachea
(encircling them both).

128
Subclavian Steal Syndrome/Phenomenon: So there is a " Syndrom e" and
there is a "Phenomenon." The distinction between the two makes for an excellent distractor.

· SS Phenomenon: Stenosis and/or occlusion o f the proximal subclavian with
    retrograde flow in the ipsilateral vertebral artery.

* SS Syndrome: Stenosis and/or occlusion o f the proximal subclavian artery with
    retrograde flow in the ipsilateral vertebral artery AND associated cerebral ischemic
    symptoms.

LVert  Occlusion proxim al to
       the vertebral in the
       subclavian can result in
       retrograde "stolen ''flo w
       from the vertebral
       artery.

       Angiogram

         A

                    (A

                                                                                                                       "Theft"
                                                                                                             'Catheter

If the level of stenosis and/or occlusion is proximal to the vertebral artery, reversal o f flow
in the vertebral artery can occur, resulting in the theft o f blood from the posterior
circulation. W hen the upper limb is exercised, blood is diverted away from the brain to the
arm. Cerebral symptoms (dizziness, syncope, etc...) depend on the integrity o f collateral
intracranial flow (PCOMs).

Subclavian Steal is alm ost always caused by atherosclerosis (98% ), but other very testable
causes include Takayasu Arteritis, Radiation, Preductal Aortic Coarctation, and Blalock-
Taussig Shunt. In an adult they will show atherosclerosis. If they show a teenager / 20 year
old it's gonna be Takayasu. Case books love to show this as an angiogram, and I think
that's the m ost likely w ay the test will show it. They could also show a CTA or M RA
although I 'd say that is less likely. M ore on this in the vascular chapter

A ortic A n eu ry sm a n d V asculitis: Will be discussed in the Vascular Chapter

                                                                 129
