                                   S E C T IO N 8:

                                   GENETICS

Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular                           ARVC - Dilated RV, with Fat in the Wall

Cardiomyopatliy (ARVC):

Characterized by fibrofatty degeneration of the RV
leading to arrhythmia and sudden death. Features
include: dilated RV with reduced function, fibrofatty
replacement of the myocardium, normal LV, and
micro-aneurysms on CINE. People use this major/
minor criteria system that includes a bunch of EKG
changes that no radiologist could possibly understand (if
they are stupid enough to ask just say left bundle
branch block). Watch out for the use of fat sat to
demonstrate the fat in the RV wall.

Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Abnormal hypertrophy (from disarray of myofibrils) of

the myocardium that compromises diastole. There are multiple types but the one they are going to
show is asymmetric hypertrophy of the intraventricular septum. The condition is a cause of sudden
death. There is a subgroup which is associated with LVOT obstruction ("hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy"). Venturi forces may pull the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve into the LVOT
(SAM - Systolic Anterior Motion of the Mitral Valve). Patchy midwall delayed enhancement of
the hypertrophied muscle may be seen, as is an independent risk factor for sudden death.

Noncompaction:                     Systole                 Diastole

Left ventricular noncompaction is  Noncompaction - Spongy LV with No Myocardial Thickening
an uncommon congenital
cardiomyopathy that is the result
of loosely packed myocardium.
The left ventricle has a spongy
appearance with increased
trabeculations and deep
intertrabecular recesses.

As you might expect, these guys get heart failure at a young age. Diagnosis is based of a ratio of
non compacted end-diastolic myocardium to compacted end-diastolic myocardium of more
than 2.3:1.

          Buzzword: Prominent Ventricular Trabeculation

Muscular Dystrophy: Becker (mild one) and Duchenne (severe one) are X-linked
neuromuscular conditions. They have biventricular replacement of myocardium with connective
tissue and fat (delayed Gd enhancement in the midwall). They often have dilated cardiomyopathy.
Just think kid with dilated heart and midwall enhancement.

                                                                 142
