                        S E C T IO N 2:

                      CORONARIES

Questions regarding the coronaries will likely come in two flavors:
(1) Normal - mostly anatomy vocab, and (2) ABnormal - pathologies.

Normal: There are three coronary cusps; right, left, and non-coronary (posterior).
The left main comes off the left cusp, the right main comes off the right cusp.

Posterior Descending Artery                     With regard to what perfuses what,
(PDA) - 65%-80%                                 the following are high yield factoids:

-(*the other 20% have the P D A                 · RCA perfuses SA node 60%
supplied by the left coronary)                  · RCA perfuses AV node 90%

                                                                     Circumflex

                                                                     (LCX)

Acute Marginal        Conus                                          Diagonals       Obtuse
      -- Acute Angle                                                                 IWarginals'
                      *About 1/2 the time this                       "L A D for D "
                      is the first branch.                                           "Supply the
                      -It supplies the
                      ventricle outflow tract.                                       M a rg in "

                                                Septal Branches

Vascular Perfusion Territories - a high yield topic.

Dominance: Coronary Dominance is determined by what vessel gives rise to the posterior
descending artery and posterior left ventricular branches (most are right - 85%).
The safe word "yellow" is used to draw the attention of the dominant artery.

You can be "co-dominant" if the posterior descending artery arises from the right coronary artery
and the posterior left ventricular branches arise from the left circumflex coronary artery.
Although, Christian Gray would never-approve of such a dynamic.

                                                                 121
NOTNormal: Anomalies of the Origin, Course, and Termination:

Malignant Origin: There are like a million billion different types

and configurations. The main bad guy people talk about is the LCA
from the Right Coronary Sinus, coursing between the Aorta and
Pulmonary Artery (arrows). This anomaly is more eyil than Skeletor
from He-Man , with a high rate of sudden cardiac death.
By the power of Grayskull - they will always fix this thing.

                                            For the purpose of           Malignant coronary artery
                                            multiple choice              with origin from the opposite
                                            (real life is more complex)  sinus and an interarterial
                                                                         course is the 2nd most
                                            - Left Coronary from         common cause of sudden
                                            the Right Cusp gets          cardiac death in young
                                            Fixed                        patients

                                            - Right Coronary from        (most common is hypertrophic
                                            the Left Cusp gets           cardiomyopathy).
                                            Fixed if symptomatic

ALCAPA: Anomalous Left Coronary from the Pulmonary Artery.  Myocardial Bridging:
                                                            This is an intramyocardial course of a
There are two types;                                        coronary artery (usually the LAD).
(a) Infantile type (they die early)                         This is usually asymptomatic -
                                                            although it may cause symptoms as the
     - CHF & dilated cardiomyopathy,                        diameter decreases with systole.
(b) Adult (still at risk of sudden death).
                                                            Besides making a good MCQ - it can
The easiest question to write would be to ask about         be an issue for CABG planning. In
                                                            many cases the bridged segment is
"STEAL SYNDROME" - which describes a reyersed               spared from atherosclerosis, with
                                                            plaque classically located in a segment
(retrograde) flow in the LCA as pressure decreases in the   just proximal to the bridging

pulmonary circulation.  Arrow on Left Coronary              Bridged segment (in the muscle)
                                                            shown with bracket.
                        - off Pulmonary Artery (PA)

                               I. .1

                         Left M

I                       -

                        ALCAPA with anomalous Left
                        Nobody would STEAL this.

Coronary Artery Aneurysm: By definition this is a yessel with a diameter greater than 1.5x
the normal lumen. Most common cause in adults is atherosclerosis. Most common cause in children
is Kawasaki (spontaneously resolyes in 50%). They can occur from lots of other yasculitides as
well. Last important cause is iatrogenic (cardiac cath).

Coronary Fistula: Defined as a connection between a coronary artery and cardiac chamber or
great yessels. It's usually the RCA, with drainage into the right cardiac chambers. They are
associated / result in coronary aneurysm. I f you see crazy dilation o f the coronaries - think this.

                                            122
                         Coronary I Cardiac CT

Who is the idealpatient to get a coronary CT? There are few groups of people getting these.
(1) Intermediate risk for MI and/or atypical chest pain patients. A negative coronary CT will help
stop a stress test or cath from occurring. Why do a procedure with risks on someone with GERD?
(2) Suspected aberrant coronary anatomy.
(3) Evaluating stents (larger than 3mm) or CABG patency
(4) Preoperative assessment for transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI/TAVR)

What makes someone intermediate riskfor a MI ? Framingham Risk Score 10-20%

Whatfindings suggest increased riskfor a major adverse cardiac event (MACE) ? A bunch of
calcium in the vessels - calculated as a "high Agatston score (>160)." Remember this works for
calcified plaque -- not so good with non-calcified disease.

What is the ideal heart rate? To reduce motion related artifacts a slow heart rate is preferred. Most
books will tell you under 60 beats per min. Beta blockers are used to lower the heart rate to
achieve this ideal rate.

Are there contraindications to beta blockers? Yup. Patients with severe asthma, heart block,
acute chest pain, or recent snorting of cocaine off the breasts of a prostitute named Chastity -
should not be given a beta blocker.

Are all heart blocks contraindications to beta blockers ? 2nd and 3rd Degree are
contraindications. A 1st degree block is NOT.

What if I can Hgive the beta blocker? Can he still have the scan? Yes, you just can't use a
prospective gating technique. You'll have to use retrospective gating.

What is the difference between prospective and retrospective gating?

-P rospective: "Step and Shoot" - R-R interval * data acquisition triggered by R Wave
· Pro; There is reduced radiation b/c the scanner isn't on the whole time

     Con: No fiinctional imaging
     Con: More sensitive to heart rate variability (high heart rate or irregular rhythm)
     Trivia: Always axial, not helical
-Retrospective: Scans the whole time, then back calculates
     Pro: Can do functional imaging
     Pro: Less sensitive to heart rate variability
     Con: Higher radiation (use of low pitch - increases dose)
     Trivia: This is helical (not Sparta)

What component(s) of the cardiac cycle trigger imaging acquisition ?
-Prospective: Data acquisition triggered by R Wave
-Retrospective: Data is acquired throughout the cardiac cycle

What is bestfor valvular evaluation ?

-R etrospective: This type o f gating is requiredf o r evaluating the m itral a n d tricuspid valves.

Other than beta blockers, are any other drugs givenfor coronary CT? Yup. Nitroglycerine is
given to dilate the coronaries (so you can see them better).

Are there contraindications to nitroglycerine ? Yup. Hypotension (SEP < 100), severe aortic
stenosis, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and Phosphodiesterase (Viagra-Sildenafil,
"boner pills") use.

                                                               123
