      S E C T IO N 10:

P ericardium

Pericardial Effusion: The pericardium is composed of two layers (visceral and parietal), with

about 50cc of fluid normally between the layers. An "effusion" is the situation where the fluid volume
exceeds 50cc between the pericardial layers. This can be from lots and lots of causes - renal failure
(uremia) is probably the most common. For the purpose of multiple choice tests you should think about
Lupus, and Dressier Syndrome (inflammatory effusion post MI).

On CXR they could show this 3 ways:            Pericardial Effusion: "Oreo Cookie Sign"

(1) Normal Heart on Comparison,
Now Really Big Heart.

· Classic history of a 30 year old female
  with an ugly rash on her face (lupus).

· Classic history of a recent MI (Dressier
  syndrome).

(2) Giant Water Bottle Heart,

(3) Lateral CXR with two lucent lines
(epicardial and pericardial fat) and a
central opaque line (pericardial fluid) - the
so called "oreo cookie sign."

Cardiac Tamponade: Pericardial effusion can cause elevated pressure in the pericardium and

result in compromised filling of the cardiac chambers (atria first, then ventricles). This can occur with
as little as lOOcc of fluid, as the rate of accumulation is the key factor (chronic slow filling gives the
pericardium a chance to stretch). The question is likely related to short-axis imaging during deep
inspiration showing flattening or inversion of the intraventricular septum toward the LV, a
consequence of augmented RV filling. Another indirect sign that can be shown on CT is reflux of
contrast into the IVC and azygos system.

Pericardial Cysts: Totally benign incidental finding. Usually seen on the
right cardiophrenic sulcus. They do not communicate with the pericardium.
This would be most easily shown as an ROI measuring water density along
the ri^ht cardiophrenic sulcus.

Congenital /Acquired Absence: Even though you                         Leftward
can have total absence of the pericardium - the most common           Shift of the
situation is partial absence of the pericardium over the left         Heart
atrium and adjacent pulmonary artery. When the left
pericardium is absent the heart shifts towards the left. They                             Tongue of
could show you a CT or MRI with the heart contacting the left                             Lung (arrow)
chest wall, and want you to infer partial absence. Another piece                          Between the
of trivia is that cardiac herniation and volvulus can occur in                            Aorta and PA
patients who undergo extrapleural pneumonectomy (herniation
can only occur if the lung has also been removed).

Trivia: Left atrial appendage = most at risk for strangulation

                                                                 145
