                                        SECTION 1l:

                           S u rgeries

Palliative Surgery for the Hypoplastic Left Heart: Surgery for Hypoplasts
is not curative, and is instead designed to extend the life (prolong the suffering) o f the child.
It is done in a 3 stage process, to protect the lungs and avoid right heart overload:

     (1) Norwood or Sano - within days of birth
     (2) Glenn - at 3- 6 months
     (3) Fontan at 1 I/2 to 5 years

(1a) Norwood: The goal o f the surgery is to create an unobstructed outflow tract from
the systemic ventricle. So the tiny native aorta is anastom osed to the pulm onary trunk, and
the arch is augmentented with a graft (or by other methods). The ASD is enlarged to create
non restrictive atrial flow. A Blalock-Taussig Shunt (see below) is used between the right
Subclavian and right PA. The ductus is rem oved as well to prevent over shunting to the lungs.
Apparently, when this goes bad it's usually from issues related to dam age o f the coronary
arteries or over shunting of blood to the lungs (causing pulmonary edema). As a point of
trivia, sometimes the thymus is partially removed to get access.

                                                     Maintain Pulmonary Flow
                                                       - Shunt (BT or Sano)

                                                                                            Creation of
                                                                                            Unobstructed
                                                                                            Flow
                                                                                                - Enlarged

                                                                                                   Aorta (graft)
                                                                                                - Enlarged

                                                                                                   ASD

                                                                 146
(1b) Sano: Same as the Norwood, but instead o f using a Blalock-Taussig shunt a conduit is
made connecting the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery. The disadvantage o f the BT Shunt
is that it undergoes a steal phenomenon (diverted to low pressure pulmonary system).

(2a) Classic Glenn: Shunt between the SVC and right

pulmonary artery (end-to-end), with the additional step o f sewing
the proximal end o f the Right PA closed with the goal o f reducing
right ventricular work, by diverting all venous return straight to the
lung (right lung).

(2b) Bi-Directional Glenn: Shunt between the SVC and the                    Glenn
                                                                            Bi-Directional
right pulmonary artery (end-to-side). The RPA is left open, letting
blood flow to both lungs. This procedure can be used to address
right sided heart problems in general, and is also step two in the
palliative hypoplastic series. If it's being used as step two the
previously placed Blalock-Taussig Shunt or Sano shunt will come
down as the Glenn will be doing its job o f putting blood in the
lungs.

(3) Fontan Operation: Used for Hypoplastic Hearts. The old

school Fontan consisted of a classic Glenn (SVC to RPA), closure of the
ASD, and then placing a shunt between the Right atrium to the Left PA.
The idea is to let blood return from systemic circulation to the lungs by
passive flow (no pump), and turn the right ventricle (the only one the kid
has) into a functional left ventricle. There are numerous complications
including right atriomegaly with resulting arrhythmias, and plastic
bronchitis (they cough up "casts of the bronchus" that look like plastic).

                                                                            Blood
                                                                            Bypasses
                                                                            R Atrium

other Surgeries;

Classic Blalock-Taussig Shunt: Originally                       High Yield Point:

developed for use with TOR Shunt is created             Glenn = Vein to Artery
between the Subclavian artery and the pulmonary         (SVC to Pulmonary Artery)
artery. It is constructed on the opposite side o f the
arch. It's apparently technically difficult and often   Blalock-Taussig = Artery to Artery
distorts the anatomy o f the pulmonary artery.          (Subclavian Artery to Pulmonary Artery)

Modified Blalock-Taussig Shunt: This is a gortex
shunt between the Subclavian artery and pulmonary artery,
and is performed on the SAME SIDE as the arch. It's easier
to do than the original.

                                                       BT- Shunt

                  147
Pulmonary Artery Banding: Done to reduce pulmonary
artery pressure (goal is 1/3 o f systemic pressure). M ost common
indication is CHF in infancy with anticipated delayed repair. The
single ventricle is the most common lesion requiring banding.

Atrial Switch: Mustard and Senning procedures are used to
correct transposition o f the great arteries by creating a baffle within
the atria in order to switch back the blood flow at the level o f in­
flow. The result is the right ventricle becomes the systemic
ventricle, and the left ventricle pumps to the lungs. This is usually
done in the first year o f life.

     Senning: Baffle is created from the right atrial wall and
     atrial septal tissue WITHOUT use o f extrinsic material

     Mustard: Involves the resection o f the atrial septum and
     creation of a baffle using pericardium (or synthetic material).

Rastelli Operation: This is the most commonly
used operation for transposition, pulmonary outflow
obstruction, and VSD. The procedure involves the
placement of a baffle within the right ventricle
diverting flow from the VSD to the aorta (essentially
using the VSD as part of the LVOT). The pulmonary
valve is oversewn and the conduit is inserted between
the RV and the PA. The primary advantage o f this
procedure is the left ventricle becomes the systemic
ventricle. The primary limitation o f this procedure is
that the child will be committed to multiple additional surgeries
because the conduit wears out and must be replaced.

Jatene Procedure: This is another arterial switch method that
involves transection o f the aorta and pulmonary arteries about the
valve sinuses , including the removal o f the coronaries. The great
arteries are switched and the coronaries are sewn into the new aorta
(formerly the PA). Apparently this (Lecompte Maneuver) is very
technically difficult, but the advantage is there is no conduit to go
bad, and the LV is the systemic ventricle.

Ross Procedure: Performed for Diseased Aortic Valves in Children. Replaces the aortic
valve with the patient's pulmonary valve and replaces the pulmonary valve with a
cryopreserved pulmonary valve homograft. Follow-up studies have shown interval growth of
the aortic valve graft in children and infants.

                                                                 148
Bentall Procedure:

Operation involving composite graft
replacement o f the aortic valve, aortic root and
ascending aorta, with re-implantation o f the
coronary arteries into the graft. This operation
is used to treat combined aortic valve and
ascending aorta disease, including lesions
associated with Marfan syndrome.

Summary - Most Common Surgery / Key Points

         Glenn                  Blalock Taussig                  Fontan

Vein to Artery                  Artery to Artery                 It's complicated with multiple
(SVC to Pulmonary Artery)       (Subclavian Artery to Pulmonary  versions - steps are unlikely to
                                Artery)                          be tested

Primary Purpose: Take           Primary Purpose: Increase        Primary Purpose: Bypass the
systemic blood directly to the  pulmonary blood flow             right ventricle / direct systemic
pulmonary circulation (it                                        circulation into the PAs.
bypasses the right heart).

Most Testable Complications:    Most Testable Complications:     Most Testable Complications:
-SVC Syndrome                   -Stenosis at the shunt's         -Enlarged Right Atrium
-PA Aneurysms                   pulmonary insertion site         causing arrhythmia
                                                                 -Plastic Bronchitis

                          THIS vs THAT: Heart Transplant Types

Orthotopic Heart Transplant: All o f the heart is removed, except the circular
part o f the left atrium (the part with the pulm onary veins). The donor heart is trimmed
to fit to the left atrium.

Heterotopic Heart Transplant: The recipient heart remains in place, and the
donor heart is added on top. This basically creates a double heart. The advantages of
this are (1) it gives the native heart a chance to recover , and (2) gives you a backup if
the donor is rejected.

                                                   149
   fROMETHEUS

     Lionhact, m,t>.

150
