     S E C T IO N 3:
H ead and N eck

       - S elect T o p ic s -

Disclaimer: All o f the temporal bone pathology you would commonly associate with Peds is also
discussed in detail in the Neuro chapter -found in Volume 2. This is also truefo r the classic orbital
pathologies o f childhood (Retinoblastoma etc...)

Midface Malformations: Babies are noraially cute, but sometimes things go

horribly wrong. Although it is easy to focus on the negatives of being cursed with a horrible monster
face, it is not always bad. There are still many promising career opportunities available; ringing the
bell in a tower, working as an assistant for a mad scientist, and so on. The easiest way to think about
the various types of monster baby faces is to group them by location.

Location 1: Nasal Cavity                                                MS

A quick review of some anatomy will really help with           Aperture is the business in the Front
understanding the two primary malformations in this              Choanae is the party in the Back
region.

This is an axial slice through the nasal cavity, at the level
of the maxillary spines (the pointy things "MS"). The
vomer ("V") is in the middle.

The two key things to know here are the pyriform aperture
("PA") is the area in the front (between the maxillary
spines), and the posterior choanae ("PC") is the area in the
back.

l^riform Aperture Stenosis: front end o f the nose

The problem is the medial nasal processes are either fused or they are
too big resulting in either total obstruction or stenosis of the nose. The
classic look is an axial CT though the maxillary spines demonstrating
soft tissue extension across the nostrils and a narrowed / inward bow to
the maxillary spines (aperture < 8 mm).

The big trivia is the association with holoprosencephalv. pituitarv
dvsfunction. and the Central MEGAincisor (seen in 75% of cases). All
of these things reflect a midline developmental problem so the
association with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysfunction is
highly testable.

-- as my Grandma always said `face predicts brain ".

Next Step - You have to image the brain

                                                                 167
C h0 3 n 3 l AtfSSiS: back end o f the nose

Results from a membrane that separates the nasal cavity
from its normal communication with the oral cavity. It is
usually unilateral but can be bilateral. The bilateral ones
have a history of "cyclical cyanosis that improves with
crying'' (they mouth breath when they cry). This is an
emergency and typically requires emergent measures to
preserve the airway. The unilateral classic stories are
 "can't pass NG tube, " and "respiratory distress while
feeding" (neonates have to breath through their noses). m -
You will also sometimes hear a history of "a continuous
stream o f snot drainingfrom one or both nostrils, " or the
word "rhinorrhea. "

CHARGE             There are two different types: bony (90%), and membranous (10%). The
Coloboma,          appearance is a unilateral or bilateral posterior nasal narrowing, with
Heart defect,      thickening of the vomer.
Atresia (Choanal)
Retarded growth,   Trivia: There are many syndromic associations including CHARGE. Crouzons,
Genitourinary      DiGeorge, Treacher Collins, and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. CHARGE is the one
abnormalities      people mention the most.
Ear anomalies

Location 2; Nasofrontal Region

These are embryology problems where the dural membrane in the prenasal space don't regress. This fuck
up in regression leaves a patent tract which things can protrude or grow into.

Congenital Dermal Sinus with Dermoid / Epidermoid Cysts

Usually when people talk about these things they are referring to the spina bifida style midline
lumbosacral region defects. However, we are going to stay focused on the face. During normal
development there is a dural tract in the prenasal region that is supposed to regress and close. If it
doesn't you can have dermoid or epidermoid cysts form anywhere along the course of the tract. They
will be midline, and will NOT change in size with crying or jugular vein compression. For
gamesmanship, consider a sinus tract anytime you see a cyst in these locations.

                                                                Sinus tracts may or
                                                                may not have
                                                                associated dermal
                                                                or intraosseous
                                                                cysts.

                                                                Cysts may or may
                                                                not have sinus
                                                                tracts.

Dural communication will require
communication through the foramen cecum.

                                                           168
Nasal Glioma

These things aren't actually gliom as - they have no neoplastic
features. They are more like "brain in the wrong place."
Some people call them "nasal cerebral heterotopia," but those
people are assholes. They might grow - but the growth rate
tends to parallel brain growth rate.
Just like the dermoids I talked about on the prior page, these
things don't change size if you cry like a baby or com press the
jugular vein.
They don't enhance. They ju st look like a soft tissue mass in
the nose (of a baby).

Encephaloceles

As we discussed, if the dural diverticulum that extends
through the foramen cecum in early developm ent doesn't
involute you end up with a tract. If intracranial contents
herniate into this tract you get yourself an encephalocele.

These things have a bunch o f associations (facial clefts,
callosal issues, interhemispheric lipomas) -- mostly midline
stuff, which fits with the theme.

Intranasal encephaloceles hang downward into the
superomedial nasal cavity. For the purpose of multiple choice,
a nasal catheter will be displaced laterally by the
encephalocele (medial displacement with a dacryocystocele).

They CAN change size with crying (like a baby) or compression o f the jugular vein.

Many times in this text "Biopsy the M otherfucker" will be my recommendation as the next step.
This is NOT one o f those times. D o n 't biopsy th is .... M other fuckers. The concern is CSF
leaking and meningitis.

                                                                 169
Location 3; Nasolacrim al Apparatus

Dacryocystocele

Dacryocystoceles are the result of an obstructed nasolacrimal duct (the duct that drains your eye into your
nose). This duct is the reason you make pathetic snotty nose sounds when your high school boyfriend
dumps you for that slutty girl you hate. In babies poorly understood congenital obstruction of this duct
(and resulting dacryocystocele formation) is actually the second most common cause of neonatal nasal
obstruction after choanal atresia.

These things often show up in the ER after they get infected and acquire the rank of "dacryocystitis."

Craniofacial Syndromes

There are 3 big ones that people talk about. Crouzans, Aperts, and Treacher Collins Syndrome
(Mandibulo- facial Dysostosis). I've got a chart on Crouzans & Aperts earlier in the chapter (pg 41), so
I'll just touch on Treacher Collins.

Treacher Collins Syndrome ( Mandibulo- facial Dysostosis 1

These are the kids with the tiny jaws that are
super dangerous to intubate. They have small
absent zygomatic arches, narrow but over
projected maxilla, and mandible hypoplasia with
a retruded weak / unmanly chin.

Skinny Protruded Maxilla                         Normal Mandible         T.C. Mandible
Tiny Retruded Chin (destined to drink soy milk)  Looks like a Horseshoe  Has a Concave Curve of
Tiny Absent Zygomas / Malar Bones                                        the Horizontal Ramus
                                                                         (nothing else does that)
Useless Trivia: Problem is with the 1st and 2nd Branchial Arches

                                                 170
Ectopic Thyroid:

Thyroid topics will be covered again in the endocrine chapter. I do want to mention one or two now for
completeness. To understand ectopic thyroid trivia you need to remember that the thyroid starts
(embryology wise) at the back of the tongue. It then descends downward to a location that would be
considered normal. The "pyramidal lobe" actually represents a persistence of the inferior portion of the
thyroglossal duct - that is why this thing is so variable in appearance. Sometimes this process gets all
fucked up and the thyroid either stays at the back of the tongue (lingual thyroid) or ends up half way
down the neck or even in the chest (ectopic thyroid).

Trivia to know:
· Most "developed" countries test for low thyroid at birth (Guthrie Test). That will trigger a workup for

   either ectopic tissue or enzyme deficiencies.
· Nukes (1-123 or Tc-MIBI) is superior to ultrasound for diagnosing ectopic tissue. This is by far the

   most likely way to show this on a multiple choice exam. I guess CT would be #2 - remember thyroid
   tissue is dense because of the iodine.
· Ultrasound does have a preoperative role in any MIDLINE neck mass - with the point of ultrasound
   being to confirm that you have a normal thyroid in a normal place. If you resect a midline mass
   (which turns out to be the kids only thyroid tissue) you can expect an expensive well rehearsed didactic
   lecture on pediatric neck pathology from an "Expert Witness" sporting a $500 haircut.
· Lingual thyroid (back of the tongue) is the most common location of ectopic thyroid tissue.

Thyroglossal Duct Cyst:

As we discussedpreviously, thyroid relatedpathology can occur
anywhere between the foramen cecum (the base of the tongue)
and the thyroid gland. In this situation we are talking about the
duct (which is the embryological thyroid interstate highway to the
neck) failing to involute fully. What you get is a left over cyst -
hence the name. The classic locations are (I) at the base of the
tongue, and (2) midline anterior to the hyoid. Now textbooks will
make a big deal about these things becoming slightly lateral below
the hyoid. Do NOT get hung up on that. For the purpose of multiple
choice remember these guys are midline. Midline is the buzzword.

Things to know:
· Classic Buzzword / Scenario = Midiine Cyst in the Neck of a Kid.
· Next step once you find one = confirm normal thyroid location and/or

   look for ectopic tissue (Ultrasound +/-Tc-MIBI, or I-123).
· They are cystic (it's not called a "Duct Solid")
· Enhancing nodule within the cyst = CANCER (usually papillary)
· They can get infected - look for rim enhancement + fatty stranding
· Rx is Sistrunk procedure (yes, that's actually the name)

   - remove cyst, tract + hyoid, decreases recurrence

Dermoid Cyst

It is true that dermoids almost always occur below the clavicles, but
when they do happen in the neck they have a pretty classic look;
midline sublingual / submandibular space with a "sac of marbles"
appearance. The marbles are lobules of fat within fluid.

                                                                 171
Branchial Cleft Cyst (BCC)

Another cystic embryologic remnant. There are a bunch o f types (and subtypes... and sub­
subtypes) and you can lose your fucking mind trying to rem em ber all o f them - don't do that.
Just remember that by far the most common is a 2"^ Branchial Cleft Cyst (95%). The angle
of the mandible is a classic location. They can get infected, but are often asymptomatic.
Extension of the cyst between the ICA and EGA (notch sign) just above the carotid
bifurcation is pathognomonic.

How can this be asked on multiple choice:

· What is it ? - M ost likely on CT or MRI. Ultrasound would be tough, unless they clearly
   labeled the area "lateral neck" or oriented you in some other way.

· Location Fuckery. They could (and this would be super mean) ask you the relationship of a
   type 2 based on other neck anatomy. So - posterior and lateral to the submandibular gland
   or lateral to the carotid space, or anterior to the sternocleidomastoid. How I would handle
   that? Just rem em ber it's going to be lateral to everything. Lateral is the buzzword.

· Mimic - They could try and trick you into calling a necrotic level 2 lymph node a BCC.
   Thyroid cancer {history o f radiation exposure) and nasopharyngeal cancer {history o f HPV)
   can occur in "early adulthood." If you have a "new " BCC in an 18 year old - it's probably a
   necrotic node. Next Step = Find the cancer +/- biopsy the mother fucker.

I say LATERAL                            Type II - BCC
cyst in the neck,
you say branchial
cleft cyst

cyst in the neck, I say M IDLINE 4

you say 'i:.
thyroglossal duct
cyst

                                    172
                               Jugular Vein Pathology

There are two jugular vein issues that occur in kids that I should probably mention.

Septic Thrombophlebitis - i.e. clotted jugular vein. You see this classically in the setting of a
recent pharyngeal infection (or recent ENT surgery).

How can this be asked on multiple choice:

· What is it ? - Showing the clotted vein with the appropriate clinical history.

· "Lemierre's Syndrome " - Seeing if you know that it has a fancy syndrome name.

· Next Step? Looking in the lungs for septic emboli. This could also be done in the reverse. Show
  you the septic emboli, give you a history of ENT procedure (or recent infection), and have you ask
  for the US of the neck veins.

· USMLE Step 1 Association Trivia = Fusobacterium necrophorum is the bacteria that causes the
  septic emboli. As this bacteria sounds like a Marvel Comic villain the likelihood of it being asked
  increases by at least 5x.

Phlebectasia - Idiopathic dilated jugular vein.

How can this be asked on multiple choice:

· What is it ? - Showing the dilated vein.

· Trivia - It is NOT related to a stenosis. There are no other
  signs of venous congestion.

· Trivia - It gets worse with the Valsalva maneuver - "neck     Phlebectasia - Dilated Jugular Vein
  mass that enlarges with valsalva. "

                               MlscVeno/Lymphatics

Venous, Arterial and Lymphatic Malformations are complex with overlapping features and
numerous classification schemes. I 'll cover them again in the vascular chapter - this is just a brief
peds neck tangent. Both lymphatic and venous malformations can both look like a large trans-
spatial multi-cystic mass in the neck. They can both have fluid levels.

If you must try and tell them apart - you could try this:
· Venous Malformations will have enhancement o f the cystic spaces.
· Lymphatic Malformations will have enhancement o f the septa.
· Phleboliths -- suggests venous.

In many cases they coexists together .... so ... y eah ... hopefiilly the person writing the question
understands that.

                                                                 173
Hemangioma of Infancy

These things are actually the most common congenital lesions in the head and neck. Just like
any hemangioma they contain vascular spaces with varying sizes and shapes. Most people
consider them a "tumor" more than a vascular malformation.

Things to know:                                                             Vocabulary Trivia -
· How they look = Super T2 bright, with a bunch of                             T H IS vs THAT:

  flow voids. Diffusely vascular on doppler.                        Infantile Hemangiomas = NOT
· Phases = Typically they show up around 6 months of                present at birth. Show up around
                                                                    6 months of age. Nearly always
  age, grow for a bit, then plateau, then involute (6-10            involute.
  years). Usually they require no treatment.
· Indications for Treatment = Large size / Rapid growth             Congenital Hemangiomas =
  with mass effect on the airway or adjacent vascular               Present at birth. May (RICH) or
  structures. Fucking with the kids eye movement or                 may not (NICH) involute.
  eyelid opening.
· Treatment = Typically medical = Beta blocker
   (propranolol)
· Associations = PHACES Syndrome (discussed later
   in the chapter) - think this if it is intra-cranial or muhiple.

Cystic Hygroma (Lymphangioma)

This is another cystic lesion o f the neck, which is most likely to be shown as an OB
ultrasound (but can occur in the Peds setting as well). The classic look / location is a cystic
mass hanging off the back o f the neck on OB US (or in the posterior triangle if CT/MRI).

Trivia:

· Associations: T urners (most       Cystic H ygrom a (Lym phangiom a)
  common association). Downs         This Turners Baby can't . ... Turn its head.
  (second most common association).
  Aortic C oarctation (most common
  CV abnormality), Fetal Hydrops
  (bad bad bad outcomes).

· Septations = Worse Outcome

· T2 Bright (like a hemangioma).
  Does NOT enhance (hemangiomas
  typically do).

                                     174
Fibromatosis Coli (<<Congenital Torticollis")

This is a benign "mass" of the sternocleidomastoid
in neonates who present with torticollis (chin points
towards the opposite side - or you could say they
look away from the lesion). It's really just a benign
inflammation that makes the muscle look crazy big.

Ultrasound can look scary, until you realize it's just
the enlarged SCM. Ultrasound is still the best
imaging test. Sometimes it looks like there are two
of them, but that's because the SCM has two heads.
It goes away on its own, sometimes they do passive

physical therapy or try and botox them.                 - This Dragon has Two Heads -

Most common cause of a neck "mass" in infancy
Classic scenario is a 4 week old with a palpable neck mass and torticollis toward the affected side
Best imaging test = US.
Things that make you think it's not FC: mass is outside the SCM, or internal calcifications - in
which case you should think to yourself... nice try Mother fuckers- that's a neuroblastoma.

        Gamesmanship:

So... there can be significant fuckery with the "direction" things curve or people look depending
on how the question is ask. What do I mean ?

If you made the mistake of just memorizing the word "towards" in association with fibromatosis
coli you might get tricked if the options were: A - Patient looks towards the involved side.
B - Patient looks toward the uninvolved side. You'd run into the same problem with the word
"away."

Now, that might seem obvious once I spell it out like that but I'm pretty sure at least a few of you
were making a flashcard that had only the word "towards" on it. You have to assume the test
writer has the worst intentions for you. Don't provide them with any opportunity to trick you.

Rhabdomyosarcoma

Although technically rare as fiick, this is the most common mass in the masticator space of a kid (~ 70
% occur before age 12). Having said that if you see it in the head/neck region it is almost always in the
orbit. In fact, its the most common extra-occular orbital malignancy in children (dermoid is most
common benign orbital mass in child). The most classic scenario would be an 8 year old with painless
proptosis and no signs of infection.

What do sarcomas look like?

I'll talk about this more in the MSK chapter, but in general I'll just say they look mean as cat shit
(enhancing, solid, areas of necrosis, etc..).

                                                                 175
