            S E C T I O N 8:

      S o l id O r g a n GI

Pirates Of the Pancreas-

CF - The pancreas is nearly always (90%) with CF patients.
Inspissated secretions cause proximal duct obstruction leading to the
two main changes in CF: (1) Fibrosis (decreased T1 and T2 signal) and
the more common one (2) fatty replacement (increased Tl).

Patients with CF diagnosed as adults tend to have more pancreas          Complete Fatty Replacem ent
problems than those diagnosed as children. Those with residual
pancreatic exocrine function can have bouts of recurrent acute
pancreatitis. Small (l-3mm) pancreatic cysts are common.

High Yield Trivia:
 Complete fatty replacement is the most common imaging finding in adult CF
 Enlarged with fatty replacement = lipomatous pseudohypertrophy of the pancreas.
 Fibrosing Colonopathy: Thick walled right colon as a complication of enzyme replacement therapy.

U Ix  Shwachman*Diamond Syndrome - The 2nd most common cause of pancreatic
      insufficiency in kids (CF #1). Basically, it's a kid with diarrhea, short stature, and
      eczema. Will also cause lipomatous pseudohypertrophy of the pancreas.

      Dorsal Pancreatic Agenesis - You only have a ventral bud (the dorsal bud forgets
      to form). Since the dorsal buds makes the tail, the appearance is that of a pancreas without a
      tail. All you need to know is that (1) this sets you up for diabetes (most o fyour beta cells are
      in the tail), and (2) it's associated with polysplenia.

Pancreatitis - The most common cause of pancreatitis in peds is trauma (seat belt).

         NAT: Another critical point to make is that non-accidental trauma can present as pancreatitis.
 M k If the kid isn't old enough to ride a bike (handle bar injury) or didn't have a car wreck (seat
 " ^ belt injury) you need to think NAT.

Tumors of the Pediatric Pancreas: Even at a large pediatric hospital its uncommon to see more

than 1-2 of these a year. Obviously, they are still fair game for multiple choice. This is what I would
know:

Solid and Papillary Epithelial Neoplasm (SPEN) - The most common pediatric solid

tumor. It's found in female adolescents (usually asian, or black). The outcomes are pretty good after

surgical resection. If you get shown a case in the peds setting this is    Peds Pancreatic Mass
probably it. I'll mention this thing again in the Adult GI chapter.      Age 1 = Pancreatoblastoma

Otherwise, I would try and use age as a discriminator                    Age 6 = Adenocarcinoma
(if they are nice enough to give it to you).                             Age 15 = SPEN

                          212
-liver Masses-

Tumors: For Peds liver tum ors I like to use an age-based system to figure it out. M ass in the

liver, first think - w hat is the age? Then use the narrow DDx to figure it out.

       Age0-3: With kids that are newborns you should think about 3 tumors:

Infantile Hepatic Hemangioma:
Often < 1. Associated with high output CHF, this is
classically shown as a large heart on CXR plus a mass in
the liver. The aorta above the hepatic branches o f the
celiac is often enlarged relative to the aorta below the
celiac because o f differential flow. Skin hemangiomas
are present in 50%. Endothelial growth factor is
elevated. These can be associated with Kasabach-Merritt
Syndrome (the platelet eater).

How do they do? - Actually well. They tend to spontaneously involute without therapy over
months-years - as they progressively calcify.

Hepatoblastoma:
Most common prim ary liver tum or o f childhood (< 5).
The big thing to know is that it's associated with a bunch
o f syndromes - mainly hemi-hypertrophy, Wilms,
Beckwith-Weidemarm crowd. Prem aturity is a risk fa c to r
This is usually a well circumscribed solitary right sided
mass, that may extend into the portal veins, hepatic veins,
and IVC. Calcifications are present 50% o f the time. AFP
is elevated. Another piece o f trivia is the hepatoblastom a
may cause a precocious puberty from making bHCG.

I would know 3 things: (1) Associated with Wilms, (2) AFP, (3) Precocious Puberty

Mesenchymal Hamartoma:
This is the predominately cystic mass (or multiple cysts), sometimes
called a "developm ental anomaly." Because it's a "developm ental
anom aly" it shouldn't surprise you that the AFP is negative.
Calcifications are UNCOM M ON. W hat is common is a large portal
vein branch feeding the tumor.

                                                                 213
A>g.> 5:

HCC: This is actually the second m ost com mon liver cancer in k ids. You'll see them in kids
with cirrhosis (biliary atresia, Fanconi syndrome, glycogen storage disease). AFP will be
elevated.

Fibrolamellar Subtype: This is typically seen in younger patients (<35) without
cirrhosis and a normal AFP. The buzzword is central scar. The scar is sim ilar to the one seen
in FNH with a few differences. This scar does NOT enhance, and is T2 dark (the F N H scar is
T2 bright). As a point o f trivia, this tum or is Gallium avid. This tum or calcifies more often
than conventional HCC.

Undifferentiated Embryonal Sarcoma: This is the pissed off cousin o f the
mesenchymal ham artoma. It's also cystic, but the mass is much more aggressive. It will be a
hypodense mass with septations and fibrous pseudocapsule. This mass has been known to
rupture.

        Any Age:

Mets: Think about Wilms tumor or Neuroblastoma

Now, there are several other entities that can occur in the liver o fyoung children / teenagers
including; Hepatic Adenoma, Hemangiomas, Focal Nodular Hyperplasia, and Angio
Sarcoma. The bulk o f these are discussed in greater detail in the adult G I chapter

                                   Fetal Hepatomegaly

  I'm gonna cover the 2 scenarios I think are probably the most testable.
  Scenario 1: Mom is a "free spirit." She was also on that daytime TV show where they
  don't know who the Dad is ... the paternity test show. Dad could be one o f these 17 lucky
  guys... and the test comes back and it is none o f them. It was some other asshole that she can't
  even remember. She was on that show. The prenatal US (after 20 weeks) shows a big liver and
  big placenta. This is classic congenital syphilis. The liver is the earliest organ involved and
  the last to resolve after treatment.

  Scenario 2: Mom is a not a free spirit and she wasn't on that show embarrassing her family,
  b u t.... She is 43. The kid has a big liver on 3rd trimester US. This is classic Transient
  Abnormal Myelopoiesis (TAM). "TAM" is a preleukemic syndrome seen only in Downs
  (trisomy 21). Anytime you are given advanced maternal age (35+) in the question - you should
  be thinking Downs. Fetal Hepatomegaly + Downs = TAM. Most o f the time (80%) it will get
  better on its own. The other 20% become myeloid leukemia o f Down syndrome - hence the
  "preleukemic."

                                                                 214
-Congenital Biliary / liver-

Choledochal cysts are congenital dilations o f the bile ducts -classified into 5 types by
some dude nam ed Todani. The high yield trivia is type 1 is focal dilation o f the CBD and is by
far the most com m on. Type 2 and 3 are super rare. Type 2 is basically a diverticulum o f the
bile duct. Type 3 is a "choledochocele." Type 4 is both intra and extra hepatic. Type 5 is
Caroli's, and is intrahepatic only. I 'll hit this again in the GI chapter.

Caroli's is an AR disease associated with polycystic kidney disease and m edullary sponge
kidney. The hallmark is intrahepatic duct dilation, that is large and saccular. Buzzword is
"central dot sign" which corresponds to the portal vein surrounded by dilated bile ducts.

AR Polycystic Kidney Disease: This will be discussed in greater detail in the renal
section, but kids with AR polycystic kidney disease will have cysts in the kidneys, and
variable degrees o f fibrosis in the liver. The degree o f fibrosis is actually the opposite of
cystic formation in the kidneys (bad kidneys ok liver, ok kidneys bad liver).

Hereditary Hem orriiagic Telangiectasia (Osler-Weber-Rendu):
Autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple AVMs in the liver and lungs. It leads
to cirrhosis, and a massively dilated hepatic artery. The lung AVMs set you up fo r brain
abscess.

Biliary Atresia: If you have prolonged newborn jaundice (> 2 weeks) you should think
about two things (1) neonatal hepatitis, and (2) B ihary Atresia. It's critical to get this
diagnosis right because they need corrective surgery (Kasai Procedure) prior to 3 months.
Patients with biliary atresia really only have atresia of the ducts outside the liver (absence of
extrahepatic ducts), in fact they have proliferation o f the intrahepatic ducts. They will
develop cirrhosis without treatment and not do well.

Trivia to Know about Biliary Atresia:
 Associations with Polysplenia, and Trisom y 18
 G allbladder m ay be absent (normal gallbladder --supports neonatal hepatitis)
 Triangle Cord Sign - triangular echogenic structure by the portal vein - possibly remnant of

  the CBD.
 Hepatobiliary Scintigraphy with 99m Tc-IDA is the test o f choice to distinguish (discussed

  in the Nukes Chapter).
 Alagille Syndrome: This is a total zebra. All you need to know is hereditary cholestasis,

  from paucity of intrahepatic bile ducts, and peripheral pulmonary stenosis. The purpose o f a
  liver biopsy in biliary atresia is to exclude this diagnosis.

Gallstones: If you see a peds patient with gallstones think sickle cell.

                                                                 215
-Spleen-

Sickle Cell - These kids bodies have spleen better days - as the spleen will typically
enlarge progressively and then eventually auto-infarct and shrink (during the first decade). If
the spleen remains enlarged it can run into problems - mainly acute splenic sequestration
crisis.

I want you to think about sickle cell spleen as either too big or too small (for the purpose o f
multiple choice). First I 'll ex-spleen the too big problems:

Splenic Sequestration - This is the second most common cause o f death in SC patients
younger than 10. We are talking about the situation in which the spleen becom es a greedy
little pig and tries to hog all the blood for itself

Gamesmanship: History of abdominal pain or vital signs suggesting low volume (high HR,
low BP) with a big spleen. Remember most kids with sickle cell will have smaller spleens
(auto infarct) so a big spleen should be your clue.

Other problems you can run into if your spleen stays big are abscess formation and large
infarcts. These large infarcts are not the same pathophysiology as the "auto-infarct" you
typically think of with sickle cell. These are the big wedge shaped infarcts (hypo-perfusion on
CT). As a point o f trivia, infarcted splenic tissue should look hypoechoic on US, with linear
 "bright bands " -- google that if you haven't seen it before.

Now the too small problem:

Auto Infarcted Spleen - This is different than the massive infarct in that it is typically the
combined effort o f numerous tiny, unnoticeable, and repetitive micro occlusions leading to
progressive atrophy. Supposedly this doesn't hurt (large infarcts do). This tends to occur
early and is usually "complete" by age 8. The typical look is going to be a tiny (possibly
calcified) spleen. W hen I say tiny - we are talking like 1cm. In the imaginary world o f
multiple choice you might not even see the fucking thing.

''Where is the fu c kin g spleen ? " = Auto Infarct = Sickle Cell

Gamesmanship: If you don't see the spleen but you do see a gallbladder full of stones in a kid
less than 15 - you should think Sickle Cell.

                                                                 216
Polysplenia and Asplenia - Heterotaxia syndromes are clutch for multiple choice
tests. The m ajor game played on w ritten tests is "left side V5 right side. "

So what the hell does that mean? Let me break this down like a cardboard box that you intend
to put in your recycling ... because this gets pretty fucking com plicated. I like to start in the
lungs. The right side has two fissures (major and minor). The left side has just one fissure.
So if I show you a CXR with two fissures on each side, (a left sided minor fissure), then the
patient has two right sides. Thus the term "bilateral right sidedness."

What else is a right sided      Heterotaxia Syndromes
structure? The liver. So,
these patients w on't have a    Right Sided             Left Sided
spleen (the spleen is a left
sided structure).               Two Fissures in Left Lung One Fissure in Right Lung

The opposite is true. Since             Asplenia                   Polysplenia
the spleen is on the left, a     Increased Cardiac
"bilateral left sided" patient                          Less Cardiac Malformations
will have polysplenia.               M alforations          Azygos Continuation
                                                                    o f the IVC
                                Reversed Aorta/IVC

Aorta/IVC: This relationship is a little more confiising when you try to reason it out. The
way I keep it straight is by remembering that the IVC is usually on the right. If you are
"bilateral left" then you d o n 't have a regular IVC -- hence the azygos continuation. Then I
just remember that the other one (flipped IVC/Aorta) is the other one.

Normal                          Reversed (Aorta/ ICV)   Azygos Continuation
IVC (on the right)              -Asplenia               -Polysplenia
Aorta (on the left)             Right Isomerism
                                                        Left Isomerism
                                                   217
Heterotaxia Syndromes I Situs - Cont...

So on the prior page I used terms like "bilateral right sided" and "bilateral left sided" to help
make the concept more digestible. I didn't make those words up. You will read that some
places but I think to be ready for the full gauntlet o f heterotaxia related fuckery you should
also be ready for words that start with "situs " and end with "isomerism. "

Situs Vocab: There are 3 vocab words that start w ith the w ord "Situs."

 Situs Solitus - Instead o f ju st saying norm al, you can be an asshole and say "Situs Solitus. "
 Situs Inversus Totalis - Total mirror image transposition o f the abdominal and thoracic

  stuff
 Situs Am biguus (Ambiguous) - This is a tricky w ay o f saying Heterotaxy. o f which you can

  have left or right "isomerism."

"ISOm쯴isiTl" - 1 guess some asshole really liked organic chem istry.... This is a fancy

way o f saying bilateral right or bilateral left - as explained on the prior page.

Minor                                     Situs Solitus                                  Situs
Fissure                                      (Normal)                                 Inversus
                                                                                     Gastric
                                         Gastric Bubble                              Bubble on
                                         on Left                                     Right
                                         Larger part of                              Larger part of
                                         Liver on Riglit                             Liver on Left
                                         Minor fissure on                            Minor fissure
                                         Right                                       on Left
                                                                                     Inverted
   'GB'                                  Spleen                                      Bronchial
          Situs Solitus                                                              Pattern
                                                        Situs Inversus               Associated
"How Pretentious Assholes                                "Mirror Image"              with Primary
           Say Normal"                                                               Ciliary
                                                                                     Dyskinesia

Minor     Minor                                                                      V.H. with T
Fissure,  Fissure                                                                         Left

                          Absent Spleen                                              Isomerism
                                                                                     Absent Minor
 Visceral Heterotaxy with                                                            Fissures
Thoracic Right Isomerism                                                             Interrupted
                                                                                     IVC
                                                                                     Polysplenia
                                                                                     Biliary
                                                                                     Atresia

                                                                                     (10%)

                                                           Visceral Heterotaxy with
                                                           Thoracic Left Isomerism

                                                           218
- Top 4 Things for PedsGI-

) Absent GB                               Biliary Atresia:
                                           Congenital liver fibrosis cholangiopathy

                                                neonatal jaundice (after 1 week of life)
                                           US: Bright band of tissue (triangular cord

                                            sign) near branching of common bile duct;
                                            small or absent gallbladder (fasting ~ 3
                                            hours)
                                           Scintigraphic: No tracer excretion into bowel
                                            by 24 hours
                                           Biopsy to exclude = Zebra Alagille syndrome
                                           Treated with Kasai procedure

                                          IVIal rotation:
                                           Duodenum to the right of the midline
                                           Increased risk for mid gut volvulus, and

                                            internal hernia

                                           "Bilious vomiting"

                                           SMA to the right of the SMV

SMV - 2 o'clock position relative to SMA  Heterotaxia Syndromes

            Asplenia or                        Right Sided             Left Sided
            Polysplenia                   Two Fissures in Left
                                                                One Fissure in Right
                                                    Lung                   Lung
                                                  Asplenia
                                           Increased Cardiac          Polysplenia
                                               M alforations
                                                                     Less Cardiac
                                          Reversed Aorta/IVC        M alform ations
                                                                Azygos Continuation

                                                                       of the IVC

V AC TER L                                V - Vertebral Anomalies (37%)
                                          A - Anal (imperforate anus) (63%)
                                          C - Cardiac (77%)
                                          TE - Tracheoesophageal Fistula

                                                   or Esophageal A tresia ( 40%>)
                                           R -R e n a l (72%)
                                           L - Limb (radial ray) - 58%

                                          219
