                                     SECTION 5:

                                        C hest

Before we proceed with the trivia I need to make sure you know / can do two things for me.

1) Know how to tell if a neonatal chest is hyper-inflated or not. Don't get hung up on this low vs
     normal - that's a bunch of bologna. Just think (a) Hyper-inflated, or (b) NOT Hyper-inflated.
      The easiest way to do this is to just count ribs.
      More than 6 Anterior, or 8 Posterior as they
      intersect the diaphragm is too much. As a
      quick review, remember that the anterior ribs
      (grey) are the ones with a more sloping course
     as they move medially, where as the posterior
     ribs (black) have a horizontal course.

      Other helpful signs suggesting hyperinflation:
       Flattening of the diaphragms
       Ribs take on a more horizontal appearance
       Some increased lucency under the heart

2) Know what "Granular" looks like. Know what "Streaky" or "Ropy" looks like. My good
     friends at Amazon are not capable of printing a clear picture of these so I want you to stop reading
     and
     A. Go to google images
     B. SesLTch "Granular neonatal chest x-ray." Look at a bunch o f examples. Maybe even
          download a few of them for review.
     C. Search "Streaky Perihilar neonatal chest x-ray." Look at a bunch of examples. Maybe even
          download a few of them for review.
     D. Search "Ropy neonatal chest x-ray." Look at a bunch of examples. Maybe even download a
          few of them for review.

Random Pearl; We are going to talk about the presence of a pleural effusion as a discriminator. One
pearl is to lookfo r an accentuated (thick) minorfissure on the right. If you see that shit, kid probably
has an effusion. Confirm by staring with fierce intensity at the lung bases to look for obliteration of
the costophrenic sulcus.

As we proceed forward with the        High Volumes              Alphabet - M N oP
trivia, pay close attention to lung   + Perihilar Streaky
volumes, and the words "granular",                         (1) Meconium
"streaky", and "ropy."                Not High (low or     (2) Aspiration
                                      normal) Volumes      (3) Non GB Neonatal
You will find that you can divide     + Granular
the big 5 in half by doing something                       (4) S S D
like this:                                                 (5) Group B Pneumonia

                                      179
      - Life in the NiCU ( just as glamorous as it sounds ) -

Meconium Aspiration
This typically occurs secondary to stress (hypoxia), and is more common in term or post-mature babies
(the question stem could say "post term " delivery). The pathophysiology is all secondary to chemical
aspiration.
Trivia:
 The buzzword "ropy appearance" of asymmetric lung densities
 Hyperinflation with alternative areas of atelectasis
 Pneumothorax in 20-40% of cases

                         How can it have hyperinflation?? Aren't the lungsfull of sticky shit
                         (literally) ??? The poop in the lungs act like miniature ball-valves ("floaters" I
                           call them), causing air trapping - hence the increased lung volumes.

Reality vs Multiple Choice: "Meconium Staining" on the amniotic fluid is common (like ISVo o f all
births), but development o f "aspiration syndrome" is rare with only 5% o f those 15% actually have
aspiration symptoms. Having said that, i f the question header bothers to include "Green colored
amnioticflu id " or "Meconium staining" in the question header they are giving you a major hint.
D on't overthink a hint like this. I f they ask "What color was George Washington s white horse ?" the
answer is NOT brown.

Transient Tachypnea of the Newborn (TTN)
The classic clinical scenario is a history of c-section (vagina squeezes the fluid out of lungs normally).
Other classic scenario histories include "diabetic mother" and/or "maternal sedation." Findings are
going to start at 6 hours, peak at one day, and be done by 3 days. You are going to see coarse
interstitial marking and fluid in the fissures.

Trivia:
 Classic histories: C-Section, Maternal Sedation, Maternal Diabetes
 Onset: Peaks at day 1, Resolved by Day 3
 Lung Volumes - Normal to Increased

Surfactant-Deficient Disease (SDD)

This is also called hyaline membrane disease, or RDS. It's a disease of pre-mature kids. The idea is
that they are born without surfactant (the stuff that makes your lungs stretchy and keeps alveolar
surfaces open). It's serious business and is the most common cause of death in premature newborns.
You get low lung volumes and bilateral granular opacities (just like B-hemolytic pneumonia). But,
unlike B-hemolytic pneumonia you do NOT get pleural effusions. As a piece of useful clinical
knowledge, a normal plain film at 6 hours excludes SDD.

Surfactant Replacement Therapy

They can spray this crap in the kid's lungs, and it makes a huge difference (decreased death rate etc...).
Lung volumes get better, and granular opacities will clear centrally after treatment. The post treatment
look of bleb-like lucencies can mimic PIE.
Trivia:
텶ncreased Risk of Pulmonary Hemorrhage
텶ncreased Risk of PDA

                                                                 180
Neonatal Pneumonia (Beta-Hemolytic Strep - or "GBS")

This is the most common type of pneumonia in newborns. It's acquired during exit of the dirty birth
canal. Premature infants are at greater risk relative to term infants. It has some different looks when
compared to other pneumonias (why I discuss it separately).

Trivia:
텶t often has low lung volumes (other pneumonias have high)
텴ranular Opacities is a buzzword (for this and SDD)
텽ften (25%) has pleural effusion (SDD will not)
텹ESS likely to have pleural effusion compared to the non Beta hemolytic version (25% vs 75%)

Neonatal Pneumonia (not Beta-Hemolytic Strep - "Non GB" or "Non GBS")

Lots of causes. Typical look is patchy, asymmetric perihilar densities, effusions, and hyperinflation.
Will look similar to surfactant deficient disease but will be full term. Effiisions are also much more
likely (they are rare in SDD).

Persistent Pulmonary HTN

Also called "persistent fetal circulation". Normally, the high pulmonary pressures seen in utero (that
cause blood to shunt around the lungs) decrease as soon as the baby takes his/her first breath. Dr.
Goljan (Step 1 wizard) calls this a "miracle," and used this basic physiology to deny evolution. When
high pressures persist in the lungs it can be primary (the work of Satan), or secondary from hypoxia
(meconium aspiration, pneumonia, etc...). The CXR is going to show the cause of the pulmonary
HTN (pneumonia), rather than the HTN itself

Pulmonary interstitial Emphysema (PIE)                  Chronic Lung Disease - CLD I
                                                        (Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia - BPD)
When you have surfactant deficiency and they put you
on a ventilator (which pulverizes your lungs with       This is the kid bom premature (with resulting
PEEP), you can end up with air escaping the alveoli     surfactant deficiency), who ends up being
and ending up in the interstitium and lymphatics. On    tortured in ventilator purgatory. His/her tiny
CXR it looks like linear lucencies (buzzword). It's a   little lungs take a ferocious ass whipping from
warning sign for impending Pneumothorax. Most           positive pressure ventilation and oxygen
cases of PIE occur in the first week of time            toxicity -- "barotrauma" they call it. This
(bronchopulmonary dysplasia - which looks similar -     beating essentially turns the lungs into scar,
occurs in patients older than 2-3 weeks). Surfactant    inhibiting their ability to grow correctly. That
therapy can also mimic PIE. The treatment is to         is why people call this "a disease of lung
switch ventilation methods and/or place them PIE side   growth impairment."
down.
                                                         Classic Vignette: Prolonged ventilation in a
Rarely (zebra rare) PIE can progress to a large cystic    tiny (<1000 grams), premature kid (<32
mass - which can cause mediastinal shift.                 weeks)

Trivia:                                                  Classic Look: Alternating regions of
 Consequence of ventilation                               Fibrosis (coarse reticular opacities), and
 Usually occurs in the first week of life                   Hyper-Aeration (cystic lucencies).
 Warning Sign for Impending Pneumothorax
 Treatment is to put the bad side down                  Buzzword: "Band like opacities"
 Buzzword = Linear Lucencies

                       This T H A T : PIE vs CLD
Both have cystic lucencies. The difference (classic peds) is TIME.

PIE = First week of life  CLD = After 3 to 4 weeks' postnatal age

                          181
d v . Solving Cases Using Buzzwords

When I say "Post Term Baby, "                  How this could work:
You Say Meconium Aspiration
                                  Blah Blah Blah , Post Term Delivery o f a
When I say "C-Section, "          beautiful baby girl. What is the diagnosis?
You say Transient Tachypnea
                                  (A) RDS
When I say "M aternal Sedation '  (B) Transient Tachypnea
You say Transient Tachypnea       (C) Meconium Aspiration

When I say "Premature "
You say RDS

Solving Cases Using Lung Volumes:

High (flat diaphragms):           Low:
 Meconium Aspiration             톁urfactant Deficiency (no pleural effusion)
 Transient Tachypnea             텯eta-Hemolytic Pneumonia (gets pleural effusions)
 Non BH Neonatal Pneumonia

                                  Y

How this could work:
Blah Blah Blah , This Picture o f a beautiful baby
girl. What is the diagnosis?
(A) RDS
(B) Transient Tachypnea
(C) Meconium Aspiration

                                                               182
-Congenital Chest-

Pulmonary Hypoplasia: "Tiny Lung'

This is the situation where the lung(s) look tiny or incompletely developed. It can occur from primary
reasons, but the secondary causes seem to lend themselves more readily to multiple choice questions.

You can think about secondary causes as either:

(A) Things inside the chest pushing on the lungs during development (most commonly a congenital
diaphragmatic hernia / bowel in the chest, but sometimes from a neuroblastoma, giant congenital
heart, or sequestration)

(B) Things outside the chest pushing on the lungs during development     Potter Sequence
(classically a fucked up skeleton / ribs - as you might see in a short         No Kidneys
rib dwarf like Jeune syndrome "asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy," but                 
sometimes a large intra-abdominal mass compressing the thorax)                    No Pee

(C) Things outside the chest fucking with normal lung development          No Amniotic Fluid
(classically low fluid "oligohydramnios" ). Remember, the
developing baby has to breath in the amniotic fluid for normal lung        Hypoplastic Lungs
development. Anything that drops fluid (premature rupture of
membranes. Potter sequence, renal problems) will mess up the lungs.

              OB Ultrasound Buzzwords:
               'Reduced Thoracic Circumference (TC)
               'Fetal Lung: Head Ratio < 1

Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDHs):

Most commonly they are Bochdalek type. B is in the Back - they are typically posterior and to the
left. The appearance on CXR is usually pretty obvious.

Trivia:                                                                     LARGE Congenital
     톃sually in the Back , and on the left (Bochdalek)                    Diaphragmatic Hernia
     텶f it's on the right - there is an association with GBS Pneumonia
     텺ortality Rate is related to the degree of pulmonary Hypoplasia      Buncha Bowel in the
     텺ost have Congenital Heart Disease                                  Chest Smashing a Lung
     텲ssentially all are malrotated
                                                                         Pulmonary Hypoplasia of
Gamesmanship                                                                 the Smashed Lung
     텽ne trick is to show the NG tube curving into the chest.

Bronchogenic Cysts:

Typically an incidental finding. They are generally solitary and unilocular. They typically do NOT
communicate with the airway, so if they have gas in them you should worry about infection.

                                                                 183
Bronchopulmonary Sequestration

The easiest way to think about these things is "extra lung that is NOT connected to the airways or
vasculature normally." Some people will call them "accessory lung tissue." Other people will call
them "bronchopulmonary foregut malformations" or BPFMs, but those people tend to be weirdos. The
kind of people who send out Christmas cards with the dog dressed as Santa.

           Sequestrations Have:
           - NO communication with the airway
           - NO communication with the pulmonary arteries
            - They USUALLY have an Aortic Feeder Vessel

These are grouped into intralobar and extralobar with the distinction being which has a pleural
covering (which you can NOT see on imaging). The venous drainage is different (intra to
pulmonary veins, extra to systemic veins). You can NOT tell the difference radiographically.
The practical difference is age and presentation.

                 Intralobar                                 Extralobar
            More Common (75%)
           Presents in Adolescence                      Less Common (25%)

             Recurrent Infections                        Presents in Infancy
(bacteria migrates infrom pores o f Kohn)
                                                Respiratory Distress or Cyanosis
          Rare to Have Associated            (often related to associated congenital
            Congenital Anomalies
                                                              anomalies)

                                                Associated Congenital Anomalies
                                                     - `Extra'for `Extra'things-

                                            (CCAMs, congenital diaphragmatic hernia,
                                           vertebral anomalies, congenital heart disease,

                                                        pulmonary hypoplasia)

Most Common (60%) in the Left Lower Lobe,       90% in the Left Lower Lobe
      Posterior Segment. 40% in the RLL
                                                 10% Below the Diaphragm
         Uncommon in the Upper Lobes.                "subdiaphragmatic"

           No Pleural Cover                             Has its own pleural cover
you can't see that shit on CT or MR              you can't see that shit on CT or MR

    Pulmonary Venous Drainage                *The pleural covering is protective against
                                           infection, which is why they rarely get infected

                                                       Systemic Venous Drainage

Gamesmanship: I say recurrent pneumonia in same area, you say intralobar sequestration.

                                           184
Congenital Lobar Emphysema (CLE)

The idea behind this one is that you have bronchial pathology (maybe atresia depending on what
you read), that leads to a ball-valve anomaly and progressive air trapping. On CXR, it looks
like a lucent, hyper-expanded lobe.

Trivia:
 It's not actually emphysema - just air trapping secondary to bronchial anomaly
 It prefers the left UPPER lobe (40%)
 Treatment is lobectomy

Gamesmanship: The classic way this is shown in case conference or case books is with a series
o f CXRs. The first one has an opacity in the lung (the affected lung clears fluid slower than
normal lung). The next x-ray will show the opacity resolved. The following x-ray will show it
getting more and more lucent. Until it's actually pushing the heart over.

                                                                     Note the mass
                                                                     effect on the heart

Congenital Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation (CCAM)
- (Other Aliases Include - C P A M )

As the name suggests it's a malformation o f adenomatoid stuff       Schematic of a the most
that replaces normal lung. Most o f the time it only involves one    common "look" for a CCAM /
lobe. There is no lobar preference (unlike CLE which favors the      CPAM. They tend to have
left upper lobe). There are cystic and solid types (type 1 cystic    large cysts, surrounded by
is the most common -70% ). There is a crop o f knuckle heads         smaller cysts.
who want to call these things CPAMs, which I 'm sure is
evidence based and will really make an impact in the way these
things are treated. As such, you should be ready for them to be
called CPAMs on the exam , don't let that trip you up. CCAMs
communicate with the airway, and therefore at least components
o f them can fill with air. M ost o f these things (like 90%>) will
spontaneously decrease in size in the third trimester. The
treatment (at least in the USA) is to cut these things out, because
of the iddy bitty theoretical risk of malignant transformation
(pleuropulmonary blastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma).

Q: What i f you see a systemic arterialfeed er (one coming o ff the aorta) going to the CC AM ?
A: Then it's not a CCAM, it's a Sequestration. -- mumble to yourself "nice try assholes"

185
                                                                                Left Upper Lobe:
                                                                      Think Congenital Lobar
                                                                      Emphysema (CLE) first
                                                                             But, remember CCAI\/I has no
                                                                             lobar prevalence, so it can be
                                                                             anywhere

                                                                                 Left Lower Lobe:

                                                         Think Sequestration First

                                                                               Congenital Diaphragmatic
                                                                               Hernia (CDHs) favors this
                                                                               side too

Case 1. Newborn with congenital heart disease

A. Intralobar Sequestration
B. Extralobar Sequestration
C. Congenital Lobar Em physema

Case 2. 10year old with recurrentpneumonia

A. Intralobar Sequestration
B. Extralobar Sequestration
C. Congenital Lobar Emphysema
**Intralobar is seen older kids,
**Extralobar is seen in infants with co-morbids
** CLE is in the upper lobe

                                                             186
                         -Primary Lung Tumors-                                            Normal 2nd
                                                                                         Trimester US
THIS vs THAT: Prim ary Lung Tumor vs Congenital M alformation:
                                                                                                +
As a general rule, developmental / congenital lung lesions will be present on the         Infant with
mid-second trimester US. For the purpose of multiple choice, if the history tells        Lung Tumor
you that the 2nd Trimester US was normal and they show you a mass - think
Primary Tumor. If instead they tell you (or show you) a lung mass on the second            Primary
trimester US - think Congenital Malformation (CPAM - etc..). There are                   Lung Tumor
exceptions to this rule - I'm not going to get into it and confuse the issue. This is a
"general rule" for gamesmanship.

Pleuropulmonary Blastoma (PPB) - This is the most                                 PPB

common primary lung malignancy in children. They can look a         Big Fucking Mass (B.F.M.)
lot like CCAMs and even have different types (cystic, mixed,        in the chest of a 1-2 year old
solid) - but should be absent on the second trimester US. These
things are usually right sided, pleural based, and without chest    Shouldn't have an eaten-up
wall invasion or calcifications. No rib invasion (helps             rib (Askin tumors often do)
distinguish itfrom the Askin /E w ing Sarcoma o f the Chest Wall -
if they won't tell you the age), No calcification. The more solid   10% of the time they have a
types can have mets to the brain and bones. The cystic type seem    multilocular cystic nephroma.
to occur more in kids less than a year old, and be more benign.

Inflammatory Myofibroblastic Tumor (IMT) - This is the most cormnon primary lung

mass in children. It is benign (PPBs are malignant). These are solid masses, typically lobulated and
often calcified. They have a lower lobe predominance. The tend to look like fluid on MR (T2 bright)
because they are composed of "myxoid" stroma. It can look like a sequestration (given the arterial
supply) or the solid types of PPB.

                 -Catheters/Lines-

Umbilical Venous Catheter (UVC) - AUVC passes from the
umbilical vein to the left portal vein to the ductus venosus to a hepatic vein
to the IVC. You don't want the thing to lodge in the portal vein because
you can infarct the liver (or cause portal hypertension).
Things to know about UVCs:
 The ideal spot is at the IVC - Right Atrium junction.
 Clot forming in a portal vein branch can cause lobar atrophv
 Development of a "Cystic Liver Mass" (Hematoma) can suggest UVC

  erosion into the liver.

Umbilical Artery Catheter (UAC) - AUAC passes from the
umbilicus, down to the umbilical artery, into an iliac artery than to the
aorta. Positioning counts, as the major risk factor is renal arterial
thrombosis. You want to avoid the renal arteries by going high (T8-T10),
or low (L3-L5)

Things to know about UACs:
 It goes down first
 It should be placed either high (T8-T10) or low (L3-L5)
 Should stay left of midline on AXR (aorta on the left)
 Omphalocele is a contraindication

187
        ECHO - Extracorporeal Memdrane Oxygenation

Neonatologists primarily use this device to torture sick babies - hopefully into revealing the
various government secrets they have stolen, or the location o f their organization's
underground lair. "Enhanced interrogation" or "tem porizing m easure o f last resort," they call
it - to get around the Geneva Conventions.

Oh you want to pretend yo u c a n 't talk? Get the EC M O catheters!

Alternatively, it can be used as a last resort in neonatal sepsis, severe SSD, and meconium
aspiration. Actually, in cases of meconium aspiration ECMO actually does work
(sometimes).

Types:

There are two main types; (1) Veno-Arterial "V-A",        VenoArterial       Veno Venous
and (2) Veno-Venous "V-V"                                      "V-A"             "V_V"

In both cases deoxygenated blood is removed from the            Catheter         Catheter
right atrium and pumped into a box (artificial lung) to         Position;        Position;
get infused with oxygen. The difference is in how it is                          RA+RA
returned.                                                RA + Aorta (near    "Dual Lumen"
                                                            the origin of
In V-A, blood goes back to the Aorta (you can see                            Lung Support
why this would help rest the left ventricle). The         the innominate
catheter is usually placed at the origin o f the                artery)
innominate or "overlying the arch."
                                                            Heart + Lung
In V-V blood goes right back into the right atrium. In          Support
this situation even if the lungs were totally clogged
with shit (meconium aspiration) and no oxygen            Carotid artery
exchange was happening it w ouldn't matter because       and Rigiit
the blood that is being pumped (RA -> RV ->              Jugular Vein are
Pulmonary Artery) already has oxygen in it.              "Sacrificed" to
                                                         tile Volcano God
                                                         in the hopes of a
                                                         plentiful harvest.

        188
  ECHO - Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation - Condnued

Things to Know:

 Lung W hite Out = N orm al. M echanism is variable depending on who you asked. The way
  I understand it is that the airway pressure suddenly drops off causing atelectasis, plus you
  have a change in the circulation pattern that now mimics the fetal physiology (mom =
  artificial lung). Resulting oxygen tension changes lead to an edema like pattern. A multiple
  choice trick could be to try and make you say it is worsening airspace disease, or reflects the
  severity o f the lung injury. D on't fall for that. It's an expected finding.

 Consequences of V-A. I mentioned on the prior page that they typically ligate the carotid
  when they place the Arterial catheter. No surprise that they will be at increased risk for
  neurologic ischemic complications as a result.

 Crucial Complication = Hemorrhage. The combination of anticoagulation (necessary in
  ECM O) and being sick as stink puts these kids at super high risk for head bleeds. This is
  why they will get screened for germinal matrix hemorrhage prior to being placed on ECMO
  and then routinely screened with head ultrasounds (expertly read by the second year resident
  on call).

Catheter Position Gamesmanship:

I think there are two likely ways a multiple choice question could be structured related to
ECMO catheter position. The first would be to show you a series of daily radiographs with the
latest one demonstrating migration of one or both catheters. Thats the easy way to do it.

The sneaky way would be to show you the
catheter with the lucent distal end and the dot
marker on the tip. This would be particularly
evil as there are tons of different catheter
brands and looks, but if I was going to try and
trick you, this would be the way that I would do
it.

In this case, the venous catheter looks falsely
high if judged by the lucent tip, but that round
metallic marker (near the black arrow) shows
the tip in the RA.

The arterial catheter "overlies the region of the
aortic arch," which is normal.

                                                                 189
          -Special Situations in Peds Ciiests-

Viral - In all ages this is way more common than bacterial infection. Peribronchial edema is the
buzzword for the CXR finding. "Dirty" or "Busy" Hilum. You also end up with debris and mucus in
the airway which causes two things (1) hyperinflation and (2) subsegmental atelectasis. Respiratory
Syncytial Virus (RSV) - This will cause the typical non-specific viral pattern as well. However,
there is the classic testable predilection to cause a segmental or lobar atelectasis -- particularly in the
right upper lobe.

Round Pneumonia - Kids get round pneumonia. They love to show
this, and try to trick you into thinking it's a mass. Younger than 8 you are
thinking round pneumonia, round pneumonia, round pneumonia - with S.
Pneumonia being the culprit. The PhD trivia is that these occur because you
don't have good collateral ventilation pathways. Round pneumonia is
usually solitary, and likes the posterior lower lobes. Take home message: No
CT to exclude cancer,just get afollow up x-ray.

Neonatal atypical peripheral atelectasis (NAPA) - It is best
to think about this as a cousin or uncle of Round Pneumonia (they are in the
same family). It is essentially the same thing except it is peripheral. The
classic look is a round, pleural based "mass" in the apex of the lung.
Similarly to the "round pneumonia" this is a transient finding and will
resolve as the primary process improves.

Lipoid Pneumonia - Classic history is a parent giving their newborn a teaspoonful of olive oil
daily to cultivate "a spirit o f bravado and manliness. "Although this seems like a pretty solid plan, and
I can't fault their intentions - it's more likely to result in chronic fat aspiration. Hot Sauce is probably a
better option. Most people will tell you that bronchoalveolar lavage is considered the diagnostic
method of choice. CXR is nonspecific - it is just airspace opacities. CT is much more likely to be the
modality used on the exam. The classic finding is low attenuation (-30 to -100 HU) within the
consolidated areas reflecting fat content.

Bronchial Foreign Body:

The key concept is that it causes air trapping.
The lung may look more lucent (from air
trapping) on the affected side. You put the
affected side down and it will remain lucent
(from air trapping). Another random piece of
trivia is that under fluoro the mediastinum will
shift AWAY from the affected side on
expiration.

Key Point: A normal inspiratory CXR is meaningless. Don't forget that the crayon / green bean is going
to be radiolucent. You need expiratory films to elicit air trapping. Normally, the bottom lung is gonna
turn white (move less air). If there is air trapping the bottom lung will stay black.

                                                                 190
Swyer Janies - This is the classic unilateral lucent lung. It typically occurs after a viral lung
infection in childhood resulting in post infectious obliterative bronchiolitis. The size of the affected
lobe is smaller than a normal lobe (it's not hyper-expanded).

Papillomatosis - Perinatal HPV can cause these soft tissue masses within the airway and lungs.

It's also seen in adults who smoke. "Multiple lung nodules which demonstrate cavitation " is the
classic scenario. Some testable trivia includes the 2% risk of squamous cell cancer, and that
manipulation can lead to dissemination. The appearance of cysts and nodules can look like LCH
(discussed more in the thoracic chapter), although the trachea is also involved.

Sickle Cell /Acute Chest - Kids with sickle cell can get "Acute chest." Acute chest actually

occurs more in kids than adults (usually between age 2-4). This is the leading cause of death in sickle
cell patients. Some people think the pathology is as such: you infarct a rib -> that hurts a lot, so you
don't breathe deep -> atelectasis and infection. Others think you get pulmonary microvascular
occlusion and infarction. Regardless, if you see opacities in the CXR of a kid with sickle cell, you
should think of this.

Gamesmanship (how do you know it is sickle cell?)                 CF Related Trickery
 Kid with Big Heart                                           Fatty Replaced Pancreas on CT
 Kid with bone infarcts (look at the humeral heads)
 Kid with H shaped vertebra (look on lateral)                 Abdominal Films with
 Cholecysectomy Clips (look at right upper abdomen)           Constipation

Cystic Fibrosis- So the sodium pump doesn't work and           Biliary Cirrhosis (from blockage
they end up with thick secretions and poor pulmonary           of intrahepatic bile ducts), and
clearance. The real damage is done by recurrent infections.    resulting portal HTN

Things to know:
 Bronchiectasis

  (begins cylindrical and progresses to varicoid)
 It has an apical predominance

  (lower lobes are less involved)
 Hyperinflation
 They get Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
 Mucus plugging (finger in glove sign)
 Men are infertile (vas deferens is missing)

                                                               THIS vs THAT:

Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia - The motile part of                 Cystic                Primary
the cilia doesn't work. They can't clear their lungs and get   Fibrosis                Ciliary
recurrent infections. These guys have lots o f bronchiectasis                       Dyskinesia
just like CF. BUT, this time it's lower lobe predominant
(CF was upper lobe).                                            Upper Lobe           Lower Lobe
                                                               Predominant -        Predominant -
Things to know:                                                Brochiectasis        Bronchiectasis
 Bronchiectasis (lower lobes)
 50% will have Kartageners (situs inversus).                  Infertile - Men are   Infertile - Men's
                                                                Missing the Vas     Sperm Don't Swim
   So, 50% will not
 Men are infertile (sperm tails don't work)                        Deferens               For Shit
 Women are sub-fertile (cilia needed to push eggs around)

191
