                                    S E C T IO N 6:

                         MEDIASTINAL MASSES

Anterior:                                                              That Asshole is Guilty!

Normal Thymus: This is the most common mediastinal                Things that make you think the
"mass." It's terribly embarrassing to call a normal thymus a      thymus is a cancer!
mass, but it can actually be tricky sometimes. It can be pretty
big in kids less than 5 (especially in infants). Triangular        Abnormal Sizefo r patients Age
shape o f the thymus is sometimes called the "sail sign." Not        (really big in a 15 year old)
to be confused with the other 20 sail signs in various parts o f
the body, or the spinnaker sail sign, which is when                Heterogenous appearance
pneumomediastinum lifts up the thymus.                             Calcification
                                                                   Compression o f airway or

                                                                     vascular structure

Thymic Rebound: In times o f acute stress (pneumonia, radiation, chemotherapy, bums), the
thymus will shrink. In the recovery phase it will rebound back to normal, and sometimes larger
than before. During this rebound it can be PET avid.

Lymphoma: This is the most common abnormal mediastinal mass in children (older

children and teenagers). Lymphoma vs Thymus can be tricky. Thymus is more in kids under 10,
Lymphoma is seen more in kids over 10. When you get around age 10, you need to look for
cervical lymph nodes to make you think lymphoma. If you see calcification, and the lesion has
NOT been treated you may be dealing with a teratoma. Calcification is uncommon in an untreated
lymphoma.

Complications: Compression o f SVC, Compression o f Pulmonary Veins, Pericardial Effusion,
Airway Compression.

ALL / Leukemia - can appear very similar to Lymphoma (soft tissue mass in the anterior
mediastinum). In this scenario, most people will tell you that Lymphoma can NOT be
differentiated from Leukemia on imaging
alone.

                                                    I say, Extra Gonadal Germ Cell Tumor,

Germ Cell Tumor (GCT): On                           You Say Klinefelter's Syndrome (47XXY)

imaging, this is a large anterior mediastinal  Klinefelter patients have the worst syndrome
mass arising from or at least next to the      ever. They have small penises, they get male
thymus. It comes in three main flavors, each   breast cancer, and as if things couldn't possibly
of which has a few pieces of trivia worth      get worse... they get germ cell tumors in their
knowing:

1- Teratoma - Mostly Cystic, with fat and      chest. In fact, they are at 300x the risk of
calcium                                        getting a GCT. Pineal gland Germ Cells have
                                               also been reported in Klinefelter patients, giving

2 - Seminoma - Bulky, solid and lobulated.     them vertical gaze palsy. In that case, they can't

"Straddles the midline"                        even look up to the sky and say "Why God* ?!

3 - NSGCT - Big and Ugly - Hemorrhage          Why Me!? Why Klinefelter's!?"
and Necrosis. Can get crazy and invade the     **God, Allah, Mother Earth, Celestial Deity NOS

lung.

                                               192
Middle

Lymphadenopathy - Middle mediastinal lymphadenopathy is most often from
granulomatous disease (TB or Fungal), or from lymphoma.

Mononucleosis          M ediastinai A denopatiiy Trivia:

                    Cause: EBV (-90%), CMV (-10%)
                    Classic Scenario: Adolescent with hilar adenopathy, splenomegaly,
                    and fatigue.
                    Trivia: Rash after Antibiotics (Amoxicillin)
                    Trivia: "No sports for 3 weeks" - to avoid splenic injury

Primary TB          Distribution of nodes in usually unilateral, right hilar, right paratracheal
                    Lower and Middle lobe consolidation is common

   Histoplasmosis   Midwest and Southeast United States
Coccidioidomycosis  Most have normal CXRs
                    Can have hilar adenopathy

                    Southwest United States
                    Usually looks like consolidation and nodules
                    Can have hilar adenopathy

Lymphoma            Often cited as the "most common" anterior mediastinal mass in a kid.
                    Hilar involvement (usually bilateral) is more common with Hodgkin

Sarcoid             Uncommon in children -- it usually presents in the early-mid 20s.
                    Case reports of early onset Sarcoid exist.

Duplication Cysts - These fall into three categories (a) bronchogenic, (b) enteric,
(c) neuroenteric. The neuroenterics are traditionally posterior mediastinal.

 Bronchogenic - w ater attenuation - close to the trachea or bronchus. Trivia:

   Tend to be middle mediastinal (70%), the rest are in the hilum
   Typically filled with mucus or fluid

 Enteric I Esopiiageai - w ater attenuation close to the esophagus (low er in the
  mediastinum). Trivia:

   Abutment o f the esophagus is the key finding.
   Can communicate with the lumen o f the esophagus - and have air/fluid levels.
   Usually on the right, involving the distal esophagus
   Can be middle or posterior mediastinal in location
   Second most common GI lumen duplication cyst (distal ileum #1)

                                                                 193
Posterior

Neuroblastoma - This is the most common posterior mediastinal mass in a child under 2. This
is discussed in complete detail in the GU PEDs section. I'll just mention that compared to abdominal
neuroblastoma, thoracic neuroblastoma has a better outcome. It may involve the ribs and vertebral
bodies (on X-rays look for rib splaying and erosions). Also, remember that Wilms usually mets (more
than neuroblastoma) to the lungs, so if it's in the lungs don't forget about Wilms. More on this later in
the chapter.

You can have other Neuroblastic tumors in this region as well. If Neuroblastoma is the most
undifferentiated and aggressive the spectrum looks something like this:

Most Mature                 Intermediate                            Undifferentiated

Ganglioneuroma        Ganglioneuroblastoma                         Neuroblastoma

t  When Compared with Neuroblastoma, Ganglioneuromas are:

    Less Aggressive

    More Circumscribed (less invasive)

    Less Likely to have Calcifications (although they still can)

    Found in Older Children (think 2nd decade) - vs.

   neuroblastoma (think 1st decade)

   These tumors can NOT be differentiated with imaging alone
   (but that doesn't mean someone can't write a multiple choice

Ewing Sarcom a - This is discussed in com plete detail in the M SK PEDs section.

Askin Tumor (Primitive Neuroectoderm al tumor of the chest wall):
This is now considered part of the Ewing Sarcoma spectrum, and is sometimes called an Ewing
sarcoma of the chest wall. They tend to displace adjacent structures rather than invade early on (when
they get big they can invade). They look heterogenous, and the solid parts will enhance.

Neuroenteric Cyst - By convention these are associated with vertebral anomalies (think
scoliosis, hemivertebrae, butterfly vertebrae, split cord, etc..) - think cyst protruding out of an unsealed
canal / defect. The cyst does NOT communicate with CSF, is well demarcated, and is water density.
Favor the lower cervical and thoracic regions.

Extram edullary Hem atopoiesis - This occurs in patients with myeloproliferative
disorders or bone marrow infiltration (including sickle cell). Usually, this manifests as a big liver and
big spleen. However, in a minority of cases you can get soft tissue density around the spine
(paraspinal masses - usually below T6), which are bilateral, smooth, and sharply delineated.

                      194
strategy - The Anterior Mediastinal Mass

Lymphoma - In a kid ju st assume it's Hodgkins (which m eans it's gonna involve the
thymus). Why assum e H odgkins ? Hodgkins is 4x more com m on than NHL. Hodgkins
involves the thymus 90% o f the time.

Q: How the hell do you tell a big ass normal thymus in a little baby vs a lymphoma?
A: My main move is to go age. Under 10 = Thymus, Over 10 = Lymphoma.

Thym ic Rebound - If the test writer is headed in this direction they M UST either (a)
bias you with a history saying stuff like "got off chemo" or "got off corticosteroids" or
(b) show you a series of axial CTs with the thing growing and maintaining normal
morphology. I think "a" is much more likely.

The Funk: In general just think morphology / density:

   Soft Tissue - Kinda Homogenous = Think Lymphoma or Hyperplasia
   Fat = Germ Ceil Tumor {Why God!? Why Klinefelters!?)
   Water = Congenital Stuff - Think Lymphangiomas

Strategy - The Posterior                              Strategy - The B.F.M.
      Mediastinal Mass                                 "Big Fucking M ass"

First Rule of Peds Multiple Choice Test          If you see a B.F.M. in the chest o f a kid,
Taking - TIMING! AGE!                            you basically have two choices:

Under 10 - Think malignant,                      (1) Askin Tumor (PNET / Ewings) -
Think neuroblastoma.                                  *AGE 10+, look for an eaten up rib.

2nd Decade - Think benign.                       (2) Pleuropulmonary Blastoma
                                                     *AGE is typically less than 2.
  If it's a round mass- Think about
  Ganglioneuromas & Neurofibromas

  If it's cystic (and there is scoliosis) think
  Neuroenteric Cyst

  If they show you coarse bone
  trabeculation - with an adjacent mass (or
  a history of anemia) - Think
  Extramedullary Hematopoiesis

                                                 195
