                                   S E C T IO N 7:
                                  L u m in a l GI

Esophageal Atresia I

TE fistula: This can occur        N-Type Fistula (85%)  Esophageal Atresia    H-Type Atresia
                                                          NO Fistula (10%)
in multiple subtypes, with the                                                       (1%)
classic ways of showing it                                                  Delayed Diagnosis
being a frontal CXR with an
NG tube stopped in the upper
neck, or a fluoro study (shown
lateral) with a blind ending sac
or communication with the
tracheal tree.

There are 5 main subtypes, only 3 (shown above) are worth knowing (being familiar with) for the
purpose of the exam.

Things to Know About Esophageal Atresia / TE Fistula:
·Diagnosis is made with a Fluoro swallow exam
·Most Important Thing To Know are the VACTERL associations (more on this later)
· The most common subtype is the N-Type (blind ended esophagus, with distal esophagus hooked up
to trachea
· Excessive Air in the Stomach = H type (can also be with N type)
· No Air in the Stomach = Esophageal Atresia
· The presence of a right arch (4%) must be described prior to surgery (changes the approach).

Gamesmanship: Fake out for TE fistula is simple aspiration. Look for the presence or absence of
laryngeal penetration to tell them apart (if shown a dynamic Fluoro swallow exam).

VACTERL: This is extremely high yield. VACTERL is a way of remembering that certain
associations are seen more commonly when together (when you see one, look for the others).

They occur with different frequency:  VACTERL association is diagnosed when 3
                                      or more of the defined anomalies affect a
V - Vertebral Anomalies (37%)         patient.
A - Anal (imperforate anus) (63%)
C - Cardiac (77%)                     Therefore, keep investigating when 1-2 of
TE - Tracheoesophageal Fistula        these anomalies are found.

       or Esophageal Atresia (40% )   The heart and kidneys are the most
R -R e n a l (72%)                    commonly affected organs in this
L - Limb (radial ray) - 58%

Trivia: If both limbs are involved, then both kidneys tend to be involved. If one limb is involved, then
one kidney tends to be involved.

Stricture: Around 30% of kids with a repaired esophageal atresia will end up with a focal
anastomotic stricture. Strictures can also be seen with caustic ingestion (dishwashing soap) - but those
tend to be long segment. Reflux (if chronic and severe) is another possible cause.

                                                                 196
Esophageal Foreign Bodies: Kids love to stick things in their mouths (noses and ears).
This can cause a lot o f problems including direct compression o f the airway, perforation, or even
fistula to the trachea. Stuff stuck in the esophagus needs to be removed.

TH IS vs THAT: Trachea vs Esophagus:

The esophagus is a dirty sock, it flexes to accommodate that big piece o f steak you didn't even
bother to chew. The trachea is rigid, like that math teacher I had in high school (who hated
m usic... and colors), but unlike the math teacher it has a flexible membrane in the back.

The point of me                    Frontal View   Esophagus
mentioning this is to                                Trachea
help you problem solve            Coronal Coin =
a "where is the coin "
type question. The                Frontal View
esophagus will
accommodate the coin       Turned Coin = Trachea
so it can be turned in
any direction. The
trachea is rigid and will
force the coin to rotate
into the posterior
membrane -- so it will
be skinny in the AP
direction.

Additional trivia relates to swallow ed batteries, magnets, and pennies - chart on the follow ing
page.

                                      197
                       Ingested Metallic Foreign Bodies

Magnets                One nnagnet is ok. Two or more magnets is a          Surgical Consult
AA or AAA Batteries    problem. Tlie reason is that tiiey can attract       NOT an MRI (dumbass)
Disc Batteries         each other across intestinal walls leading to
                       obstruction, necrosis, perforation, and a law suit.

                       Less of a problem relative to other types of         Serial plain film exams.
                       batteries, but can cause serious problems if you     Remove if they stay in
                       need them for the DVR control because Game of        the stomach for more
                       Thrones season 7 is on (spoiler; it sucked).         than 2 days.

                       They look like coins, except they                    Stuck in the esophagus
                       have two rings. The literature is                    = big problem, gotta
                       not clear, but it appears that                       get them out within 2
                       modern batteries rarely leak                         hours.
                       (leaking is bad - caustic
                       chemicals, heavy metals etc..).                      Stuck in the stomach =
                                                                            problem, gotta get
                                                                            them out within 4 days.

Coins                  Copper Pennies are relatively        oRemove if:
(Including Pennies     safe.                                                         Retention in the
minted prior to 1982)                                                                esophagus for more
                       M ake sure it is not a disc battery                           than 24 hours or
Pennies                (coins have one order ring, disc                              Stomach for more than
-minted after 1982     battery has two).                                             28 days.

Lead                   Those minted after 1982 contain mostly Zinc
Sharp Object NOS
                       which when combined with stomach acid can

                       cause gastric ulcerations, and if absorbed in

                       great enough quantity can cause zinc toxicosis

                       (which is mainly pancreatic dysfunction /

                       pancreatitis). The ulcers are the more likely thing

                       to happen, so just remember that.                    Remove from Stomach

                       So how the hell can you tell the date of a penny
                       that is swallowed? Either (a) the question stem
                       will have to say something like - "2 year old child
                       playing with father's collection of 1984 pennies",
                       or the more likely (b) showing you the penny with
                       characteristic radiolucent holes - from erosion.

                       Usually Lead Paint Dust -                            Remove immediately
                       or any object with lead paint.                       from stomach. Distal
                                                                            passage must be
                       Bad because the gastric acid leads to                confirmed.
                       immediate absorption.

                       Esophagus = Remove Immediately
                       Stomach = Remove Immediately
                       Post Pylorus = Follow vs Surgery -- if it does perforate the small bowel it
                       will be at the 1C valve.

                       198
Vascular Impressions

This is a very high yield topic for the purpose o f multiple choice exams. Like my Grandma
always said, you never get a second chance to make a first vascular impression.

       /                                   1 1                     1]\ 1

P ulm on ary Sling Double Aortic Arch       ..........             1 1 1
                                                                   1 11
                                                    *......... *
                                                                   1 )\ 1
                                           1--1
                                                                      ^ 1
                                       Innominate Artery           1
                                       Compression
                                                                  m 1 1 Right Arch with Aberrant

                                                                  Left, or Left Arch with
                                                                  Aberrant Right

Pulmonary Sling:
· The only variant that goes between the esophagus and the trachea.
· Classic question is that this is associated with tracheal stenosis (which isactually prim ary

   and not secondary to compression).
· High association with other cardiopulmonary and systemic anomalies: hypoplastic right lung,

   horseshoe lung, TE-fistula, imperforate anus, and complete tracheal rings.
· Treatment is controversial but typically involves surgical repositioning o f theartery

Double Aortic Arch:
· Most Common SYMPTOMATIC vascular ring anomaly

Left Arch with Aberrant
Right Subclavian Artery
· Most Common Aortic Arch Anomaly

  -- not necessarily symptomatic.
· "Dysphagia Lusoria" - fancy Latin speak (therefore

  high yield) for trouble swallowing in the setting o f this
  variant anatomy
· "Diverticulum of Kommerell" pouch like aneurysmal
  dilatation o f the proximal portion of an aberrant right
  subclavian artery

                                       199
-Bowel Obstruction ( In the neonate)-

Bowel obstruction in the neonate can be thought of as either  High             Low
high or low. Here are causes you should keep in your mind
when you think the question stem is leading towards           Midgut Volvulus / Hirschsprung
obstruction.
                                                              Malrotation      Disease
Why might you think the question is leading you toward
obstruction? Anytime you are dealing with a neonate, and      Duodenal Atresia Meconium Plug
the history mentions "vomiting," "belly pain," or "liasn't                            Syndrome
passed a stool yet."
                                                              Duodenal Web Ileal Atresia
The following sections will walk through an algorithm,
starting with plain films for diagnosis (and sometimes        Annular Pancreas Meconium Ileus
management).
                                                              Jejunal Atresia  Anal Atresia /
                                                                               Colonic Atresia

Su b S e c tio n 1: "B u b b le s "

People who do peds radiology are obsessed with "bubbles" on baby grams. The idea is to develop a
pattern-based approach to bowel obstruction in the newborn.

My preferred "bubble method" favors 8 possible patterns. This is a method originally developed by
the brilliant (and devilishly handsome) Charles Maxfield at Duke.

                  Single Bubble     Double Bubble                                  m.
                                                                    Triple Bubble

 Single Bubble    Double Bubble     Diffusely Dilated         Diffusely Mildly
-plus distal gas  -plus distal gas                                   Dilated

                                    200
Sub Section 1: "Bubbles" - Continued

Single Bubble

= Gastric (antral or pyloric) atresia.                    Duodenal Atresia Trivia:

Double Bubble = Duodenal Atresia                          · 30% have Downs
(highly specific). Some authors will say                  · 40% have polyhydramnios and
that UGI is not necessary because of how                  are premature
highly specific this is. The degree of                    · The"single atresia" - cannulation
distention will be more pronounced than                   error
with midgut volvulus (which is a more                     · On multiple choice test the
acute process). Thought to be secondary                   "double bubble" can be shown on
to failure to canalize during development                 3rd trimester OB ultrasound, plain
(often an isolated atresia)                               film, or on MRI.

a Triple Bubble = Jejunal Atresia. When you call jejunal atresia,
               you often prompt search for additional atresias (colonic). Just remember
               that jejunal atresia is secondary to a vascular insult during development.

               · "M ultiple Atresia " - vascular error.

Single Bubble with Distal Gas = Can                             "Bilious    ^     Upper
mean nothing (lotta air swallowing). If the clinical           Vomiting"  fiH v     GI
history is bilious vom iting , this is om inous and can
be midgut volvulus (surgical emergency). Next test        mm
would be emergent Upper GI.
                                                          Contrast
Double Bubble with Distal Gas = Seeing
distal gas excludes duodenal atresia. The DDx is a        Enema                            Upper
duodenal web, duodenal stenosis, or midgut
volvulus. Next step would be upper GI.                                                         GI

Multiple Diffusely Dilated Loops =                                           if
Suggestive of a low obstruction (ileum or colon).                         normal
N ext step is contrast enema. I f the contrast enem a is
normal you need to follow with upper GI (to                                      Contrast
exclude an atypical look for midgut volvulus).                                    Enema

Mildly Dilated, Scattered Loops =                                                 Upper
`^Sick Belly" - Can be seen w ith proxim al or                                       GI
distal obstruction. Will need Upper GI and contrast
enema.

                                        201
Sub Section 2: Upper Gl Patterns

Upper GI on kids is fair game in multiple choice tests, and real life. Often the answ er o f this
test can equal a trip to the OR for kids, so it's no trivial endeavor.

N orm al  M alro ta tio n  Corkscrew Duodenum                            Complete Duodenum
                                                                                Obstruction

Malrotation - Normally, the developmental rotation of the gut

places the ligament of Trietz to the left of the spine (at the level of
the duodenal bulb). If mother nature fucks up and this doesn't
happen, you end up with the duodenum to the right of the midline
(spine). These patients are at increased risk for midgut volvulus
and internal hernias. If you see the appearance of malrotation and
the clinical history is bilious vomiting, then you must suspect
midgut volvulus.

Trivia regarding Malrotation                                Classic Malrotation:
· Associated with Heterotaxy Syndromes. Associated with     · Small bowel follow through shows all

  Omphaloceles.                                               the bowel on one side
· Classically shown as the SMA to the right of the SMV      · The duodenum does not cross the midline

  (on US or CT).
· False Positive on UGI - Distal Bowel Obstruction

  displacing the duodenum (because of ligamentous laxity).

          G a m e s m a n s h i p : in an infant-

I say "Non-Bilious Vomiting" -- You Say Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis

                  Next Step ?  lj|||||pr Ultrasound

I say "Bilious Vomiting" -- You Say Mid Gut Volvulus {till proven otherwise)

          Next Step?            Upper GI

                           202
C orkscrew Duodenum - This is diagnostic of                    Ladd's Band
                                                              Malrotati
midgut volvulus (surgical emergency).         The appearance

is an Aunt Minnie.

Ladd's Bands - In older children (or even adults)

obstruction in the setting o f malrotation will present as

intermittent episodes o f spontaneous duodenal

obstruction. The cause is not midgut volvulus (a

surgical emergency) but rather kinking from L add's

Bands.

So what the hell is a "L a d d 's B a n d " ? We are talking
about a fibrous stalk o f peritoneal tissues that fixes the
cecum to the abdominal wall, and can obstruct the
duodenum.

Complete Duodenal Obstruction - Strongly associated with midgut volvulus. If

Ladd's Procedure -                            Ladds Procedure:
                                              · Divide the Adhesive Ladds Bands
Procedure to prevent midgut                   · Widen the Mesentery to a safe distance
volvulus. Traditionally, the                  · Take out the appendix (bill extra for that)
Ladd's Bands are divided, and
the appendix is taken out. The
small bowel ends up on the
right, and the large bowel ends
up on the left. They are fixed
in place by adhesions (just by
opening the abdomen).

It is still possible to develop
volvulus post L add's (but it's
rare - 2-5%).

you were thinking duodenal atresia, look                 Preduodenal Portal Vein
for distal air (any will do) to exclude that
thought. Plus, as discussed above, you          An anatomic variant where the portal vein sits
want to see a dilated duodenum (double          anterior the 2nd part of the duodenum.
bubble) for duodenal atresia.                   Associated with duodenal obstruction
Partial Duodenal Obstruction:                   50"/o of the time. It isn't the cause, it just
                                                happens to be present with other things (Ladds
                                                Bands, Annular Pancreas, etc..).

                                                203
If the kid is vom iting this m ight be from extrinsic
narrowing (Ladd band, annular pancreas), or intrinsic
(duodenal web, duodenal stenosis). You can't tell.

Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis:

Thickening of the gastric pyloric musculature, which results
in progressive obstruction. Step 1 buzzword is "non-bilious
vomiting." Here is the most likely multiple choice trick; this
does NOT occur at birth or after 3 months.

Specific age range of 2-12 weeks (peak at 3-6 weeks).

Criteria is 4mm and 14mm (4mm single wall, 14mm length).

The primary differential is pylorospasm (which will relax
during exam). The most common pitfall during the exam is
gastric over distention, which can lead to displacement of the
antrum and pylorus - leading to false negative.

False positive can result from off axis measurement.

The phenomenon of "paradoxical aciduria "has been
described, and is a common buzzword.

Classic History: Infant with projectile vomiting                 Caterpillar Sign:
Caterpillar Sign: Multiple areas of peristalsis in the stomach.  Stomach with Areas of Peristalsis
Next Step = Ultrasound
Ultrasound Criteria: 4 mm (wall) and 14 mm (length)
Treatment: Tell the kid to stop being a pussy -- if that
doesn't work - surgery (pyloromyotomy)

Gastric Volvulus-  This comes in two flavors; organoaxial and mesenteroaxial.

·Organoaxial - The greater curvature flips over the lesser curvature (rotation along the long axis).
This is seen in old ladies with paraesophageal hernias { `O 'fo r `O lder').

·Mesenteroaxial -  over the mesentery (rotation along short axis). The antrum flips near

the GEjunction. Can cause ischemia and needs to be fixed. Additionally this type causes

obstruction. This type is more common in kids.

Clinically, Borchardt Triad:
1. Inability to pass NGT
2. Severe epigastric pain
3. Retching without vomiting

Duodenal Web: This is best thought o f as "almost duodenal atresia. " The reason I say

that is, just like duodenal atresia, this occurs from a failure to canalize, but instead o f a total

                   204
failure o f canalization (like duodenal                 ^           Stomach
atresia) this bowel is only partially
canalized, leaving behind a potentially                       W eb       \
obstructive web.
                                                A Greater                 Greater
Trivia to know:                                                          Curvature
- Because the web is distal to                       Curvature

   ampulla o f Vater - you get bile-
   stained emesis
 Associated with malrotation and
   Downs syndrome
 The "wind sock" deform ity is seen
   more in older kids - where the web­
   like diaphragm has gotten stretched.

Annular Pancreas: Essentially
an embryologic screw up (failure of
ventral bud to rotate with the
duodenum), that results in encasement
o f the duodenum.

In Kids = Think Duodenal Obstruction

In Adults = Think Pancreatitis

How it could be shown:

· On CT: Look for pancreatic tissue
   (same enhancement as the nearby
   normal pancreas) encircling the
   descending duodenum.

· On Fluoro: Look for an extrinsic         j Pancreas Surrounding the Duodenum
   narrowing o f the duodenum. Obviously
   this is non-specific (typical barium -
   voodoo), use the location and clinical
   history to bias yourself.

                                           205
Sub Section 3: ``Low Obstruction" in a Neonate
Just like the upper GI and "bubble" plain film in sections 1 & 2, the lower obstruction can
be approached with a pattern-based method. You basically have 4 choices; Normal,
Short Microcolon, Long Microcolon, and a Caliber Change from micro to normal.

Normal:
· This is what normal looks like:

Short Microcoion -
· Think about Colonic Atresia

Long Microcoion - This can be seen with meconium ileus or distal ileal atresia.
     ·Meconium iieus - ONLY in patients with CF.
     The pathology is the result o f thick sticky meconium
     causing obstruction o f the distal ileum. Contrast will
     reach ileal loops, and demonstrate multiple filling
     defects (meconium). This can be treated with an enema
     -enema is both diagnostic a n d therapeutic.
     Distal ileal Atresia - This is the resuh o f
     intrauterine vascular insult. Contrast will NOT reach
     ileal loops. This needs surgery.

                                                                 206
Caliber Change - This can be seen with small left colon syndrome or Hirschsprungs

     ·Small Left Colon (Meconium Plug)
    Syndrome - This is a transient functional colonic
    obstruction, that is self limited and relieved by
    contrast enema.

          *Most Testable Fact:
         It is NOT associated with CF.

          *2nd M ost Testable Fact:
         It is seen in infants o f diabetic m others or
         if mom received magnesium sulfate for eclampsia

    ·Hirschsprung Disease - Failure o f the V
    ganglion cells to migrate and innervate the distal
    colon. Affected portions o f the colon are small
    in caliber, whereas the normally innervated
    colon appears dilated.

    Trivia:
    ·It's 4:1 more com mon in boys.
    ·10% association with Downs.
    ·Diagnosis is made by rectal biopsy.

    How it can be Shown:
    -Enema - Rectum smaller than the Sigmoid

                  "R ecto-sigm oid ratio < 1"
    -Enema - Rectum with "sawtooth pattern"

                  Represents bowel spasm

   Presentation:
          (1) Newborn who fails to have BM > 48
          hours (or classically > 72 hours)
          (2) "Forceful passage o f meconium after
          rectal exam"
           (3) One month old who shows up "sick as
           stink" with NEC bowel

    ·Total Colonic Aganglionosis - This is a super rare variant o f H irschsprungs, and
    can mimic microcolon. The piece o f commonly asked trivia is that it can also involve the
    terminal ileum.

                                                                207
Meconium Peritonitis:
This is a potential complication o f bowel atresia
or meconium ileus. It has a very characteristic
look. It's a calcified mass in the mid
abdomen , traditionally shown on plain film. It
is the result o f a sterile peritoneal reaction to an
in-utero bowel perforation.
Usually, the perforation seals off prior to birth
and there is no leak.

imperforate or Ectopic Anus:
This can range from simple membranous anal atresia to an arrest o f the colon as it descends
through the puborectalis sling. The thing to know is fistula to genitourinary tract. Imperforate
anus is also associated with a tethered cord (probably need a screening ultrasound).
· / say "Baby with no asshole " , yo u say "VACTERL "
· 1 say "Baby with no a ssh o le" , yo u say "Screening US fo r tethered c o rd "

Opinions are like Assholes
Everyone has One
Unless you have an Imperforate Anus
Then you probably have VACTERL and a Tethered Cord
and probably don't have well formulated opinions... cuz you are a baby
A baby with no asshole

                                                                208
       -Obstruction in an Oider Ciiiid-

        "M y belly hurts " questions in an older child.

This scenario should make you think o f 6 main things                       - Ciassic DDx "AIIV1" -
- the classic AA-II-MM or "AIM" differential - with                      Appendicitis, Adhesions
appropriate credit given to the brilliant and under                      inguinal Hernia, intussusception
                                                                         iViidgut Volvulus, iVieckels
I appreciated Aldrich Killian (A.I.M.s founder).

Appendicitis - In children older than 4 this is the most common cause for bowel obstruction. If they
show this in the PEDs section it's most likely to be on ultrasound. In that case you can expect a blind-
ending tube, non-compressible, and bigger than 6 mm.

Inguinai Hernia: This is covered in more depth in the GI chapter. Big points are that indirect liernias
are more common in kids, they are lateral to the inferior epigastric, and incarceration is the most common
complication. Umbilical hernias are common in kids, but rarely incarcerate.

Trivia to know: This is the most common cause of obstruction in boy 1 month - 1 year.

Intussusception - The age range is 3 months - 3 years, before or after that you should think of lead
points (90% between 3 months and 3 years don't have lead points). The normal mechanism is forward
peristalsis resulting in invagination of proximal bowel (the intussusceptum) into lumen of the distal bowel
(the intussuscipiens). They have to be bigger than 2.5 cm to matter (in most cases- these are enterocolic),
those that are less than 2.0 cm are usually small bowel-small bowel and may reduce spontaneously within
minutes. Just like an appendix, in the peds section, I would anticipate this shown on ultrasound as either
the target sign or pseudo-kidney.

There are 3 main ways to ask questions about this: (1) what is it ?-
these should be straight forward as targets or pseudo kidneys, (2) lead
points - stuff like HSP (vasculitis), Meckle diverticulum, enteric
duplication cysts, and (3) reduction trivia.

Reducing Intussusception Trivia:

· Contraindications: Free Air (check plain film). Peritonitis (based on

exam)

· Recurrence: Usually within 72 hours

· Success Rates - 80-90% with air (Henoch-Schonlein purpura has a

reduced success rate)                                                    Not Every Target is an Ileocolic.
· Risk of Perforation - 0.5%                                             You want this this to be > 2.5 cm
· Air causes less peritonitis (spillage of fecal material) than barium

· Pressure should NOT exceed 120 mmHg

· Needle decompression would be the next step if they perforate and get tension pneumoperitoneum

IVIeckeis Diverticuium: This is a congenital diverticulum of the distal ileum. A piece of total trivia is
that it is a persistent piece of the omphalomesenteric duct. Step 1 style, "rule of 2s" occurs in 2% of the
population, has 2 types of heterotopic mucosa (gastric and pancreatic), located 2 feet from the IC valve, it's
usually 2 inches long (and 2 cm in diameter), and usually has symptoms before the child is 2. If it has
gastric mucosa (the ones that bleed typically do) it will take up Tc-Pertechnetate just like the stomach
(hence the Meckel's scan).

High Yield Trivia (Regarding Complications)
· Can get diverticulitis in the Meckels (mimic appendicitis)
· GI Bleed from Gastric Mucosa (causes 30% of symptomatic cases)
· Can be a lead point for intussusception (seen with inverted diverticulum)
· Can Cause Obstruction

                                       209
-Luminal Gl - Special Topics-

Gastroschisis - Extra-abominal evisceration of neonatal bowel (sometimes stomach and liver)
through a paraumbilical wall defect.

Trivia to know:
    ·It does NOT have a surrounding membrane (omphalocele does)
    ·It's always on the RIGHT side.
     ·Associated anomalies are rare (unlike omphalocele).
     ·Maternal Serum AFP will be elevated (higher than that of omphalocele)
     ·Outcome is usually good
     ·For some reason they get bad reflux after repair.
     ·Associated with intestinal atresias.

Omphalocele - Congenital midline defect, with herniation of gut at the base of the umbilical cord

Trivia to know:                                                  Pentalogy of Cantrell
· DOES have a surrounding membrane (gastroschisis does not)
· Associated anomalies are common (unhke gastroschisis)         Omphalocoele
· Trisomy 18 is the most common associated                      Ectopia Cordis
                                                                (abnormal location of heart)
  chromosomal anomaly                                           Diaphragmatic Defect
· Other associations: Cardiac (50%), Other GI, CNS, GU,         Pericardial Defect
                                                                or Stemal Cleft
  Turners, Klinefelters, Beckwith-Wiedemann,                    Cardiovascular malformations
  Pentalogy of Cantrell
· Outcomes are not that good, because of associated syndromes.
· Umbilical Cord Cvsts (Allantoic Cvsts) are associated.

This vs That -- Gastroschisis vs Omphalocele

Gastroschisis                                                   Omphalocele

Herniated bowel loop through the                     Hemiated bowel loop through the
          ventral body wall                                    ventral body wall

NOT surrounded by a membrane                         Surrounded by a membrane (peritoneum)

Umbilicus is Normal - positioned to the left of the  Umbilicus contains hemiated bow el, and therefore is
             defect (defect is on the right)                                  NOT normal

Defect is on the right                                          Defect is midline

Associated anomalies are rare                        High Association with Cardiac (50%) defects and
                                                                  Chromosomal Abnormalities

Associated with intestinal atresias                  Multiple Syndromic Associations including Turners,
                                                          iGinefelters, Beckwith-Wiedemaim, and the
                                                                 Legendary Pentalogy o f Cantrell

Cause: Probably environment - which explains an      Cause: Probably Genetic - which explains the
            association with bowel atresia              associations with the various syndromes

Duodenal Hematoma - Classic injury from bicycle handlebars (or child abuse). You can also
see this as a complication from endoscopy. D3 is the most common location. Look for an ovoid mass
in the lumen/bowel wall or paraduodenal tissues. You could be shown retroperitoneal gas as a way to
suggest perforation.

                                                                210
Enteric Duplication Cysts - These are developmental anomalies (failure to canalize). They
don't have to communicate with the GI lumen but can. They are most commonly in the ileal region
(40%). They have been known to cause in utero bowel obstruction / perforation.

Strategy: A common way to show this is a cyst in the abdomen (on ultrasound). If you have a random
cyst in the abdomen you need to ask yourself - "does this have gut signature? "

· Cyst with Gut Signature = Enteric Duplication Cyst
· Cyst without Gut Signature = Omental Cyst
· WTF is "Gut Signature ?" - It's alternating bands of hyper and hypo echoic signal - supposedly

  representing different layers of bowel.

Trivia to know: 30% of the time they are associated with vertebral anomalies.

Distal Intestinal Obstruction Syndrome - This is a cause of bowel obstruction in an older
kid (20 year old) with cystic fibrosis. This is sometimes called the "meconium ileus equivalent, "
because you end up with a distal obstruction (as the name implies) secondary to dried up thick stool. It
more commonly involves the ileum / right colon. Kids who get this, are the ones who aren't compliant
with their pancreatic enzymes.

Mesenteric Adenitis - Self-limiting, usually viral inflammatory condition of mesenteric lymph
nodes. It is a classic clinical mimic of appendicitis. The finding is a cluster of large right lower
quadrant Ivmph nodes.

Necrotising Enterocolitis (NEC)

This is bad news. The general thinking is that you have an immature bowel mucosa (from being
premature or having a heart problem), and you get translocated bugs through this immature bowel. It's
best thought of as a combination of ischemic and infective pathology.

Who gets it?
· Premature Kids (90% within the first 10 days of life)
· Low Birth Weight Kids ( < 1500 grams)
· Cardiac Patients (sometimes occult) - they can be full term
· Kids who had perinatal asphyxia
· Hirschsprung Kids that go home and come back - they present around month 1.

What does it look like?
· Pneumatosis - most definitive finding; Look for Portal Venous Gas Next
· Focal Dilated Bowel (especially in the right lower quadrant) - the terminal ileum / right colon is the

  region most affected by NEC
· Featureless small bow el, with separation (suggesting edema).
· Unchanging bowel gas pattern - this would be a dirty trick - showing several plain films from

  progressing days, with the bowel gas pattern remaining the same.

Pneumatosis vs Poop - The age old question.
· First question - has the kid been feed? No food = No poop.
· Second question - is it staying still? Poop will move, Pneumatosiswillstay still.

Useless Trivia:
· Use of maternal breast milk is the only parameter associated with decreased incidence o f NEC.

                                                                 211
