                                       S E C T IO N 9:

                              CONGENITAL GU

Renal Agenesis - This comes in one of two flavors; (1) Both Kidneys Absent - this one is gonna
be Potter sequence related, (2) One Kidney Absent - this one is gonna have reproductive associations.

Most likely way to test this: Show unilateral agenesis on prenatal US - as an absent renal artery (in
view of the aorta) or oligohydramnios - with followup questions on associations. Or make it super
obvious with a CT / MRI and ask association questions.

Unilateral Absence Association
 70% of women with unilateral renal agenesis have associated genital anomalies (usually

   unicornuate uterus, or a rudimentary horn).
 20% of men are missing the epididymis, and vas deferens on the same side they are missing the

   kidney. PLUS they have a seminal vesicle cyst on that side.

Potter Sequence: Insult (maybe ACE inhibitors) = kidneys don't form, if kidneys don't form you can't
make piss, if you can't make piss you can't develop lungs (pulmonary hypoplasia).

Lying Down Adrenal or "Pancake Adrenal" Sign - describes the elongated appearance of the adrenal
not normally molded by the adjacent kidney. It can be used to differentiate surgical absent vs
congenitally absent.

Horseshoe Kidney - This is the most common fusion anomaly. The kidney gets hung up on the
IMA. Questions are most likely to revolve around the comphcations / risks:

 Complications from Position - Easy to get smashed against vertebral body - kid shouldn't play
   football or wrestle.

 Complications from Drainage Problems: Stones, Infection, and Increased risk of Cancer (from
   chronic inflammation) - big ones are Wilms, TCC, and the Zebra Renal Carcinoid.

 Association Syndrome Trivia - Turner's Syndrome is the classic testable association.

Crossed Fused Renal Ectopia - One kidney
comes across the midline and fuses with the other.
Each kidney has its own orthotopic ureteral orifice to
drain through. It's critically important to the patient to
know that "the Ectopic Kidney is Inferior. " The left
kidney more commonly crosses over to the right
fusing to the normal right kidney lower pole.
Complications include stones, infection, and
hydronephrosis (50%).
The classic way to show this is two axial CTs. The
first at the level of the kidneys hinting that one kidney
may be absent. The second through the bladder (on a
delayed phase) showing two opacified ureters.

Trivia: More common in Males
Trivia: Associated with VACTERL

                                                                220
Congenital UPJ Obstruction

This is the most common congenital anomaly of the GU tract in neonates. About 20% of the time,
these are bilateral. Most (80%) of these are thought to be caused by intrinsic defects in the circular
muscle bundle of the renal pelvis. Treatment is a pyeloplasty. A Radiologist can actually add value by
looking for vessels crossing the UPJ prior to pyeloplasty, as this changes the management.

Q: 1970 called and they want to know how to tell the difference between a prominent extrarenalpelvis
vs a congenital UPJ obstruction.
A: "Whitaker Test", which is a urodynamics study combined with an antegradepyelogram.

Classic History: Teenager with flank pain after drinking "lots of fluids."
Classic Trivia: These do NOT have dilated ureters (NO HYDROURETER).

Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney                             ARPKD; Big Bright, with Lost
Disease (ARPKD) - These guys get HTN and renal                   Corticomedullary Differentiation.
failure. The liver involvement is different than the adult
form (ADPKD). Instead of cysts they have abnormal
bile ducts and fibrosis. Thus congenital hepatic fibrosis
is ALWAYS present in ARPKD. The ratio of liver and
kidney disease is inverse. The worse the liver is the
better the kidneys do. The better the liver is the worse
the kidneys are. Death is often from portal hypertension.

On ultrasound the kidneys are smoothly enlarged and
diffusely echogenic, with a loss of corticomedullary
differentiation. In utero you sometimes will not see
urine in the bladder. Cysts tend to be tubular and spare
the cortex.

Neonatal Renal Vein Thrombosis - This is an associated condition of maternal diabetes,
sepsis, and dehydration. It is typically unilateral (usually left). The theory is that it starts peripherally
and progresses toward the hilum. When acute, will cause renal enlargement. When chronic, will
result in renal atrophy.

Neonatal Renal Artery Thrombosis - This occurs secondary to umbilical artery
catheters. Unlike renal vein thrombosis it does NOT present with renal enlargement but instead severe
hvpertension.

Prune Belly (Eagle Barrett Syndrome)
This is a malformation triad which occurs in males. Classically
shown on a babygram with a kid shaped like a pear (big wide
belly).

Triad:
 Deficiency of abdominal musculature
 Hydroureteronephrosis
 Cryptorchidism

     (bladder distention interferes with descent o f testes)

221
                        -Congenital Ureter and Urethra-

Congenital (primary) iVIEGAureter-This is a "w astebasket" term for an enlarged
ureter which is intrinsic to the ureter (NOT the resuh o f a distal obstruction). Causes include
(1) distal adynamic segment (analogous to achalasia, or colonic Hirschsprungs), (2) reflux at
the UVJ, (3) it just wants to be big (totally idiopathic). The distal adynamic type "obstructing
primary megaureter," can have some hydro, but generally speaking an absence o f dilation o f
the collecting system helps distinguish this from an actual obstruction.

Retrocaval Ureter (circumcaval)- This is actually a
problem with the development of the IVC, which grows in a
manner that pins the ureter. M ost o f the time it's asymptomatic,
but can cause partial obstruction and recurrent UTI. IVP will
show a "reverse J" or "fishhook" appearance of the ureter.

                                                                    Retrocaval Ureter

Duplicated System - The main thing to know                     Upper Pole
about duplicated systems is the so-called "W eigert-           (obstructed /
M eyer R ule" where the upper pole inserts inferior and        dilated) Inserts
medially. The upper pole is prone to ureterocele               Inferior and
formation and obstruction. The lower pole is prone to          Medial
reflux. Kidneys with duplicated systems tend to be
larger than normal kidneys. In girls, a duplicated                               Lower Pole
system can lead to incontinence (ureter may insert                               inserts Superior
below the sphincter - sometimes into the vagina).                                and Lateral

 Upper Pole Obstructs
 Lower Pole Refluxes

Ureterocele - A cystic dilation o f the intravesicular              Cobra Head
ureter, secondary to obstruction at the ureteral orifice. IVP
(or US) will show the "cobra h e a d " sign, with contrast
surrounded by a lucent rim, protruding from the contrast
filled bladder. This is associated with a duplicated system
(specifically the upper pole).

Ectopic Ureter - The ureter inserts distal to the external sphincter in the vestibule. More
common in females and associated with incontinence (not associated with incontinence in
men). Ureteroceles are best demonstrated during the early filling phase o f the VCUG.

                        222
Posterior Urethral Valves:

This is a fold in the posterior urethra that leads to
outflow obstruction and eventual renal failure (if it's
not fixed). It is the m ost com mon cause o f urethral
obstruction in male infants.

Trivia: The fold is a Wolfian Duct tissue rem nant

Now, this can be shown a variety o f ways;

Classic VCUG: The key finding on VCUG is an                                       PUV on VCUG
abrupt caliber change between the dilated posterior
urethra and normal caliber anterior urethra.

Fetal MRl: The MRI would have to show hydro in
the kidney and a "key-hole" bladder appearance.

Pre-Natal Ultrasound Classic Triad:
 Hydronephrosis
 Bladder Dilation
 Oligiohydramnios

t "Peri-renal fluid collection" is a buzzword, and it's

the result o f fom iceal rupture. O bviously that is
non-specific and can be seen with any obstructive pathology.

Strategy for ^^Next Step " types o f Questions :                                   VCUG to evaluate
                                                                                   anatomy. This is the gold
                                                                      Persistent   standard.

Hydronephrosis on             Repeat                                               Adjunctive M AG 3 to
Routine Prenatal              Ultrasound                                           evaluate function and
Screening                     Once Born                                            drainage (obstructive vs
                                                                                   not obstructive)
                                 \
                                                                                  [
                                        Goes Away
                                         * most cases                              M R Urography offers
                                                                                   function and structure - but
                                                                                   requires sedation in little
                                                                                   kids

Non-Obstructive Causes of     Obstructive Causes of
Hydro in Baby Boys            Hydro in Baby Boys
-Vesicoureteral Reflux (VUR)  -PUV
-Primary Megaureter           -U PJ Obstruction
-Prune Belly = Zebra          -Ureteral Ectopia

                                            223
Vesicoureteral Reflux (VUR) -                         This is sometimes described as a
Normally, the ureter enters the bladder at an         "short submucosal distal ureteral segment"
oblique angle so that a "valve" is developed.
If the angle o f insertion is abnormal           ..A-
(horizontal) reflux can develop. This can
occur in the asymptomatic child, but is seen     Normal                Reflux
in 50% o f children with UTIs. The
recommendations for when the boy/girl with       -Intravesicular       -Intravesicular
a UTI should get a VCUG to evaluate for          ureter is oblique     ureter is horizontal
VUR is in flux (not likely to be tested). M ost
of the time VUR resolves by age 5-6.

Trivia: Hydronephrosis is the most common
cause of a palpable renal "mass" in childhood.

There is a grading system fo r VUR which goes 1-5.
          One is reflux halfw ay up the ureter,

     Two is reflux into a non-dilated collecting system, (calyces still pointy),
          Three you have dilation of the collecting system, and calyces get blunted
          Four the system gets mildly tortuous,
          Five the system is very tortuous.

A sneaky trick would be to show the echogenic mound near the UVJ, that results from
injection o f "deflux", which is a treatm ent urologist try. Essentially, they make a bubble with
this proprietary compound in the soft tissues near the UVJ and it creates a valve (sorta).
Anyway, they show it in a lot o f case books and textbooks so ju st like a midget using a urinal 
remember to stay on your toes.

Additional Pearl: Chronic reflux can lead to scarring. This scarrin g can result in
hypertension and/or chronic renal failure.

Additional Pearl: If the reflux appears to be associated with a "hutch" diverticulum - people
will use the vocabulary "Secondary" VUR rather than Primary VUR. The treatment in this
case will be surgical. Ureteroceles, Posterior Valves, Neurogenic Bladder - are all causes of
Secondary VUR.

"Hutch" Diverticula
 Occur at or adjacent (usually just above) the UVJ.
 Caused by congenital muscular defect
 Difficult to see on US -- better seen with VCUG.
 They are "dynamic" and best seen on the voiding (micturition) phase
 If associated with VUR will often be surgically resected

                                                 224
                          -Congenital Bladder-

The Urachus: The umbilical attachment to the bladder (started out being called the allantois, then
called the Urachus). This usually atrophies into the umbilical ligament. Persistent canalization can
occur along a spectrum (patent, sinus, diverticulum, cyst).

 Trivia: Most common complication of
  urachal remnant = infection

 Trivia: Urachal anomalies are twice as common in boys
  (relative to girls)

 Trivia: The most important piece of trivia is that when                  Urachal Cancer
  these guys get cancer, it's adenocarcinoma (90% of
  cases). To hint at this multiple choice test writers will
  often use the phrase "midline bladder structure"

Urachal Spectrum:

Normal Obliterated  Patent Urachus     Vesicourachal         Urachal Cyst
Urachus (only the                      Diverticulum
ligament remains)                                                          Urachal Sinus

Bladder Exstrophy - This is a herniation of the urinary                         Bladder Exstrophy
bladder through a hole in the anterior infra-umbilical
abdominal wall.                                              Academics name "signs" after animals to get
                                                             them published. All part of an elaborate
What do you need to know?                                    scene to make associate professor...

 Increased incidence of Malignancy in the extruded bladder

 It's Adenocarcinoma - just like a Urachal Remnant gets

 Aunt Minnie "Manta Ray Sign" - with
  unfused pubic bones. This looks like
  a monster wide pubic symphysis on an
  AP pelvic radiograph.

Cloacal Malformation - GU and GI both drain into a common opening (like a bird).
This only happens in females.

Neurogenic Bladder - 1will discuss this more in the adult Urinary chapter, but for kids I want you
to think about spinal dysraphism (tethered cord, sacral agenesis, and all the other flicked up spine stuff).

                                       225
