                            S E C T IO N 10:
                       SOLID O rga n GU

W hen it comes to solid renal masses - an age-based strategy is the ticket.

Why an age-based strategy? If they give you the age o f the patient, you can use this chart to
eliminate distractors which don't fit. If you are lucky, you w on't even have to look at the
picture.

            Neonate                     Around Age 4                Teenager
N ephroblastomatosi s  Wilms (95% o f cases before age 10)  RCC
Mesoblastic Nephroma   Wilms Variants                       Lymphoma
                       Lymphoma
                       Multilocular Cystic Nephroma

Tumor / Mass                        Rapid Review Trivia

Mesoblastic            "Solid Tumor o f Infancy" (you can be bom with it)
Nephroma

Nephroblastomatosis    "Nephrogenic Rests" - left over embryologic crap that didn't go away
                       Might turn into Wilms (bilateral wilms especially)
                       "Next Step" - f'u ultrasound till 7-8 years old
                       Variable appearance

Wilms                  90% + Renal Tumors (95% o f cases before age 10)
                       "Solid Tumor o f Childhood" - Never born with it
                       Grows like a solid ball (will invade rather than incase)
                       Met to the lung (most common)

Clear Cell - Wilms Met to Bone

Rhabdoid - Wilms       Brain Tumors
                       It fucks you up, it takes the money (it believes in nothing Lcbowski)

Multi-Cystic           Micheal Jackson Tumor (Young Boys, Middle Age Women)
 Nephroma              Big cysts that don't communicate
                       Septal Enhancement
                       Can't Tell it is not Cystic Wilms (next step = resection)

    Renal Cell         "Solid Tumor o f Adolescent" - most common in 2nd decade
Carcinoma (RCC)        Translocation Subtype = Prior chemotherapy
                       Medullary Subtype = Sickle Cell Trait,
                       Clear Cell Subtype = VHL (these RCCs are usually bilateral)

Renal Lymphoma         Non-Hodgkin
                       Multifocal

                                    226
-Solid Age 0-3

Nephroblastomatosis - These are                Nephroblastomatosis
persistent nephrogenic rests beyond 36
weeks. It's sorta normal (found in 1% o f      -Hypodense Rind -
infants). But, it can be a precursor to Wilms
so you follow it. W hen W ilms is bilateral,
99% o f the time it had nephroblastomatosis
first. It goes away on its own (normally).
It should N O T have necrosis - this makes
you think Wilms. It has a variable
appearance, and is often described as
"homogeneous." Although more commonly
a focal homogeneous ball, the way it's
always shown in case conferences and case
books is as a hypodense rind.

Ultrasound screening q 3 months till age 7-8 is the usual routine - to make sure it doesn't go
Wilms on you.

M esoblastic Nephroma - ""Solid renal tum or o f infancy." This is a fetal ham artoma,
and generally benign. It is the most common neonatal renal tumor (80% diagnosed in the first
month on life). Often involves the renal sinus. Antenatal ultrasound may have shown
polyhydramnios.

Pearl: If it really looks like a Wilms, but they are just too young (< 1 year) then call it
mesoblastic nephroma.

-Cystic Age 0-3

Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney - You have multiple tiny cysts forming in utereo.
What you need to know is (1) that there is "no functioning renal tissue," (2) contralateral renal
tract abnormalities occur like 50% of the time (most commonly UPJ obstruction).

MCDK vs Bad Hydro?
· In hydronephrosis, the cystic spaces are seen to communicate.
· In difficult cases renal scinfigraphy can be useful. MCDK will show no excretory function.

Pearl: MCDK has MACROscopic cysts that do NOT communicate

                                               227
Wilms

"Solid renal tumor o f childhood." This is by far the most common solid renal tumor of
childhood. This is NOT seen in a newborn. Repeat, you can NOT be bom with this tumor.
The average age is around 3, and nearly all (95%) are found before age 10. It typically
spreads via direct invasion.

Associated Syndromes:

Overgrowth                                                      ISay Beckwith-
· Beckwith-Wiedemann - M acroglossia (most common               Wiedemann

  finding), Omphalocele, Hemihypertrophy, Cardiac, Big Organs.  You Say,
· Sotos - Macrocephaly, Retarded (CNS stuff), Ugly Face         ·Wilms,
                                                                ·Omphalocele,

                                                                ·Hepatoblastoma

Non-Overgrowth

·WAGR - Wilms, Aniridia, Genital, Growth Retardation

· Drash - Wilms, Pseudohermaphroditism, Progressive Glomerulonephritis

Wilms Nevers                                          Wilms in a 1 year old ?
· N EV ER Biopsy suspected Wilms
                                                      Think about associated
  (you can seed the tract and up the stage)           syndromes. Wilms loves to
· Wilms N EV ER occurs before 2 months of age         pal around with:

  (Neuroblastoma can)                                 · Hemihypertrophy,
                                                      · Hypospadias,
Bilateral Wilms                                       · Cryptorchidism

About 5-10% will have bilateral disease { "Synchronous Bilateral W ilms")

Wilms Variants (look ju s t like Wilms)
     · Clear Cell - likes to go to bones (lytic)
     · Rhabdoid - "Terrible Prognosis" - Associated with aggressive Rhabdoid brain tumors

                       228
-CysticAroundAgek ^

Multilocular Cystic Nephroma                                 Multilocular Cystic Nephroma
                                                             "P rotruding into the renal pelvis
"Non-communicating, fluid-filled locules,
surrounded by thick fibrous capsule." By
definition these things are characterized by the
absence of a solid component or necrosis.

             Buzzword is
             "protrudes into the renal pelvis.'

There is a classic bimodal occurrence
(4 year old boys, and 40 year old women).

/ like to think o f this as the Michael Jackson lesion
- it loves young boys and middle-aged women

Turbo Nerds Are Spoiling My Fun

                 One of my favorite jokes has been this "Michael Jackson lesion" to help remember the
                 age distribution. Unfortunately - a bunch of Academic Nerds got together and decided
                 that the pediatric cystic nephromas are their own thing now, and the adult ones are

 t their own thing - with the words "adult cystic nephromas" and "pediatric cystic
                 nephroma" as the preferred nomenclature. Assholes.... ruined a great joke.

Gamesmanship: Board exams usually lag a few years behind these kinds of changes. So if you get
a question asking about the age distribution, you may want to still go with the bimodal occurrence -
especially if they don't say "adult" or "peds" - just make sure there isn't another more correct
answer. This is where reading all the choices is critically important. Mind reading is also helpful.
Don't forget to read the mind of the person who wrote the question - so you can understand his or
her bias.

- Solids in Teenager ^  I'll discuss RCCs more in the GU Chapter

RCC - This is the second most common renal                     "Translocation Carcinoma RCC"

malignancy of childhood (Wilms #1) and is the most           Most common RCC sub-type in Kids
common ages 15-19. RCC in kids is different than             Denser than cortex on non-con CT
RCC in adults (a little bit). It is still an enhancing       Solid & Enhancing + Expansile Growth
solid mass - BUT the #1 subtype in kids is                   Historv of prior cvtotoxic chemotherapy
"translocation carcinoma." Clear Cell RCC (#1 in             is classic.
adults is actually rare in kids). If the kid has clear cell
thev should be screened for VHL (Von Hippel Lindau).

RCC vs Wilms: RCC tends to be smaller, occur in an older cohort,
and is more likely to calcify.

Lymphoma - This is never primary. We are talking about
hematogenous spread or direct invasion of another lymphoma. The
most common look is multiple bilateral round expansile masses. _

                                                        229
                     - Bladder Masses / Cancers -

Work up for bladder lesions / masses in kids should start with an Ultrasound. A potentially
testable point is that the bladder m ust be full during the exam ination - otherwise you can miss
lesions in the folds o f a thick collapsed bladder wall.

There is a differential for bladder masses in kids, and like basically everywhere else in the body a
very long list o f possible culprits. B u t.... for the purpose o f m ultiple choice, I 'm going to focus
on one entity as it is by far the m ost common.

Rhabdomyosarcoma -

This is by far the m ost com mon m alignant tum or o f the
bladder in kids. It is a cancer o f "m uscle" so you can find
these almost anywhere in the body but ~ 20% o f them occur
in either the prostate or bladder.

There are a bunch o f subtypes with the most testable being
the "botryoid." This is the one that looks like a bunch o f
grapes (supposedly).

Otherwise - it usually just looks like a big nodular ugly      Schematic Diagram of an
horrible nightmare inducing mass in the bladder of a kid       Ultrasound of the Bladder
with a history o f urinary obstruction.                        showing multiple round masses
                                                               grouped together. Maybe they
Trivia:                                                        look like a bunch of grapes... I
  The most common location is actually the head/neck           guess it depends on which grocery
                                                               store you shop at.

- specifically the orbit and nasopharynx.

Approximately 20% are in the bladder or prostate

A pproxim ately 20%> have m etastatic disease at presentation / diagnosis

There is a bim odal peak (2-4, then 15-17).

You can also have these things in the "paratesticular" region.

Paratesticular Rhabdomyosarcoma:

By far the most common extra-testicular mass in young men and the only one really worth
mentioning. If you see a mass in the scrotum that is not for sure in the testicle this is it (unless
the history is kick to the balls from a spiteful young lady -then you are dealing w ith a big fucking
hematoma). If it's truly a mass - this is the answer.

                                                                230
