                                      S E C T IO N 14:
                              PEDIATRIC S p in e

                      -Spinal CordonUltrasound-

Normal Ultrasound Appearance /Anatomy Review:

                                                                                                        Conus

Central Canal -- Echogenic  Vertebral Bodies - Shadowing

                                                                Central Canal

Central Canal - Easily identified as an
echogenic line. Although that is sort o f counter
intuitive.

Why w ould a structure with flu id in it be
echogenic? The reason is that you are actually
seeing a "central echo complex" - which is the
interface between the anterior median fissure and
the myelinated ventral white matter commissure.

Remember that interfaces between things with        Ventral
large differences in impedance cause a lot of       Commissure
reflections (thus an echogenic line).
                                                                Anterior
                                                                Median Fissure

Trivia: Technically in a new born the central canal is not even fluid filled (it's packed with
glial fibrils), but that level o f trivia is beyond the scope o f the exam (probably).

                                               255
Low lying cord I Tethered cord: Because the canal grows faster than the cord, a
fixed attachment ("tethering") results in cord stretching and subsequent ischemia. This can be
primary (isolated), or secondary (associated with myelomeningocele, filum terminale lipoma,
or trauma). The secondary types are more likely shown on MR (to showcase the associated
mass -flu id collection), the prim ary types are more likely shown on US - as a straight
counting game.

Imaging Features: Low conus (below L2), and thickened filum terminale (> 2mm).

A common piece o f trivia used as a distractor is that meningomyelocele is associated with
Chiari malformations, lipomyelomeningocele is NOT.

High Yield Trivia

 Anal Atresia = High Risk For Occult Cord Problems (including tethering) - should get
     screened

 Low lying / tethered cords are closely linked with Spina Bifida (tufts o f hair)

 Low Dimples (below the gluteal crease) Do NOT need screening,

o These never extend intra-spinally. They might later become a pilonidal sinuses

-                  but aren't ever gonna have shit to do with the cord.

 High Dimples (above the gluteal crease) DO need screening.

                           For Screening Purposes:

Low dimples (below the butt crease) don't get screened, basically everything else does.
    Most Likely Question Style: "Which of the following does NOT get screened ?"
                                                            (Answer = low dimple).

                                                        256
-Misc Variant Topics-

Terminal Ventricle (ventriculus                               Terminal Ventricle
terminalis): This is a developmental variant.
Normally, a large portion o f the distal cord involutes in a
late stage o f spinal cord embryology. Sometimes this
process is not uniform and you get stuck with a stupid
looking cyst at the end o f your cord. These things are
usually small (around 4 mm), and cause no symptoms.
Sometimes they can get very big (like this example) and
cause some neurologic symptoms.

Pars Interarticularis Defects (Spondylolysis):
This is considered a fatigue or stress fracture, probably developing in
childhood. It is a classic cause o f back pain in an adolescent athlete.
Although they are usually not symptomatic (only 25% are). The
process represents a hole / break in the coimecting bone between the
superior and inferior articular facets. If there is forward "slippage"
you can deploy the word spondylolisthesis.

Almost always (90% +) you see this at L5 (2nd most common at L4).
They tend to have more spondylolisthesis and associated degenerative
change at L4-L5 than L5-S1. They can be seen on the oblique plain
film as a "collar on the scottie dog." The collar on the "scotty dog"
appearance on an oblique plain film is probably the m ost common
way they show this in case books and conferences. On the AP view
this can be a cause o f a sclerotic pedicle (the contralateral pedicle -
from wiggle stress). On CT it is usually more obvious with the break
clearly demonstrated.

**Pars Defects with anterolisthesis will have neuroforaminal stenosis,    Scotty Dog = Collar
with spinal canal widening (when severe will have spinal canal            (represent the pars
stenosis as well). If the process is purely a degenerative                defect).
spondylolisthesis (not much slippage), the resulting facet arthropathy
will favor the canal with less severe effects on the neuro foramina.      Anatomy trivia: the
                                                                          eye is the pedicle.

257
                           Spinal Dysraphism;

You can group these as open or closed (closed with and without a mass). Open means neural
tissue exposed through a defect in bone and skin (spina bifida aperta). Closed means the
defect is covered by skin (spina bifida occulta).

Open Spinal Dysraphisms: This is the result o f a failure o f the closure o f the primary
neural tube, with obvious exposure o f the neural placode through a midline defect o f the skin.
You have a dorsal defect in the posterior elements. The cord is going to be tethered. There
is an association with diastem atom yelia and Chiari II m alformations. Early surgery is the
treatment / standard of care.

          Myelocele: This is the more rare type where the neural
          placode is flush with the skin.

          M yelomeningocele: This is the more com mon type
          (98%) where the neural placode protrudes above the
          skin. These are more common with Chiari II
          malformations.

Closed Spinal Dysraphisms with Subcutaneous Mass

          Meningocele: This is herniation o f a CSF filled sac through a
          defect in the posterior elements (spina bifida). It is most typical
          in the lumbar or sacral regions. Although they can occur in the
          cervical spine. They may be anterior (usually pre-sacral). An
          important point is that neural tissue is NOT present in the
          sac.

          Lipomyelocele / Lipomyelomeningocele: These are lipomas with a dural defect
          (form er with the neural placode-lipom a interface inside the canal & latter with it
          outside the canal). On exam you are going to have a subcutaneous fatty
          mass above the gluteal crease. These are 100% associated with
          tethered cord (myelomeningocele may or may not).

          Terminal M yelocystocele - This is a herniation o f a terminal
          syrinx into a posterior meningocele via a posterior spinal defect.

                                                                258
Closed Spinal Dysraphisms without Subcutaneous Mass

Intradural lipomas - Most common in the thoracic spine along the dorsal aspect.
They don't need to be (but can be) associated with posterior elem ent defects.

Fibrolipoma o f the filu m terminale - This is often an incidental finding "fatty filum" .
There will be a linear T1 bright structure in the filum terminale. The filum is not
going to be unusually thickened and the conus will be normally located.

Tightfilu m terminale - This is a thickened filum term inale (> 2 mm ), with a low lying
conus (below the inferior endplate o f L2). You may have an associated terminal lipoma.
The "tethered cord syndrom e" is based on the clinical findings o f low back pain and leg
pain plus urinary bladder dysfunction. This is the result o f stretching the cord with
growth of the canal.

Dermal Sinus - This is an epithelial lined tract that extends from the skin to deep soft
tissues (sometimes the spinal canal, som etim es a dermoid or lipoma). These are T1 low
signal (relative to the background high signal from fat).

Diastematomyelia - This describes a sagittal split in the spinal cord. They almost always
occur between T 9 -S 1, with normal cord both above and below the split. You can have two thecal
sacs (or just one), and each hemi-cord has its own central canal and dorsal/ventral homs.
Classification systems are based on the presence / absence o f an osseous or fibrous spur and
duplication or non-duplication o f the thecal sac.

Caudal Regression: This is a spectrum o f defects in the caudal region that ranges from

partial agenesis o f the coccyx to lumbosacral agenesis. The associations to know are VACTERL

and Currarino triad. Think about this with maternal diabetes. "Blunted sharp" high terminating

cord is classic, with a "shield sign" from

the opposed iliac bones (no sacrum).

                                                   Currarino Triad:

Fuckery - Note than the Meningocele of             Anterior Sacral Meningocele,
Currarino is Anterior. It's not posterior.

A potential deploym ent o f fuckery is to   \m     Anorectal malformation,
put "Posterior" Sacral Meningocele as a        
distractor for Currarino Triad.                #

Anyone who would do that is an Asshole             Sacrococcygeal osseous defect
(a structure which also happens to be                      (scimitar sacrum).

posterior)

                                            259
  fROMCTHEUS

   Liomhart, m.d.

260
