S E C T IO N 11:
  Adrenal

Neuroblastoma - First thing - make sure it isn't a Renal Mass - these are frequently
contrasted with Wilms. I guaran-fucking-tee some asshole tries to trick you into calling a
Wilms a Neuroblastoma or vice-versa. Spend time mastering the ability to tell them apart.

Neuroblastomas are the most common extra-cranial solid childhood malignancy. They
typically occur in very young kids (you can be bom with this). 95% o f cases occur before age
10. They occur in the abdomen more than the thorax (adrenal 35%, retroperitoneum 30%,
posterior mediastinum 20%, neck 5%).

Staging: Things that up the stage include crossing       STAGE 4 S - HIGH YIELD
the midline, and contralateral positive nodes. These
things make it Stage 3.                                Less than 1 year old
                                                       Distal Mets are Confined to Skin,
Better Prognosis Seen with -
-- Diagnosis in Age < 1,                                Liver, and Bone Marrow
--Thoracic Primary, Stage 4S.                          Excellent Prognosis.

Associations:                                         **A common distractor is to say 4S
 NF-1, Hirschsprungs, DiGeorge,                      goes to cortical bone. This is false!
                                                      It's the marrow.
  Beckwith Wiedemann
 Most are sporadic

Random Trivia:
 Opsomyoclonus (dancing eyes, dancing feet) - paraneoplastic syndrome associated with

  neuroblastoma.
 "Raccoon Eyes" is a common way for orbital neuroblastoma mets to present
 MIBG is superior to Conventional Bone Scan for Neuroblastoma Bone Mets
 Neuroblastoma bone mets are on the "lucent metaphyseal band DDx"
 Sclerotic Bone mets are UNCOMMON
 Urine Catecholamines are always (95%) elevated

                 Neuroblastoma                                           Wilms
Age: usually less than 2 (can occur in utero)
Calcifies 90%                                  Age: Usually around age 4
Encases Vessels (doesn't invade)               (never before 2 months)
Poorly Marginated                              Calcifies Rarely (<10%>)
Mets to Bones                                  Invades Vessels (doesn't encase)
                                               Well Circumscribed
                                               D oesn't usually m et to bones (unless clear cell
                                               Wilms variant). Prefers lung.

                                               231
Neonatal Adrenal Hemorrhage            THIS vs THAT: Hemorrhage VS Neuroblastoma:
- This can occur in the setting of
birth trauma or stress.                Ultrasound can usually tell the difference (adrenal
                                       hemorrhage is anechoic and avascular, neuroblastoma is
Trivia: Neonatal adrenal hemorrhage    echogenic and hyper-vascular).
is associated with scrotal hemorrhage
                                       MRI could also be done to problem solve if necessary
Trivia: Adrenal hemorrhage is the      (Adrenal Hemorrhage low T2 , Neuroblastoma high T2).
most common cause of an adrenal
"mass" in a neonate

Trivia: 70% of adrenal hemorrhage cases occur on the right (due to the compression of the right
adrenal gland between the liver and right kidney)

Trivia: If the hemorrhage occurs on the left - think about renal vein thrombus (left adrenal vein drains
into the renal vein -- where as the right one dumps into the IVC). **Question writers are lazy.
Anatomy trivia like this makes for easy questions.

Trivia: Renal vein thrombosis (and overall adrenal hemorrhage) is more common in the infants of
diabetic mothers.

          Gamesmanship - "Next Step" Adrenal mass of a neonate.

Neonates that are sick enough to be in the hospital hemorrhage their fucking adrenals all the time. An
adrenal hemorrhage can look just like a mass on ultrasound. Yes, technically it should be anechoic and
avascular - but maybe your tech sucks, or maybe you don't get shown a picture they just tell you it's a
mass. The question writer is most likely going to try and trick you into worrying about a
neuroblastoma (which is also going to be a mass in the adrenal).

Next Step? Sticking a needle in it, sedating the kid for MRI, or exposing him/her to the radiation of
CT, PET, or MIBG are all going to go against the "image gently" propaganda being pushed at
academic institutions. Plus it's unnecessary. As is true with most things in radiology, they either get
better or they don't. Hemorrhage is going to resolve. The cancer is not.

So the first step is going to be followup ultrasound imaging.

With follow up imaging you should see something like this (depending on the interval);
- Time 0: Adrenal hemorrhage is a well-defined ~ inhomogeneous isoechoic mass, no doppler flow
- Time 1; Liquefaction starts - mass becomes more complex, strands and bands - classically starts to

   get a hypo echoic / cystic center area.
- Time 2: Size continues to decrease
- Time 3: Calcifications may occur (peripheral or curvilinear) -as early as 1-2 weeks
- Time 4: Adrenal gland has a normal sizeand shape --calcifications persist.

          Gamesmanship - History of "adrenal insufficiency" ?
          Does that help you in the setting o f a newborn adrenal mass?

Nope. Most cases are actually caused by a 21 alpha hydroxylase deficiency (congenital adrenal
hyperplasia). Those tend to look different than hemorrhage or a mass- they are more "cerebriform."
The problem is you can acquire adrenal insufficiency from neoplastic destruction (neuroblastoma) or
regular good old fashioned hemorrhage.

More on Adrenals in the Endocrine Chapter.

                                       232
