                     SECTION 13:
                           MSK

Fracture: In general, little kids bend they don't break.        Physeal Bar
You end up with lots o f buckles and greensticks. For
problem solving you can get a repeat in 7-10 days as
periosteal reaction is expected in 7-10 days. Kids tend to
heal completely, often with no sign of prior fracture.

Involvement o f the Physis: The major concern is growth
arrest, probably best asked by showing a physeal bar
("early" bony bridge crossing the growth plate). You can
get bars from prior infection, but a history o f trauma is
gonna be the more classic way to ask it.

Salter-Harris Classification lends                 Diaphysis *      M etaphysis
itself well to multiple choice:                    Physis

Type 1 : S-Slipped                                          Normal

Complete physeal fracture, with or without
displacement.

Type 2: A --Above (or "Awayfrom the Joint")

Fracture involves the metaphysis. This is the
most common type (75%).

Type 3: L - Lower
(3 is the backwards "E "for Epiphysis)

Fracture involves the epiphysis. These guys have
a chance of growth arrest, and will often require
surgery to maintain alignment

Type 4: T - Through

Fracture involves the metaphysis and epiphysis.
These guys don't do as well, often end up with
growth arrest, or focal fusion. They require
anatomic reduction and often surgery.

Type 5: R - Ruined

Compression of the growth plate. It occurs from axial loading injuries, and has a very poor
prognosis. These are easy to miss, and often found when looking back at comparisons (hopefully
ones your partner read). The buzzword is "bony bridge across physis".

                                                 237
Toddler's Fracture: Oblique fracture o f the m idshaft o f the tibia seen in a child just
starting to w alk (new stress on bone). If it's a spiral type you probably should query non­
accidental trauma. The typical age is 9 months - 3 years.

Stress Fracture in Children: This is an injury which occurs after repetitive trauma,
usually after new activity (walking). The most common site o f fracture is the tibia - proximal
posterior cortex. The tibial fracture is the so-called "toddler fracture" described above. Other
classic stress fractures include the calcaneal fracture - seen after the child has had a cast
removed and returns to normal activity.

    - The Elbow -

My God... thesepeds elbows.

Every first year resident knows that elevation o f the fat pad (sail sign) should make you think
joint effusion and possible occult fracture. D on't forget that sometimes you can see a thin
anterior pad, but you should never see the posterior pad (posterior is positive). I like to bias
m yself with statistics when I 'm hunting for the peds elbow fracture. The most common
fracture is going to be a supracondylar fracture (>60% ), followed by lateral condyle (20%),
and medial epicondyle (10%).

Radiocapitellar Line: This is a line through the center o f the radius, which should intersect the
middle o f the capitellum on every view (regardless o f position). If the radius is dislocated it
will NOT pass through the center o f the capitellum

Anterior Humeral Line: This time you                  Anterior Humeral Line
need a true lateral. A line along the                       Radiocapitellar Line
anterior surface of humerus, should pass
through the middle third o f the
capitellum. With a supracondylar
fracture (the most common peds elbow
fracture) you'll see this line pass through
the anterior third.

                                                   f
                                                  I
                                                  I

                                             238
Ossification Centers are a                                      1st          2nd
source of tricicery.                                                                       D\
                                                          I
Remember they occur in a set order                                           4th & 5th
(CRITOE),                                                      3rd
· Capitellum (Age 1),
· Radius (Age 3),
· Internal (medial epicondyle Age 5),
· Trochlea (Age 7),
· 01ecranon(Age 9), and
· External (lateral epicondyle Age 11).

-Elbow Tricks:                           Zig Zag Search Pattern Hunting For the Next Center

Lateral Condyle Fx: This is the second most common distal humerus fracture in kids. The
thing to know is a fracture that passes through the capitello-trochlear groove is unstable. Ortho makes
a big fucking deal about looking for displacement of these things - stressing the need for internal
rotation oblique views to exclude displacement. Displacement = Surgery

Most fractures are related to hyper-extension from         Common Elbow      Uncommon Elbow
falls on out-stretched hands. If the question stem tells        Fractures           Fractures
you about a fall onto the elbow point or a hyper­
flexion fracture think ulnar nerve injury: lost           Lateral Condylar   Lateral Epicondyle
sensation in the pinky & 1/2 of the ring fingers and/or   Medial Epicondyle    Medial Condyle
Flexer Carpi Ulnaris or Flexor Digitorum Profiindus -
denervation.

Trochlea - can have multiple ossification centers, so it can have a fragmented appearance.

Medial Epicondyle Avulsion (Little League EWiovi) - The medial epicondyle is the last

growth plate tofuse - a sneaky trick is to try and get you to call a normal ossification center afracture.

There are two additional tricks with this one. (1) Because it's an extra-articular structure, its

avulsions will not necessarily result in a joint effusion. (2) It can get interposed between the

articular surface of the humerus and olecranon. Avulsed fragments can get stuck in the joint, even

when there is no dislocation -- but when there is a dislocation, also look for the fragment on post

reduction films.

Anytime you see a dislocation - ask yourself              The importance o f I T (crIToe) -
· Is the patient 5 years old ? And if so                  · You should never see the trochlea and not
· Where is the medial epicondyle ?
                                                            see the internal (medial epicondyle), if you
                                                            do it's probably a displaced fragment

Nursemaids Elbow: When a child's arm is pulled on, the radial head may sublux into the
annular ligament. X-rays typically don't help, unless you supinate the arm during lateral position
(which often relocates the arm).

Classic Next Step Elbow Case:                        Get a Dedicated Elbow X-Rav Series
Obvious Ulnar Shaft Fracture on forearm x-ray        (To look for that radial head dislocation).

                                                     This is the classic Monteggia fracture-
                                                     dislocation pattern - common in kids
                                                     (rare in adults).

                                                     Obvious Ulnar Shaft Fracture +
                                                     Subtle Radial Head Dislocation

                                               239
- Avulsion Iniuries:                                                                         llliac Crest
                                                                                             Abdominal
Kids tendons tend to be stronger than their                                                   IVluscles
bones, so avulsion injuries are more
common (when compared to aduUs).                                               ^ ASIS

) The pelvis is the classic location to test                                                  Sartorius
                                                                                             Tensor
this.                                                                                         Fascia Lata

                                           Symphysis                                         AMS
                                             ADDuctor                                         Rectus Femoris
                                             Group
                                                                                       ^ Greater
                                                           Ischial                            Trochanter
                                                           Tuberosity                          Gluteal
                                                              Hamstrings                       Muscles

                                                                          I

                                                                          Lesser Trochanter
                                                                          llliopsoas

Patellar Sleeve Avulsion Fracture:
This an acute avulsion of the inferior patellar pole. The classic
look is a fragment o f bone at the inferior patella with associated
soft tissue swelling. You typically see this in a 13 year old boy
- with a history of "sudden onset pain after jumping."

This vs T h a t :
Patellar Sleeve Avulsion vs Sinding-Larsen-Johansson
- Patellar Sleeve Avulsion is acute
- SLJ is chronic

- Chronic Fatigue injurios:                                               Sinding
                                                                          Larsen
Sinding-Larsen-Johansson - This is a chronic                              Johansson
traction injury at the insertion of the patellar tendon
on the patella. It's seen in active adolescents between
age 10-14. Kids with cerebral palsy are prone to it.

Osgood-Schlatter - This is due to repeated micro              Schlatter
trauma to the patellar tendon on its insertion at the tibial
tuberosity. It's bilateral 25% o f the time, and more
common in boys.

240
                 - Periosteal Reaction in tiie Newborn -

Congenital Rubella: Bony changes are seen in 50% o f cases, with the classic buzzword
being "celery stalk" appearance, from generaHzed lucency o f the metaphysis. This is usually
seen in the first few weeks o f life.

Syphilis: Bony changes are seen in 95% o f cases.      ___________
Bony changes do NOT occur until 6-8 weeks o f life
(Rubella changes are earlier). Metaphyseal lucent
bands and periosteal reaction along long bones can be
seen. The classic buzzword is "W imberger Sign" or
destruction of the medial portion of the proximal
metaphysis of the tibia.

                                                                    Wimberger Sign

Caffey Disease - Have you ever seen that giant multiple volume set o f peds radiology
books? Yeah, same guy. This thing is a self limiting disorder o f soft tissue swelling, periosteal
reaction, and irritability seen within Ihe first 6 months o f life. The classic picture is the
really hot mandible on bone scan. The mandible is the most common location (clavicle, and
ulna are the other classic sites). It's rare as hell, and probably not even real. There have been
more sightings of Chupacabra in the last 50 years.

Prostaglandin Therapy - Prostaglandin E l and E2 (often used to keep a PDA open) can
cause a periosteal reaction. The classic trick is to show a chest x-ray with sternotomy wires (or
other hints o f congenital heart), and then periosteal reaction in the arm bones.

Neuroblastoma Mets - This is really the only childhood m alignancy that occurs in
newborns and mets to bones.

Physiologic Growth: So this is often called "Physiologic Periostitis o f the N ew born" ,
which is totally false and wrong. It does NOT happen in newborns. You see this around 3
months o f age, and it should resolve by six months. Proximal involvement (femur) comes
before distal involvement (tibia). It always involves the diaphysis.

     It is N O T physiologic periostitis if:
          * You see it before 1 month
          * You see it in the tibia before the fem u r
          * It does not involve the diaphysis.

Abuse -- Some people abuse drugs, some just can't stand screaming kids, some suffer both
shortcomings. More on this later.

241
                - Other "Aggressive Processes" In Kids -

Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis (LCH) - Also known as EG (eosinophilic
granuloma). It's twice as com mon in boys. Skeletal manifestations are highly variable, but
lets just talk about the classic ones:

     * Skull - M ost common site. Has "beveled edge" from uneven destruction o f the inner
          and outer tables. If you see a round lucent lesion in the skull o f a child think this (and
          neuroblastoma mets).

     * Ribs - Multiple lucent lesions, with an expanded appearance

     * Spine - Vertebra plana

LCH - Beveled Edge Skull Lesion       LCH - Vertebra Plana

*77/ touch on this more in the M SK chapter.
Ewing Sarcom a and Osteosarcom a are also covered in depth in the MSK chapter

                                 242
Osteomyelitis

It usually occurs in babies (30% o f cases less than 2 years old). It's usually hem atogenous
(adults it directly spreads - typically from a diabetic ulcer).

There are some changes that occur over time, which are potentially testable.

Newborns - They have open growth plates and perforating vessels which travel from the
metaphysis to the epiphysis. Infection typically starts in the metaphysis (it has the most blood
supply because it is growing the fastest), and then can spread via these perforators to the
epiphysis.

Kids - Later in childhood, the perforators regress and the avascular epiphyseal plate stops
infection from crossing over. This creates a "septic tank" scenario, where infection tends to
smolder. In fact, 75% o f cases involve the metaphyses o f long bones (femur most common).

Adults - When the growth plates fuse, the barrier o f an avascular plate is no longer present,
and infection can again cross over to the epiphysis to cause mayhem.

Vessels          Vessels       Growth
Cross            Obliterated,  Plate
Physeal          Growth Plate  Closed
Plate            Still Open

         Infant  Child (2-8)           Adult

Trivia:

- Hematogenous spread more common in kids (direct spread in adult)
- Metaphysis most common location, with target changes as explained above
- Bony changes don't occur on x-ray for around 10 days.
- It's serious business and can rapidly destroy the cartilage if it spreads into the joint

**Discussed again in the M SK Chapter

                                                                 243
                                      - Skeletal Dysplasia -

There is a bunch o f vocabulary to learn regarding dysplasias:

                English                           Fancy Doctor Speak

Short Fingers                                     Brachydactyly

Too Many Fingers                                  Polydactyly
Two or More Fused Fingers                         Syndactyly
( " S o c k H a n d " - I c a ll it)              C am ptodactyly
Contractures o f Fingers

Radially Angulated Fingers (Usually 5'*>)         Clinodactyly

Long, Spider-Like Fingers                         Arachnodactyly

Limb is Absent                                    Amelia

Limb is mostly Absent                             M erom elia

Hands / Feet (distal limbs) are Short             Acromelic

Forearm or Lower Leg are short (middle limbs)     M esom elic

Femur or Humerus (proximal limbs) are short       Rhizomelic

Short All Over                                    M icrom elic

How I remember the lengths:
   · M eso is in the M iddle,
     · Aero sounds like Acromegaly (they get big hands), and
      ·The other one is the other one (Rhizo).

There are tons o f skeletal dysplasias and extensive knowledge o f them is way way way way
beyond the scope o f the exam. Instead I 'm going to m ention 3 dwarfs, and a few other
miscellaneous conditions.

                                             244
                                 -Dwarfs-

                      (or "Dwarves" If you are practicing radiology in middle earth):

Achondroplasia - This is the m ost com mon skeletal dysplasia, and is the mostly likely
to be seen at the mall (or on television). It results from a fibroblast growth factor receptor
problem (most dwarfisms do). It is a rhizomelic (short femur, short humerus) dw arf They
often have weird big heads, trident hands (3''^ and 4`h fingers are long), narrowing o f the
interpedicular distance, and the tom bstone pelvis. A dvanced paternal age is a risk factor.
They make good actors, excellent rodeo clowns, and various parts o f their bodies (if cooked
properly) have magical powers.

Thanatophoric - This is the most common lethal dwarfism. They have rhizomelic
shortening (humerus, femur). The femurs are sometimes called telephone receivers. They
have short ribs and a long thorax, and small iliac bones. The vertebral bones are flat
(platyspondyly), and the skull can be cloverleaf shaped.

Asphyxiating Th oracic Dystrophy (Jeune) - This is usually fatal as well. The
big finding is the "Bell shaped thorax" with short ribs. 15% will have too many fingers
(polydactyly). If they live, they have kidney problems (chronic nephritis). You can
differentiate a dead Thanatophoric dwarf, from a dead Jeune dw arf by looking at their
vertebral bodies. The Jeune bodies are normal (the thanatophorics are flat).

Additional Random Dwarf Trivia:

·Ellis-Van Crevaid is the d w a rf with m uhiple fingers.
Pseudoachondroplasia is this w eird thing not present at birth, a n d spares the skull.
Pyknodysostosis osteopetrosis, in a dwarf, with a wide angledjaw, & Acro-osteolysis.

       The Dwarf Blitz - 6 Things I Would Remember About Dwarfs

 1. The Vocab: Rhizo (humerus, femur) vs Aero (hands, feet) vs M eso (forearm, tib/fib)
 2. M ost dwarfs are Rhizomelic - if forced to choose, always guess this
 3. The pedicles are supposed to w iden slightly as you descend the spinal column,

       Achondroplasia has the opposite - they narrow. If you see a live dwarf, with short
       femurs / humerus, and narrowing o f the pedicles then this is the answer.
       (technically thantophorics can get this too - but i t 's more classic fo r achondroplasia)
 4. Thanatophoric is your main dead d w a rf U sually the standout feature is the
       telephone receiver femur (and a crazy cloverleaf head)
 5. Jeune is another dead dw arf - but the short ribs really stand out,
 6. N obody tosses a D w a rf
       /« situations where the distance cannot bejum ped and the dw arfmust be tossed, don't tell the Elf.

                                                                 245
                            - Misc Conditions -

Bifid Rib - This is the most common cause of an anterior wall "mass." If there is just one (usually
the 4th rib) - then it is just a variant. If there are bunches think Gorlin Syndrome.

fe n    Gorlin Syndrome - Bifid Ribs, Calcifications of the Falx, basal cell cancers, odontogenic
        keratocysts (lytic jaw lesions).

Osteogenesis Imperfecta - They have a collagen defect and make brittle bones. Depending

on the severity it can be totally lethal or more mild. It's classically shown with a totally lucent skull,
or multiple fractures with hyperplastic callus. Another classic trick is to show the legs with the
fibula longer than the tibia. They have wormian bones, and often flat or beaked vertebral bodies.
Other trivia is the blue sclera, hearing impairment (otosclerosis), and that they tend to suck at
football.

Osteopetrosis - They have a defect in the way osteoclasts work, so you end up with

disorganized bone that is sclerotic and weak (prone to fracture). There are a bunch of different types,
with variable severity. The infantile type is lethal because it takes out your bone marrow. With less
severe forms, you can have abnormal diminished osteoclastic activity that varies during skeletal
growth, and results in alternating bands of sclerosis parallel to the growth plate. Most likely the way
this will be shown is the "bone-in-bone" appearance in the vertebral body or carpals. Picture frame
vertebrae is another buzzword. Alternatively, they can show you a diffusely sclerotic skeleton, with
diffuse loss of the corticomedullary junction in the long tubular bones.

     n  Pyknodysostosis - Osteopetrosis + Wormian Bones + Acro-Osteolysis. They also
        have "wide (or obtuse) angled mandible", which apparentiy is a buzzword.
\\ V V
        Klippel Fell - You get congenital fusion of the cervical spine (sorta like JRA).
I?      The cervical vertebral bodies will be tall and skinny. There is often a sprengel deformity
        (high riding scapula). Another common piece of trivia is to show the omovertebral bone
        - which is just some big stupid looking vertebral body.

Hunters I Hurlers I Morquio - All three of these are mucopolysaccharidoses. Findings
include oval shaped vertebral bodies with anterior beak. The beak is actually mid in Morquio, and
inferior in Hurlers. Clavicles and ribs are often thick (narrow more medially) - like a canoe-
paddle. The pelvis shape is described as the opposite of achondroplasia - the iliac wings are tall and
flaired. The hand x-ray is the most commonly shown in case books and gives you wide metacarpal
bones with proximal tapering.

Few More Trivia Points on Morquio:
     ·They are dwarfs
     ·The most common cause of death is cervical myelopathy at C2
     ·The bony changes actually progress during the first few years of life

        246
Neurofibromatosis - Just briefly remember that type 1
can cause anterior tibial bowing, and pseudoarthrosis at the
distal fibula.

This is an Aunt Minnie.

They often have scoliosis. Just think of the elephant man.

Gauchers - This is the most common lysosomal storage
disease. It gives you a big spleen, and big liver among a few
bone signs.

     *AVN o f the Femoral Heads
     *H-Shaped Vertebra
     *Bone Infarcts (lots o f them)
     'Erlenmeyer Flask Shaped Femurs

Caudal Regression Syndrome - This is a spectrum
that includes sacral and/or coccyx agenesis. You see it with NF1
VACTERL and Currarino Triads Syndromes.

Scoliosis - Lateral curvature of the spine, which is usually idiopathic in girls. It can also be from
vertebral segmentation problems. NF can cause it as well (that's a piece of trivia).

Radial Dysplasia- Absence or hypoplasia of the radius (usually with a missing thumb) is a
differential case (VACTERL, Holt-Oram, Fanconi Anemia, Throbocytopenia Absent Radius). As a
point of trivia TAR kids will have a thumb.

Hand Foot Syndrome - The classic history is hand or
foot pain / swelling in an infant with sickle cell. This is a
dactylitis, and felt to be related to ischemia. It will resolve
on its own, after a few weeks. Radiographs can show a
periostitis two weeks after the pain goes awav.

Blounts (tibia vara). Varus angulation occurring at the
medial aspect of the proximal tibia (varus bowing occurs at
the metaphysis not the knee). This is often bilateral, and
NOT often seen before age 2 (two sides, not before two).
Later in the disease progression the medial metaphysis will
be depressed and an osseous outgrowth classically develops.
You can see it in two different age groups; (a) early - which
is around age 2 and (b) late - which is around age 12.

· Two Sides - Not Before Two
· Two Different Ages (2-3, 12)

                                                                 Blount'S -Tibia VARA

247
                                    -Feet-

Congenital fo o t is a com plicated and confusing topic, about which I w ill avoid great detail
because it is w ell beyond the scope o f the exam. I am going to at least try a n d drop som e
knowledge which could be called upon in the darkest o f hours to w ork these problem s out.

Step 1: Vocabulary. Just know ing the lingo is very helpful for getting the diagnosis on
multiple choice foot questions.

          Talipes = Congenital,
          Pes = Foot or Acquired
          Equines = "Plantar Flexed Ankle", Heel Cord is often tight, and the heel won't touch thefloor
          Calcaneus = Opposite o f Equines. The Calcaneus is actually angled up
          Varus = Forefoot in
          Valgus = Forefoot out
          Cavus = High Arch
          Planus = Opposite o f Cavus - "bizarro cavus " - FLAT FOOT
          Supination - Inward rotation - "Sole offoot in " - holding soup with the bottom o fyourfoot
          Pronation - Outward rotation - "Sole o ffoot out "

Step 2: Hindfoot Valgus vs Varus

                                T   .A                                                              T

        Normal                         Hindfoot Valgus                                              C

First look at the normal           Think about this as the talus         Hindfoot Varus
acute angle the talus              sliding nose down off the
and calcaneus m ake on             calcaneus. This m ake the         T h is is the opposite
a lateral view.                    angle wider.                      situation, in w hich you
                                                                     have a narrowing of the
                                   If the talus slides off you lose  angle betw een the talus
                                   your longitudinal arch - which    and calcaneus.
                                   essentially characterizes
                                   hindfoot valgus.                  Notice the two bones lay
                                                                     nearly parallel - like two
                                   Also, note that the nose          "clubs" laying on top of
                                   dow n (ne a rly vertical)         each other.
                                   appearance of the talus .
                                   "Too M any Toes"

                                   248
step 3 - Know the two main disorders. The flat foot (valgus), and the club foot (varus).

(1) Flat Foot (Pes Planus)- This can be congenital or acquired. The peds section will cover

congenital and the adult MSK section will cover acquired. The congenital types can be grouped into
flexible or rigid (the flexible types are more common in kids). The distinction can be made with
plantar flexion views (flexible improves with stress). The ridged subtypes can be further subdivided
into (la) tarsal coalition and Ob') vertical talus. In any case you have a hindfoot valgus.

(la) Tarsal Coalition - There are two main types (i) talus to the calcaneus, and (ii) calcaneus to
the navicular. They are pretty equal in incidence, and about 50% of the time are bilateral. You can
have bony or fibrous/cartilaginous subtypes (fibrous/cartilaginous types are more common).

(i) Talocalcaneal Coalition:               (ii) Calcaneonavicular Coalition:

· Occurs at the middle facet.              · Occurs at the anterior facet.

· "Continuous C-sign "                     · Has the "anteater sign "
  produced from an                             Where the elongated
  "absent middlefa c e t"
  on the lateral view.                       anterior process o f the
                                             calcaneus resembles the
· Talar beak (spur on                        blood thirsty nose of a
  the anterior talus -                       ravenous ant eater.
  white arrow) - seen in                     This is best seen on an
  25% of cases.                              oblique view.

(lb) Vertical Talus (equinus hindfoot valgus) - This is

sometimes called the "rocker-bottom foot" because the talus is in
extreme plantar flexion with dorsal dislocation of the Navicular -
resulting in a locked talus in plantar flexion. As a point of trivia
this is often associated with myelomeningocele.

(2) Club Foot (Talipes Equino Varus)- Translation - Congenital Plantar Flexed Ankle
Forefoot. This is sorta why I lead with the vocab, all the congenital feet can be figured out based on
the translated language. This thing is more common in boys, and bilateral about half the time. The
toes are pointed down (equines), and the talocalcaneal angle is acute (varus).

Key features:                                        M edial Deviation
     · Flindfoot varus
          (decreased talocalcaneal angle)
     · Medial deviation and inversion
          of the forefoot
     · Elevated Plantar Arch

Trivia: The most common surgical complication is                      Club Foot
over correction resulting in a "rocker bottom" flat
foot deformity.

Hindfoot Valgus  Pes Planes                                                                     T-C
Hindfoot Varus                                                           Coalition
                 Talipes Equino
                 Varus (Club Foot)                                                              C-N

                                             249                      Vertical Talus
- Hip Dysplasia -

Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH) - This is seen m ore com m only in
females, children bom breech, and oligohydramnios. The physical exam buzzwords are
asymmetric skin or gluteal folds, leg length discrepancy, palpable clunk, or delayed
ambulation. It's bilateral about 1/3 o f the time. Ultrasound is done to evaluate (after physical
exam), and is excellent until the bones ossify (then you need x-rays). A com mon trick is to be
careful making a measurement in the first week o f life - the laxity immediately after birth
(related to maternal estrogen) can screw up the measurements.

A Angles.

On ultrasound the alpha angle, should be
more than 60 degrees. Anything less
than that and your cup is not deep enough
to hold your ball. The plain film
equivalent in the acetabular angle, which
is the complimentary angle (and
therefore should be less than 30).

Getting them confused? Remember that
the "Alpha Angle is the Alpha M ale " -
and therefore the bigger o f the two angles.
**But don't forget that DDH is more
common in women (not alpha males).

The acetabular angle should decrease
from 30 degrees at birth to 22 degrees at
age 1. DDH is the classic cause o f an
increased angle, but neuromuscular
disorder can also increase it.

                                              Acet                        H

The position of the femoral epiphysis               /            Ideal
(or where it will be) should be below                        Location
H ilgenreiner's line "H ", and medial to               /T '   Fem oral
Perkin's Line " P " . Shenton's Line "S"                     Epiphysis
should be continuous.

                                              250
           Proximal Focal Femoral Deficiency:

This is a congenital zebra, which ranges from absent proximal
femur to hypoplastic proximal femur.

The classic history is "weirdfucked up looking tiny
Frankenstein leg. "
You get a varus deformity.

This is described as a mimic of DDH,
but DDH will have normal femur leg length (not a fucked up looking tiny Frankenstein leg).

Slipped Capital Femoral                    NORMAL                       SCFE
Epiphysis (SCFE)
                                                                X
This is a type 1 Salter Harris, through
the proximal femoral physis. What          "Klein's Line" - D raw n along th e e d g e of the
makes this unique is that unlike most      fem ur and should norm ally intersect with lateral
SH Is, this guy has a bad prognosis if     sup erio r fem o ra l epiphysis. T h is line is used to
not fixed.                                 e v a lu a te for S C F E . W h e n the line d o e s n 't cross
                                           the lateral epiphysis think S C F E .
The classic history is a fat African
American adolescent (age 12-15) with
hip pain.

It's bilateral in 1/3 of cases (both hips
don't usually present at same time).

         The frog leg view is the money
          - this is always the answer on
          next step questions.

                                           ***Testable Trivia - 1             IS more

                                           sensitive for this m easurem ent

Legg-Calve-Perthes                                                 T H IS vs THAT:

This is AVN of the proximal femoral epiphysis.                                      i

It's seen more in boys than girls (4:1), and favors white  Perthes            SCFE
people around age 5-8. These kids tend to be smaller
than average for their age.                                Often Small       Overweight
                                                           White Kids        Black Kids
This is bilateral about 10% of the time (less than
SCFE).                                                     Age 5-8            Age 12-15

The subchondral lucency (crescent sign) is best seen on a  Bilateral 10% Bilateral 30%
frog leg. Other early signs include an asymmetric small
ossified femoral epiphysis. MRI has more sensitivity.
The flat collapsed femoral head makes it obvious. Sterile
joint effusions (transient synovitis) can be associated.

                                           251
Septic Arthritis- This is serious business ,           Fluid Distending the Joint Capsule
and considered the most urgent cause of painful        over the Femoral Neck (arrow)
hip in a child. Wide joint space (lateral
displacement of femoral head), should prompt an
ultrasound, and that should prompt a joint tap. If
you have low suspicion and don't w ant to tap the
hip. You could pull on the leg under fluoro and try
and get gas in the joint. This air arthrogram sign
supposedly excludes a joint effusion (and
therefore a septic joint) - depending on who you
ask.

Transient Synovitis - This is a sterile                Hip Joint Effusions Are Seen Here at the Neck
(reactive) hip effusion that occurs in the setting of
a systemic illness (usually viral URI or GI). As
the name suggests this is "transient" and goes
away in a few days. This is actually very
common. Some sources will say its the most
common hip disorder in growing children (peak
age is around 5). The ED will be in a full panic
and want you to tap it at 3 am.

TH IS vs THAT: Transient Synovitis vs Septic Arthritis

Telling these apart is actually im portant for real life (not getting sued) since a septic hip will
fucking destroy the kid's cartilage (usually if it's m issed for m ore than 4 days).

Ortho (and in very rare situations a "smart" ED doc) will use a clinical parameter
"the K ocher C riteria" to tell them apart.

Criteria is 4 parts:                                   If 3/4 are positive = Septic
· Fever                                                If CRP is negative and the kid can
· Inability to walk                                    bear w eight it's N OT Septic
. Elevated ESR (or CRP)                                CRP is the strongest independent
. W B C > 12K                                          risk factor for septic arthritis

Typical workup is going to be:
1. X-Ray Hip series (AP, Lateral, and Frog Leg) which is usually negative in real life but

     will probably show medial joint widening on the exam.
2. Ultrasound which will show an effusion.
3. Then a clinical decision based on K ocher Criteria (>2) and "Gut Instinct" to Aspirate
4. M RI w ould only be used if/when hip aspiration can't/hasn't been perform ed

                         252
                                -Metabolic-

Rickets - Not enough vitamin D. Affects the most
rapidly growing bones (mostly knees and wrists).
Buzzwords "fraying, cupping, and irregularity along
the physeal margin. " They are at increased risk for
SCFE. "Rachitic rosary" appearance from expansion o f
the anterior rib ends at the costochondral junctions. As a
pearl, rickets is never seen in a newborn (M om 's
vitamin D is still doing its thing).

Hypophosphatasia - This looks like Rickets in a              "Cupping" & Fraying
newborn. They will have frayed metaphyses and bowed
long bones. The underlying pathology is deficient
serum alkaline phosphatase. There is variability in
severity with lethal perinatal / natal forms, and more mild
adult forms.

Scurvy - Not enough vitamin C. This is rare as hell outside o f a pirate ship in the 1400s.
For the purpose o f trivia (which multiple choice tests love) the following stuff is high yield:

· Does NOT occur before 6 months of age (maternal stores buffer)
          o Bleeding Disorders Common
          o Subperiosteal hemorrhage (lifts up the periosteum)

· Hemarthrosis
· "Scorbutic rosary" appearance from expansion of the costochondral junctions (very

     similar to rickets).

Lead Poisoning - This is most commonly seen in kids less than two who eat paint chips.
The classic finding is a wide sclerotic m etaphyseal line (lead line), in an area o f rapid
growth (knee). It will not spare the fibula (as a normal variant line might).

Lucent Metaphyseal Bands
- This is a classic peds DDx. - LINE.

· Leukemia
· Infection (TORCH)
· Neuroblastoma Mets
· Endocrine (rickets, Scurvy)

                                       253
                   - Non-Accidental Trauma I NAT) -

                                "Som e People Just C a n 't Take Scream ing Kids. "
Any suspicious fracture should prompt a skeletal survey ("baby gram" does NOT count).
Suspicious fractures would include highly specific fractures (metaphyseal comer fracture,
posterior rib fractures) or fractures that don't make sense - toddler fracture in a non­
ambulatory child.
· Posterior M edial Rib Fracture: In a child under the age of

  3, this is pretty reliable. Supposedly this type o f fracture can
   only be made from squeezing a child.
· M etaphyseal Corner Fractures: W hen this is present in a
   non-ambulatory patient (infant) it is HIGHLY specific. The
   only exception is obstetric trauma. A fter age 1, this becom es
   less specific.
· Skull Fracture: The general idea is anything other than a parietal bone fracture (which is
   supposedly seen more with an actual accident) is concerning.
· Solid Organ and Lum en Injury - D on't forget about this as a presentation for NAT.
   Duodenal hematoma and pancreatitis (from trauma) in an infant - should get you to say
   NAT. Just think "belly trauma in a kid that is too yo u n g to fa ll on the handle bars o f their
   bike

                                                                 254
