                                S E C TIO N 2:

                  PERITONEAL CAVITY

The peritoneal cavity is the space between the various coverings (parietal and visceral peritoneum) in the
abdomen. It can be both a conduit for disease and a source of anatomic trivia.

Anatomic Trivia:

There are 2 primary "sacs" - greater and lesser. No surprise, the "greater"
is the big one. The "lesser" is basically the spot behind the stomach. It is
important to know that the "lesser sac" can be called the "omental bursa" -
for the purpose of flicking with you. The conduit between the greater and
lesser sac is referred to as the epiploicforamen (o f Winslow) - white arrow.

The "greater sac" can be divided again into two parts above (supracolic) and below (infracolic) the
transverse mesocolon. The supracolic and infracolic compartments are connected by the right and left
paracolic gutters along the lateral aspects of the ascending / descending colon. The right one is wider than
the left (the left one owns a sports car to compensate).

Male vs Female: The female peritoneum communicates with the extraperitoneal pelvis via the fallopian
tubes. This is why you'd never squirt barium into the vagina/uterus during a HSG (it would end up
causing a peritonitis and a lawsuit). The male peritoneum does not communicate.

Disease Conduit:

Disease may spread through the abdomen and pelvis by (1) the bloodstream,

(2) Lymphatic extension / (3) Direct invasion - with occurs from spread along the peritoneal ligaments
and mesenteries. Testable examples:

· Gastrohepatic Ligament - allows spread from the stomach, esophagus, and liver
· Gastrosplenic Ligament - allows spread from the stomach to the splenic hilum
· Duodenocolic Ligament - allows spread from the right colon to nodes around the duodenum / pancreas

(4) Intraperitoneal seeding - this occurs via the         Pelvic Abscesses tend
natural flow of fluid. The natural intraperitoneal fluid  to collect in the areas
mostly flows upward from the pelvis to the upper          pulled by gravity in
abdomen via the right (more than left) paracolic          the supine position
gutters. Anywhere the fluid tends to spend more time      (sick people tend to
/ get caught up (shown by the stars) will be              spend more time supine).
predisposed for serosal-based metastases in the
setting of peritoneal carcinomatosis.                     Additionally, it is said that pus and ascites
                                                          tends to flow away from the liver (the opposite
Right ___                                                 of normal flow). As a result the dependent
Paracolic ^                                               areas: right posterior subphrenic recess
                                                          (RPSA), anterior subheptic space (ASH),
Lower                                                     posterior sub hepatic space / hepatorenal recess
recess of                                                 / Morrison (M) and pelvic cavity tend to be
mesentery                                                 involved. ASH

                                                          RPSA

                  Sigmoid
                  Mesocolon

                   Pouch of
                   Douglas

                  302
Pseudomyxoma Peritonei: This is a gelatinous ascites that results from either
(a) ruptured mucocele (usually appendix), or intraperitoneal spread of a mucinous neoplasm (ovary, colon,
appendix, and pancreas). It's usually the appendix (least common is the pancreas).
The buzzword is "scalloped appearance of the liver." Recurrent bowel obstructions are common.

Peritoneal Carcinomatosis: The main thing to know regarding peritoneal implants is that the
natural flow of ascites dictates the location of implants. This is why the retrovesical space is the most
common spot, since it's the most dependent part of the peritoneal cavity.

Omental Seeding/Caking: The omental surface can get implanted by cancer and become thick.
The catch-phrase is "posterior displacement of the bowel from the anterior abdominal wall."

        Primary Peritoneal Mesothelioma: People think about mesothehoma involving the
        pleura (and it does 75% of the time), but the other 25% of the time it involves the peritoneal
        surface. The thing to know is that it occurs 30-40 years after the initial asbestosis exposure.

Cystic Peritoneal Mesothelioma: This is the even more rare benign mesothelioma, that is NOT
associated with prior asbestos exposure. It usually involves a women of child-bearing age (30s).

Barium Gone Bad: Rare but serious complications - two main flavors: (1) Peritonitis & (2) Intravasation.

Barium Peritonitis: This is why you use water soluble contrast anytime you are worried about leak. The
pathology is an attack of the peritoneal barium by the leukocytes which creates a monster inflammatory
reaction (often with massive ascites and sometimes hypovolemia and resulting shock). If no "real doctor" is
available, you should give IV fluids to reduce the risk of hypovolemic shock. The long term sequela of barium
peritonitis is the development of granulomas and adhesions (causing obstructions and an eventual lawsuit).

Barium Intravasation: This is super rare, but can happen. If barium ends up in the systemic circulation it
kills via pulmonary embolism about 50% of the time. Risk is increased in patients with inflammatory bowel or
diverticulitis (altered mucosa).

Mesenteric Mass:               Bowel Association - Duplication Cyst

Cystic  Unilocular                  Surgical Site         Lymphocele
        Multi-locular            Hx of Pancreatitis  - Pseudocyst
                               Lymphangioma

Solid   Many Lesions            Mets, Lymphoma, Mesothelioma
                           ^    Fat Containing  Liposarcoma

        Single Lesion          Don't y f Smooth _    GIST, Solitary Fibrous Tumor
                            >
                               Have  Margms
                               Fa. ^ Infiltrative ^  Ileum Location +

                                                     Arterial                  -- Carcinoid

                                     Margins         Enhancement

                                                     Distorting Margins Delayed  Desmoid,
                                                     Hyper-Enhancement           Sclerosing
                                                                                 Mesenteritis

Mesenteric Lymphoma: This is usually non-Hodgkin lymphoma, which supposedly involves the
mesentery 50% of the time. The buzzword is "sandwich sign." The typical appearance is a lobulated
confluent soft tissue mass encasing the mesenteric vessels "sandwiching them."

Misty Mesentery: The imaging appearance of increased mesenteric fat

density centered around the jejunal root, often with a few small nodes. It is
usually mesenteric panniculitis (but can also be lymphoma). Retroperitoneal
nodes (big ones) of the bulky soft tissue "sandwich" would make you think
lymphoma. Most people will get a 6 month follow up to establish stability.

                                     303
