       SECTION 5:
HEPATIC DOPPLER

Brief introduction to terminology.

      ``Duplex " means color.
      "Spectral" means color with a waveform.

- Concept of Arterial Resistance -

Some organs require continuous flow (brain), whereas others do not (muscles). The body is
smart enough to understand this, and will make alterations in resistance / flow to preserve energy.
When an organ needs to be "on," its arteriolar bed dilates, and the waveform becomes low
resistance. This allows the organ to be appropriately perfused. When an organ goes to "power
save" mode, it directs the arterioles to constrict. The result is a switch in waveform to high
resistance as blood flow is diverted to other more vital organs.

To help quantify this low resistance high           RI = PSV - EDV / PSV
resistance thing, we use this

"Resistive Index (RI)"
- which is defined as V1-V2 / V I.

Just remember that things that need blood all
the time, will have continuous diastolic flow
- and thus a low resistance wave form.

                                 What is this ``Tardus Parvus" ?  Normal H. Artery

Tardus: Refers to a slowed systolic
upstroke. This can be measured by
acceleration time, the time from end
diastole to the first systolic peak. An
acceleration time > 0.07 sec correlates with
>50% stenosis of the renal artery

Parvus: Refers to decreased systolic
velocity. This can be measured by
calculating the acceleration index, the
change in velocity from end diastole to the
first systolic peak.

An acceleration index <3.0 m/sec-
correlates with >50% stenosis of the renal
artery

                                               331
- Understanding Stenosis -
The vocabulary o f "Upstream vs D ownstream " is som ewhat confusing. Try and remember,
that the flow o f blood defines the direction.

     * Upstream = Blood that has NOT yet passed through the stenosis
     * Downstream = Blood that has passed through the area o f stenosis

So there are direct and indirect signs of stenosis.
Direct Signs: The direct signs are those found at the stenosis itself and they include elevated
peak systolic velocity and spectral broadening (immediate post stenotic).
Indirect Signs: The indirect signs are going to be tardus parvus (downstream) - with time to
peak (systolic acceleration) > 70msec. The RI downstream will be low (< 0.5) because the
liver is starved for blood. The RI upstream will be elevated (> 0.7) because that blood needs
to overcome the area o f stenosis.

High RI  Increased    Low RI
            Peak    Decreased

          Velocity      Peak
                     Velocity
           332
- Hepatic Veins -

Flow in the hepatic veins is complex, with alternating forward and backward flow. The bulk
of the flow should be forward "antegrade" (liver -> heart). Things that mess with the
waveform are going to be pressure changes in the right heart which are transmitted to the
hepatic veins (CHF, Tricuspid Regurg) or compression o f the veins directly (cirrhosis).

Anything that increases right atrial                 Above the line is Retrograde
pressure (atrial contraction) will                   (towards the liver)
cause the wave to slope upward.
"A" represents atrial contraction.

Anything that decreases right atrial                 Below the line is Antegrade
pressure will cause the wave to                      (towards ttie heart)
slope downward.
                                                      Increased HV        Decreased HV
Abnormal Hepatic Vein                                    Pulsatility         Pulsatility
Waveforms can manifest in one o f three main
categories:                                          Tricuspid Regurg        Cirrhosis

(1) More Pulsatile                                   Right Sided CHF      Hepatic Venous
                                                                       Outflow Obstruction
(2) Less Pulsatile
                                                                            (any cause)
(3) Absent = Budd Chiari

LOW YIELD - TRIVIA - Study only on second time through

THIS vs THAT: Tricuspid Regurg vs Rigiit Sided CHF

                                                                       A V

Although certain dinosaur radiologists still
love this stuff, it's unlikely to show up on
the test, and if it does it probably w on't be
more than one question. If they ask it at all
- 1 would bet the question is something
regarding the "D Wave to S Wave"
relationship.

 Tricuspid Regurg - D deeper than S
 Right Heart Failure - S deeper than D

                                                333
- Portal Vein -

Flow in the portal vein should always be towards the liver (antegrade). You can see some
normal cardiac variability from hepatic venous pulsatility transmitted through the hepatic
sinusoids. Velocity in the normal portal vein is between 20-40 cm/s. The waveform should be a
gentle undulation , always remaining above the baseline.

You have three main patterns:                                  NORMA
     (1) Normal                                                PULSATILE
     (2) Pulsatile                                             REVERSED
     (3) Reversed

Causes o f Portal Vein Pulsatility: Right-sided CHF, Tricuspid Regurg, Cirrhosis with Vascular
AP shunting.

Causes o f Portal Vein Reversed Flow: The big one is Portal HTN (any cause).

Absent Flow: This could be considered a fourth pattern. It's seen in thrombosis, tumor invasion,
and stagnant flow from terrible portal HTN.

Slow Flow: Velocities less than 15 cm/s. Portal HTN is the most common cause. Additional
causes are grouped by location:

      Pre - Portal Vein Thrombosis
      Intra - Cirrhosis (any cause)
      Post - Right-sided Heart Failure, Tricuspid Regurg, Budd-Chiari

Final Doppler Trivia:

An ultra-common quiz question is to ask "what should        A

the Doppler angle be?" Now even though ultrasound

physics is covered in more detail in the dedicated section

o f the War M achine this is a high yield enough point to

warrant repetition. The answer is "less than 60. "

Why? Doppler strength follows the cosine of the angle.
For example, Cos 90 = 0, Cos 60 = 0.5, Cos 0 = 1.0
- the doppler strength follows the Cos.

                               334
