                                       S E C T I O N 7:
                                     S urgical

The Whipple Procedure:

The standard Whipple procedure involves resection of the pancreatic head, duodenum, gastric
antrum, and almost always the gallbladder. A jejunal loop is brought up to the right upper
quadrant for gastrojejunal, choledochojejunal or hepaticojejunal, and pancreatojejunal
anastomosis.

An alternative method used by some surgeons is to perform a pancreatoduodenectomy and
preserve the pylorus when possible. There is debate in the surgery literature with regard to
which method should be the standard. In this pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy, the
stomach is left intact and the proximal duodenum is used for a duodenojejunal anastomosis.

CBD                             Stom ach
     Pancreatic

                 Whipple

Complications:
Delayed gastric emptying {needfor NG tube longer than 1- day) and pancreatic fistula {amylase
through the surgical drain >50 mlfo r longer than 7-10 days), are both clinical diagnoses and
are the most common complications after pancreatoduodenectomy.
Wound infection is the third most common complication, occurring in 5% -20% o f patients.

                                                                345
- Transplant -

Pancreas transplant (usually with a renal transplant) is an established therapy for severe type 1
diabetes - which is often complicated by renal failure. The vascular anatomy regarding this
transplant is quite complicated and beyond the scope o f this text. Just know that the pancreas
transplant receives arterial inflow from two sources: the donor SMA, {which supplies the head
via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery) and the donor splenic artery, {which supplies the
body and tail). The venous drainage is via both the donor portal vein and the recipient SMV.
Exocrine drainage is via the bowel {in older transplants via the bladder).

The number one cause o f graft failure is acute rejection. The number two cause o f graft failure is
donor splenic vein thrombosis. Donor splenic vein thrombosis usually occurs within the first 6
weeks o f transplant. Venous thrombosis is much more common than arterial thrombosis in the
transplant pancreas, especially when compared to other transplants because the vessels are
smaller and the clot frequently forms within and propagates from the tied-off stump vessels.
Both venous thrombosis and acute rejection can appear as reversed diastolic flow. Arterial
thrombosis is also less o f a problem because o f the dual supply to the pancreas (via the Y graft).
A point of trivia is that the resistive indices are not o f value in the pancreas, because the organ
lacks a capsule. The graft is also susceptible to pancreatitis, which is common < 4 weeks after
transplant and usually mild. Increased rates of pancreatitis were seen with the older bladder
drained subtype.

           ``Shrinking Transplant" is a buzzword for chronic rejection, where the graft
          progressively gets smaller in size.

                                                                 346
