                                       S E C TIO N 4:

                                    G allb lad d er

Normal Gallbladder

The normal gallbladder is found inferior to the interlobar fissure between the right and left lobe. The
size varies depending on the last meal, but is supposed to be < 4 x < 10cm. It is important to
understand that the gallbladder will distend when fasting and be empty after eating. So a mildly
distended gallbladder is "normal" in a fasting state. More than 4cm in width is dilated - and can
make you think about obstruction -- usually from a stone.

The wall thickness should be < 3mm. A thick wall is nonspecific, and in general means that it is
inflamed or swollen. Inflammation can be from the gallbladder or the adjacent liver. This is why
hepatitis (inflammation of the liver) can cause gallbladder wall thickening. Edema - like you think
about in a CHF / fluid overloaded patient - that can also cause a thickening gallbladder wall.

The lumen should be anechoic -- looking like a simple cyst.

Normal Anatomy:                              These things here (that
                                             you can sometimes see
The gallbladder (like         Body           on MRCP) have a
the stomach) has        Fundus               testable name:
named parts that could
be potentially tested.                       "Spiral Valves
I've grey scale color                        of Heister"
coded them here in
this amazing
illustration:

Variants/Congenital

Duct of Luschka: An accessory cystic duct. This can cause a big problem (persistent bile leak)
after cholecystectomy. There are several subtypes - which is not likely to be tested.

    Cystic               Common
    Duct                  Hepatic Duct

NORMAL                  Common
                        Bile Duct

                                        Accessory Subvesicular        Hepaticocystic
                                        (most common)

Phrygian cap: A phrygian cap is seen when the GB folds on itself It means nothing.

Intrahepatic Gallbladder: Variations in gallbladder location are rare, but the intrahepatic
gallbladder is probably the most frequently recognized variant. Most are found right above the
interlobar fissure.

Duplicated Gallbladder: It can happen.

                                        326
GBPathology Part 1- The last Wish

GB Wall Thickening (> 3mm):                              -Gallbladder Shadowing-
Very non-specific. Can occur irom          (1) Gallbladder full of stones - *Clean Shadowing.
biliary (Cholecystitis, AIDS, PSC...) or   (2) Porcelain Gallbladder -* Variable Shadowing
non-biliary causes (hepatitis, heart       (3) Emphysematous Cholecystitis - *Dirty Shadowing.
failure, cirrhosis, etc....).
                                           C lean S h a d o w (stone)Dirty S h a d o w (air in wail)
Gallstones: Gallstones are found in
10% of asymptomatic patients. In kids
you should reflexively think about sickle
cell. Most (75%) are cholesterol, the
other 25% are pigmented.

On ultrasound, they cast shadows.

Reasons a stone might not cast a shadow
 It's not a stone
 It's a stone, but < 3mm in size
 The sonographer is an amateur

  (Bush league psyche-out stuff.
  Laughable, man)

Acute Cholecystitis:

This is similar to the pathophysiology of a pimple (or an appendicitis). The            Most Sensitive
gallbladder is full of dirty stuff and it needs to intermittently drain. If it gets  Ultrasound Findings
clogged up (typically by a stone) then it dilates (which causes pain). Bile
salts begin to concentrate and inflame the gallbladder mucosa (causing it to          Sonographic
thicken). Eventually enteric bacteria, promising to usher in a marxist utopia,         Murphy and
plot a bolshevik coup d'etat against the gallbladder mucosa - which if not
stopped can lead to gangrenous cholecystitis, rupture, abscess, and the death         Cholelithiasis
of free will and liberty.

In this way you can remember that acute cholecystitis should have:

 Pain -- the sonographic Murphy sign (maximal tenderness from the ultrasound probe over the

visualized gallbladder). The pain is typically constant - as opposed to biliary colic with is intermittent.

 Stones - around 95% of cases are caused by a stone obstructing the cystic duct

 Dilation of the Gallbladder (more than 4cm in width)

 Wall thickness (from inflammation -- this can increase in severity with time)

                                                                                     Gallstone impacted

Gangrenous Cholecystitis - This is an advanced subtype of cholecystitis with

necrosis of the gallbladder wall. Some useful trivia:

 Murphy Sign can be absent (necrosis of the nerve supply)
 Sloughed Membranes or "Cobwebs" is a buzzword for the sonographic

  appearance. I 've attempted to illustrate that here (arrows):

Emphvsematous Cholecystitis - Infection with gas-forming organisms
(in the wall & lumen of gallbladder). Some useful trivia:

 Common in elderly diabetics
 More likely to perforate
 "Dirtv Shadowing" is the classic sonographic appearance.

                                           327
GBPathologyPart2- TheSwordof Dosnny

Acute Acalculous Cholecystitis:

In most cases the absence of gallstones is going to make the diagnosis of cholecystitis unlikely. As we
discussed on the prior page, the process is typically obstructive - with a stone being the most conmion
cause of obstruction. Having said that, there is a specific situation where you can have a pissed off
gallbladder without a stone.

This process is similar to non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI) in the bowel. Where most cases of
bowel ischemia are caused by a clot obstructing arterial or venous flow -- or a direct pinch from a hernia
or an abnormal twist -- there is a cause where none of that shit is happening. NOMI occurs after a severe
hypotensive event (massive blood loss, sepsis, near drowning or strangling yourself while masturbating).
In these near death events, there is often massive vasoconstriction of the bowel to shunt blood to the brain
and heart. This is the same idea with acute acalculous cholecystitis. My point here is that you want this
patient to be super sick or just narrowly escaped death final destination style. Some useful trivia:

 Classic scenario = following heart vale replacement surgery
 Thick wall and adjacent fluid are considered more important that gallbladder dilation
 HIDA scan will be positive (gallbladder not visualized) same as you'd expect with an obstructive stone.

Mirizzi Syndrome: This occurs when the common hepatic duct is obstructed

secondary to an impacted cystic duct stone. The stone can eventually erode into the
CHD or GI tract. The legend states that Mirizzi occurs more in people with a
low cystic duct insertion (normal variant), allowing for a more parallel course
and closer proximity to the CHD.

Key point: Increased co-incidence of gallbladder CA (5x more risk)                   Cystic Duct Stone
                                                                                     Obstructing CBD

Bouveret Syndrome:

Gastric outlet obstruction that occurs after impaction of a gallstone in the pylorus or proximal duodenum.
The idea is that a gallstone can erode through the gallbladder and form a fistula into the nearby small
bowel. If it gets stuck in the proximal duodenum or stomach it causes upstream dilation and a distended
stomach. This is not the classic location for a gallstone ileus (usually it is the the ileocecal valve) - so
don't get confused -- this is not a common thing - but it does have a French sounding name so you better
know it for the exam.

Some useful trivia:
 Bouveret Syndrome is a gallstone ileus - in its most proximal form.
 French sounding name "Bouveret" infers the syndrome is very high yield for multiple choice exams
 Bouveret sounds like belch to me (maybe because I don't speak French) -- distended stomachs need to

  belch. Belching is rude. French people are famously rude. It is very rude of a gallstone to erode into
  the proximal small bowel and cause a gastric outlet obstruction.

In a fashion        There is resulting
typical of a rude   upstream dilation
Frenchman, a        of the stomach
gallstone creates   secondary to the
a fistula into the  very rude
adjacent            gallstone
proximal small      obstructing
bowel               outflow.

                    328
GBPathologyPart 3-TheBloodof Elves

                                Clinically M eaningless THIS vs THAT:
                 Gallbladder Adenom yom atosis VS Cholesterolosis

Nothing makes an Academic Radiologist happier than spending time deploying intense
focused concentration targeted at distinguishing between two very similar appearing
completely benign (often incidental) processes. They believe this "adds value" and will
save them from the eventual avalanche o f reim bursement cuts with subsequent A! takeover.

Classic Example: Adenomyomatosis vs Gallbladder Cholesterolosis. These things are
actually different - and even though it makes zero difference clinically, this is just the kind
o f thing people who write questions love to write questions about.

Gallbladder Adenomyomatosis: You have hypertrophied mucosa and muscularis propria,
with the cholesterol crystals deposited in an intralum inal location (w ithin Rokitanskv-
A schoff sinusesV

Cholesterolosis: Cholesterol and triglyceride deposition is within the substance o f the
lamina propria, and associated with formation o f cholesterol polyps.

Adenomyomatosis: Results from hyperplasia o f
the wall with formation o f intramural mucosal
diverticula (Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses) which
penetrate into the wall o f the gallbladder. These
diverticula become filled with cholesterol crystals -
which manifest from the unique acoustic signature
as comet-tail artifact Thighlv specific for
adenomyomatosis).

Comes in 3 flavors: Segmental (annular), Fundal                                                                      D iffu s e
(localized or adenomyoma), and Generalized (diffuse)
The Localized form can't be differentiated from GB
cancer.

                                                                                             Segm ental, Localized,

Gamesmanship: D on't be tricked into selecting "Adenom yosis " as a distractor. That
shit is in the uterus. Rem ember the larger w ord is in the smaller organ. Or, you can
think about the two Ms in M yoM at - turned inward sorta looks like a gallbladder.

  nn

329
GB Pathology Part 4 - Time of Contempt

Porcelain Gallbladder:

 Extensive wall calcification.
 The key point is increased risk o f GB Cancer.
 These are surgically removed.

Gallbladder Polyps:

These can be cholesterol (by far the most      THIS vs THAT: Gallbladder Polyps
common), or non cholesterol (adenomas,
papillomas). Cholesterol polyps aren't real         Benign               Malignant
polyps, but instead are essentially enlarged
papillary fronds full of lipid filled          < 5mm                     > 1cm
macrophages, that are attached to              *these are nearly always  between 5mm-10mm
the wall by a stalk.                           cholesterol polyps        usually get followed for
                                                                         growth
The non-cholesterol subtypes are almost
always solitary and are typically larger. The  Pedunculated              Sessile
larger polyps may have Doppler flow. They are
NOT mobile and do NOT shadow. Once they        Multiple                  Solitary
get to be 1 cm, people start taking them out.
                                               Comet Tail Artifact on    Enhancement on CT/
                                               Ultrasound (seen in       MRl greater than the
                                               cholesterol polyps)       adjacent gallbladder
                                                                         wall. Flow on Doppler.

Gallbladder Cancer:

 Classic vignette would be an elderly women with nonspecific RUQ pain, weight loss,
  anorexia and a long standing history o f gallstones, PSC, or large gallbladder polyps.

 Most GB cancers are associated with gallstones (found in 85% o f cases)
 Mirizzi syndrome has a well described increased risk o f GB cancer
 Other risk factors include smoldering inflammatory processes (PSC, Chronic

  Cholecystitis, Porcelain Gallbladder! and large polyps ("large" = bigger than 1cm)
 Unless the cancer is in the fundus (w hich can cause biliary obstruction) they often present

  late and have horrible outcomes with 80% found with direct tumor invasion o f the liver or
  portal nodes at the time o f diagnosis.

                                               330
