                                    SECTION 3:
                               LIVER / B ilia r y

Bare Area: The liver is covered by visceral peritoneum except at the porta hepatis, bare area, and
the gallbladder fossa. An injury to the "bare area" can result in a retroperitoneal bleed.

Couinaud System: Functional division of the liver into multiple segments. "Functional" is the
key word. Each segment will have its own biliary drainage, inflow, and outflow.

                                                                                                                       Falciform / L.
                        Hepatic Veins

                                                      Falciform

                                                              Above the g
                                                                 Portal Vein

                                                                                                                         * R. HV

                      A   Extrapolated
                          Hepatic Vein
             Below the    Locations
             Portal Vein

Portal Vein

Couinaud System Testable Trivia:
 Right Hepatic Vein Divides 7/8, and 6/5
 Middle Hepatic Vein Divides 4a/8, 4b/5
 Left Hepatic Vein / Fissure for the Ligamentum Teres (falciform) divides 4a/2, 4b/3
 The Portal Vein Divides the Liver into Upper and Lower Segments
 The Caudate Lobe (Segm ent 1) is unique in that it drains directly to the IVC.

             "C antlie's Line" divides the liver into a
             functional left and right hepatic lobes.
             This line runs from the IVC to the middle o f the
             gallbladder fossa.

             304
Caudate Lobe: The caudate lobe (segm ent 1) has a direct connection to the IVC through
it's own hepatic veins, which do not com m unicate with the prim ary hepatic veins.
Additionally, the caudate is supplied by branches o f both the right and left portal veins - which
matters because the caudate may be spared or hypertrophied as the result o f various
pathologies such as Budd Chiari, etc ... (as discussed later in the chapter).

          Additional Anatomic Trivia:

Trivia: Along the same lines o f anatomy explaining pathology, the intra-hepatic course o f the
right portal vein is longer than the left, w hich is w hy it is m ore susceptible to fibrosis (this is
why the right liver shrinks, and the left liver grows in cirrhotic morphology).

Trivia: M ost common vascular variant = Replaced right hepatic (origin from the SMA)

Trivia: M ost common biliary variant = Right posterior segmental into the left hepatic duct.

Normal MRI Signal Characteristics: I like to think o f the spleen as a bag o f water/
blood (T2 bright, T1 dark). The pancreas is the "brightest T1 structure in the body" because it
has enzymes. The liver also has enzymes and is similar to the pancreas (T1 Brighter, T2
darker), just not as bright as the pancreas

Fetal Circulation: The fetal circulation anatom y is high yield anatomic trivia.

          ^ Liver

Placenta  Umbilical Vein                       ^ IVC

          ^  ^ Ductus Venosus                  Jf

                          (remnant o f

                          ligamentum venosum)

                          305
Classic Ultrasound Anatomy:

There are 4 high yield looks, that are classically tested with regard to ultrasound anatomy. In years
past, these were said to have been shown by oral boards examiners (likely the same dinosaurs
writing the exam).

Trivia:                                                * . / siyiA
Pancreas
should be                                   ... -'-i-            LRV
more
echogenic                                                        A
than liver

            S = Splenic Vein, SMA = SMA, LRV = Left Renal Vein,
                    A= Aorta, VB = Vertebral Body, IVC = IVC

            RHA - Right Hepatic Artery, CBD = Common Bile Duct, PV = Portal Vein

Mickey Mouse Sign: (1) Bile Duct, (2)
Hepatic Artery, (3) Portal Vein

                                            Fat in the Falciform Ligament /
                                            Ligamentum Teres

                                       306
Promethean Dialogue on the Liver -

A discourse on the liver, cirrhosis, p o rta l HTN, a n d the developm ent o f H C C

My idea is that by leading with a discussion o f normal physiology, and the changes that
occur with diffuse liver injury, that a lot o f the processes and changes that occur with
cirrhosis will make more sense (and be easier to remember). If you are in a rush to cram for
the test just skip this discussion and move on to the charts. If you have more time, I think
understanding the physiology is worthwhile.

Hepatocyte injury can occur from a variety o f causes including viruses, alcohol, toxins
{alfatoxins i.e. peanut fungus), and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. These injuries result in
increased liver cell turnover, to which the body reacts by forming regenerative nodules. The
formation o f regenerative nodules is an attempt by the liver not ju st to replace the dam aged
hepatocytes but also to compensate for lost liver function. In addition to activation of
hepatocytes, stellate cells living in the space o f Disse become active and proliferate
changing into a myofibroblast -like cell that produces collagen. This collagen deposition
causes fibrosis.

The development o f fibrosis first puts the squeeze on the  Another consequence of the
right portal vein (which usually has a longer intrahepatic  Longer Right Portal Vein Course
course). This causes atrophy o f segments 6 and 7, and      is that Hepatic Abscess (often
compensatory hypertrophy o f the caudate, segments 2        from ascending hematogenous
and 3. Because o f these changes, some people will try      sources) nearly always (75%+)
and use a caudate / right lobe ratio {C/RL >0.75 is 99%     involves the right hepatic lobe.
specific) to call cirrhosis.

                Morphologic Changes of Cirrhosis

Left Medial /   ^ Left Segment
Right Anterior         Hypertrophy
Atrophy

                Wide Perihilar Region                                       I

                Caudate Hypertrophy                                         I
                                                                            I
Wide                   Large                                                I
Fissure                Gallbladder                                        
                       Fossa                                      Right c

                "Posterior                                  Caudate / Right Lobe Ratio
                Hepatic Notch"                                  Increased with Cirrhosis

                307
All this squeezing can lead to portal hypertension. Portal hypertension is usually the result o f
increased hepatic resistance from pre-hepatic {portal vein thrombosis, tumor compression),
hepatic {cirrhosis, schistosomiasis) and post hepatic (Budd-Chiari) causes. Obviously, most
cases are hepatic with schistosomiasis being the most common cause world-wide, and EtOH
cirrhosis being the most common cause in the US. Once portal venous pressure exceeds
hepatic venous pressure by 6-8 mmHg - portal hypertension has occurred (variceal bleeding
+ ascites around > 12). In reaction to this increased resistance offered by the liver, collaterals
will form to decompress the liver by carrying blood away from it. These tend to be
esophageal and gastric varices. As a point o f trivia, in pre-hepatic portal hypertension,
collaterals will form above the diaphragm and in the hepatogastric ligaments to bypass the
obstruction.

The liver has a dual blood supply (70% portal, 30% hepatic artery) with compensatory
relationships between the two inflows; arterial flow increases as portal flow decreases. This
helps explain the relationship between these two vessels with regard to Doppler US. As
fibrosis leads to portal hypertension, velocity in the hepatic artery increases.

Another phenomenon related to this "hepatic arterial buffer response" is the THAD. These
Transient Hepatic Attenuation Differences are typically seen in the arterial / early portal phase
- NOT on the equilibrium / delayed phases (hence the w ord "transient"). The easiest w ay to
think about them is that they are focal "arterial buffer responses." In other words, in that tiny
little spot right there the liver feels like there isn 't enough portal flow, so it responses by
increasing the arterial flow. This can happen for several reasons;

 C irrhosis: A bunch of scar / fibrosis deforms the hepatic sinusoids compressing the tiny
   little portal veins (think about arteries and veins in the neck or groin - pressure will
   compress the vein first) - people call this "shunting." This is m ost typical in the subcapsular
  region.

 Clot: Venous blood flow could be compromised from a clot in a portal vein branch (these
   enhancement patterns are typically larger, wedge shaped, and extend towards the periphery).

 M ass (B9 or Malignant): This can occur from two primary mechanisms:
   1 - You could have the direct mass effect from the mass smashing the veins.
   2 - The tumor could be recruiting / up-regulating arterial flow (VEGF etc...).

 Abscess / Infection: Also probably a mixed mechanism. Some direct mass effect, but also
   some elem ent o f "hyperem ia" - causing a " siphon effect." For clarity we aren't ju st talking
   liver abscess here, cholecystitis can also have this region effect.

                                                                 308
The perfusion related changes you see with cirrhosis aren't ju st local, you can also have global
patterns. Since the fibrosis blockade takes place at the level o f the central lobular vein (into
sinusoids), flow remains adequate for the central zones o f the liver, but not for the peripheral
zones. The arterial response produces enhancement o f the peripheral subcapsular hepatic
parenchyma with relative hypodensity o f the central perihilar area. The consequent CT pattern
is referred to as the "central-peripheral" phenom enon.

Sometimes you will see reversal of flow (hepatofugal - directed away from the liver). As an
aside, apparently "fugal" is latin for "flee." So the blood is fleeing the liver, or running away
from it. Reversed flow in the portal system is seen in cirrhosis between 5-25% o f the time.

Why does the p o rta l vein reverse flo w instead o fju s t clotting o ff in the setting o f high
resistance to inflow?

The answer has to do with the unique dual hepatic blood supply (70% P / 30% A). As
mentioned above, in cirrhosis, the principal area o f obstruction to blood flow is believed to be
in the outflow vessels (the hepatic venules and distal sinusoids). The outflow obstruction also
partially shits on the hepatic artery, causing increased resistance as well. So why doesn't the
artery clot or reverse ? The difference is that the portal system can decompress through the
creation o f collaterals, and the artery cannot. So the artery does something else, it opens up
tiny little connections to the portal system. The enlargement o f these tiny communications has
been referred to as "parasitizing the portosystemic decompressive apparatus." If the
resistance is high enough, hepatic artery inflow will be shunted into - and can precipitate
hepatofugal flow in the portal vein. So, in patients with hepatofugal flow in the main portal
vein or intrahepatic portal vein branches, the shunted blood comes from the hepatic artery.
This is the long answ er for w hy cirrhotic changes can lead to THADs, and why these cirrhosis
related THADs tend to be subcapsular.

With increased resistance in the liver to the portal circulation, you also start to have colonic
venous stasis (worse on the right). This can lead to `^Portal H ypertensive C ohpathy, " v^\\\ch
is basically an edem atous bowel that mim ics colitis. W hy is it worse on the right? The short
answer is that collateral pathways develop more on the left (splenorenal shunt, short gastrics,
esophageal varices), and decompress that side. The trivia question is that it does resolve after
transplant. The same process can affect the stom ach "Portal H ypertensive G astropathy"
causing a thickened gastric w all on CT, as w ell as cause upper G I bleeding in the absence o f
varices.

                                                                 309
Earlier I mentioned that hepatocytes react to injury by turning into regenerative nodules. This is
how multi-focal HCC starts. Regenerative nodules -> Dysplastic nodules (increased size and
cellularity) -> HCC. As this process takes place, the nodule changes from preferring to drink
portal blood to only wanting to drink arterial blood. This helps explain why HCC has arterial
enhancement and rapid washout. The transformation also follows a progression from T2 dark
(regenerative) -> T2 bright (HCC). A buzzword is ``nodule within no dule" where a central bright
T2 nodule has a T2 dark border. This is concerning for transformation to HCC.

Regenerative                        Dysplastic                  HCC

Contains Iron                       Contains Fat, Glycoprotein

T1 Variable, T2 Dark                T1 Bright, T2 Iso to Dark   T2 Bright

Does NOT Enhance                    Usually Does NOT Enhance    Does Enhance

Another thing that happens with hepatocarcinogenesis is the decrease in a thing called the OATP
bile uptake transporter. This is the transporter that moves biliary contrast agents (example =
Eovist) into the cells. It's the reason normal liver cells look bright on the delayed phase when
using a hepatocyte specific agent. It's also the reason FNHs look super bright on delayed images
as they are basically hypertrophied hepatocytes. As hepatocytes become cancer they lose
function in this transporter and become dark on the delayed phase. The exception (highly
testable) is the well differentiated HCC which retains OATP function and is therefore bright on
the 20 min delayed Eovist sequence.

There is one last concept that I wanted to "squeeze" in. The squeezing that causes portal
hypertension also squeezes out most benign liver lesions (cysts, hemangiomas). So, lesions in a
cirrhotic liver should be treated with more suspicion.

                  Hepatic Contrast Phase Timing & Window

 Arterial Phase                     Portal Venous Phase               "Liver Window"
 - 25-30 seconds after injection                                Center: 100 Width: 200
                                    - 70 seconds
This ("Late Arterial") is the most
critical phase for HCC evaluation.
You can recognize this timing as
contrast in the hepatic artery and
portal vein (but none in the
hepatic veins).

                                    310
     - MR Contrast - Hepatobiliary Considerations -

I want to clarify a few issues that can be confusing (and may also be testable).

How they work: Gadolinium (which is super toxic) is bound to some fype of chelation
agent to keep it from killing the patient. The shape and function of the chelation agent
determine the class and brand name. The paramagnetic qualities of gadolinium cause a local
shortening of the T1 relaxation time on neighboring molecules (remember short T1 time =
bright image).

Types of Agents: I want you to think about MRI contrast in two main flavors:
(1) Extracellular and (2) Hepatocyte Specific.

Extracellular: These are nonspecific agents that are best thought of as Iodine contrast for
CT. They stay outside the cell and are blood flow dependent (just like CT contrast). The
imaging features in lesions will be the same as CT - although the reason they look bright is
obviously different - CT contrast increases the density (attenuation), MR contrast shortens the
T1 time locally - which makes T1 brighter. The classic imaging set up is a late hepatic arterial
phase (15-30 seconds), portal venous phase (70 seconds), and a hepatic venous or interstitial
phase (90 seconds - 5 mins) - just like CT.

Classic Example o f a Non-Specific Extracellular Agent = Gd-DTPA (Magnevist)

Hepatocyte Specific: Certain chelates are excreted via the bile salt pathway. In other
words, they are taken up by normal hepatocytes and excreted into the bile. This gives you great
contrast between normal hepatocytes and things that aren't normal hepatocytes (cancer). The 20
min delay is the imaging sequence that should give you a homogenous bright liver (dark holes
are things that don't contain normal liver cells / couldn't drink the contrast). The problem is that
it's pretfy non-specific with a handful of benign things still taking it up (classical example is
FNH), and at least one bad thing taking it up (well-differentiated HCC). Plus, a handful of
benign things won't take it up (cysts, etc..). There are at least three good reasons to use this
kind of agent: (1) it's great for proving an FNH is an FNH - as most lesions won't hold onto the
Gd at 20 mins, (2) it's great for looking for bile leaks, and (3) once you've established a
baseline MRI (characterized all those benign lesions) it's excellent for picking up new mets
(findings black holes on a white background is easy).

Classic Example o f a Hepatocyte Specific Agent = Gd-EOB-DTPA (Eovist).

Is Eovist a pure Hepatocyte Specific Agent ? Nope - It also acts like a non-specific extracellular
agent early on (although less intense). About 55% is excreted into the bile - and gives a nice
intense look at 20 mins.

What about Gd-BOPTA (Multihance) ? This is mostly an extra-cellular agent, but has a small
amount (5%) of biliary excretion. The implication is that you can use Multihance to look for a
bile leak you just have to wait longer (45mins-3 hours) for the Gd to accumulate.

What about Manganese instead o f Gd ? This is the old school way to do biliary imaging. It
works the same as Gd - by causing T1 shortening.

                                                              311
                          - liver Masses -

Hemangioma: The most common benign liver neoplasm, favoring women 5:1. They may

enlarge with pregnancy. On US will be bright (unless it's in a fatty liver, then can be relatively dark).
On US, flow can be seen in vessels adjacent to the lesion but NOT in the lesion. On CT and MRI
tends to match the aorta in signal and have "peripheral nodular discontinuous enhancement". It is
critical that it be discontinuous and not a complete ring. Should totally fill in by 15 mins.

Trivia: A hemangioma can change its sonographic appearance during the course of a single
examination. No other hepatic lesion is known to do this.

Trivia: Tc-99m-labeled RBCs can be used to diagnose hemangiomas - bigger than 2 cms

Trivia: Need to core for biopsy, FNA does not get enough tissue (only blood)       Flasii Filling

Typical Hemangioma:                             Giant Hemangioma:                  Hemagioma:

 Classically Hyperechoic (bright) on            Term is used for                  Technically not a
  ultrasound                                      Hemangiomas larger than            hemangioma, but
                                                  5 cms                              historically referred
 Enhanced thru transmission is common                                               to as one.
 NO Doppler flow inside the lesion itself       Similar CT findings to regular
                                                  hemangioma peripheral             They are smaller
                                                                                     (< 2 cm) and will
 Calcifications are extremely rare             nodular discontinuous                demonstrate a rapid
                                                enhancement pattern                  "flash filling" on
 On CT: peripheral nodular discontinuous       which fills in on delays (just       arterial phase itself
  enhancement - which fills in on later phases  takes longer to fill in - cuz its
                                                                                    They otherwise
                                                giant)                               retain contrast and
                                                                                     remain isodense to
Peripheral Discontinuous  Progressive           Kasabach-Merritt syndrome,           blood pool. Thev
Nodular Enhancement       filling in on         with its classic potential           do not washout the
                          later phases          complication consumptive             way an HCC
                                                coagulopathy is a testable           would.
                                                association

Focal Nodular Hyperplasia (FNH): The second most common benign liver neoplasm.

Believed to start in utero as an AVM. It is NOT caused by oral contraceptive (birth control) pills. It is
composed of normal hepatocytes, abnormally arranged ducts, and Kupffer cells (reticuloendothelial cells).
May show spoke wheel on US Doppler. On CT, should be "homogenous" on arterial phase - similar in
brightness to the IVC fnot the aorta) Can be a "Stealth" lesion on MRI - T1 and T2 isointense. Can have
a central scar. Scar will demonstrate delayed enhancement (like scars do).

Biopsy Trivia: You have to hit the scar, otherwise path results will say normal
hepatocytes.

Medicine Trivia: Can develop after chemotherapy treatment with
oxaliplatin (chemo for bowel cancer)

Sulfur Colloid is always the multiple choice test question (reality is that it's only hot  Enhancement
30-40%). Unlike hepatic adenomas, they are not related to the use of birth control pills,  intensity
although as a point of confusing trivia / possibly poor MCQ writing, birth control pills
may promote their growth (controversial - some say they don't).                            should be equal
                                                                                           to that of the
                                                                                           IVC (not the
                                                                                           Aorta)

T1 - Stealth              T2 - Stealth                  Arterial Homogenous Enhancement
                                                        -Also has a Central Scar

                                                312
Hepatic Adenoma: Usually a solitary lesion seen in a female on OCPs. Alternatively could be
seen in a man on anabolic steroids. When it's multiple you should think about glycogen storage
disease (von Gierke) or liver adenomatosis. Being a big fat pig with diabetes is also a described risk
factor. Think of a big fat diabetic girl named Von Gierke (short hair, probably has a nose ring).

No imaging methods can reliably differentiate hepatic adenoma from hepatocellular carcinoma.
Rarely, they may degenerate into HCC after a long period of stability. They often regress after OCPs
are stopped. The propensity to bleed sometimes makes them a surgical lesion if they won't regress.

        Gamesmanship:                                           Adenoma Subtype Trivia:
        Drop Out with In & Out of Phase - used to show fat
                                                            "In fla m m a to ry "
Trivia:
     Q: Most common location for hepatic adenoma (75%)       Most common
    A: Right Lobe liver                                      Highest bleed rate

Management:                                                 "H N F -1 a lp h a m u ta ted "
 Stop the OCPs and re-image, they should get smaller.
 Smaller than 5cm, watch them.                              Second most common
 Larger than 5cm they often resect because                  Multiple masses

   (1) they can bleed and                                  "B e ta c a te n in -m u ta te d "
   (2) they can rarely turn into cancer.
                                                             Least common
                                                             Anabolic steroids
                                                             Glycogen storage disease
                                                             Familial adenomatous polyposis

HCC: Occurs typically in the setting of cirrhosis and chronic liver disease; Hep B, Hep C,
hemochromatosis, glycogen storage disease. Alpha 1 antitrypsin. AFP elevated in 80-95%. Will often
invade the portal vein, although invasion of the hepatic vein is considered a more "specific finding."

"Doubling Time"- the classic Multiple Choice Question. This is actually incredibly stupid to ask
because there are 3 described patterns of growth (slow, fast, and medium). To make it an even worse
question, different papers say different stuff. Some say; Short is 150 days, Medium to 150-300, and
Long is >300. I guess the answer is 300 - because it's in the middle. Others define medium at
around 100 days. A paper in Radiology {May 2008 Radiology, 247, 311-330) says 18-605 days. The
real answer would be to say follow up in 3-4.5 months.

Other Random Trivia: HCCs like to explode and cause spontaneous hepatic bleeds.

Fibrolamellar Subtype of HCC: This is typically seen in a younger patients (<35) without
cirrhosis and a normal AFP. The buzzword is central scar. The scar is similar to the one seen in FNH
with a few differences. This scar does NOT enhance, and is T2 dark (usually). As a point of trivia,
this tumor is Gallium avid. This tumor calcifies more often than conventional HCC.

              THIS vs THAT:                             THIS vs THAT:
Classic HCC vs Fibrolamellar HCC  Central Scars of FNH and Fibrolamellar HCC

HCC               FL HCC                     FNH            FLHCC

Cirrhosis         No Cirrhosis    T2 Bright                 T2 Dark (usually)

Older (50s-60s) Young (30s)       Enhances on Delays        Does NOT enhance

Rarely Calcifies  Calcifies
                  Sometimes
                                  Mass is Sulfur Colloid    Mass is Gallium Avid
                                  Avid (sometimes)
Elevated AFP      Normal AFP

                                  313
Cholangiocarcinoma: Where HCC is a cancer o f                 A
the hepatocyte, cholangiocarcinoma is a cancer o f the bile      Gamesmanship - They could
duct. Cholangiocarcinoma believes in nothing Lebowski.           tell you the dude has ulcerative
It flicks you up, it takes the money (prognosis is poor).        colitis, as a way to infer that he
                                                                 also has PSC.
Who gets it? The most classic multiple choice scenario
would be an 80 year old man, with primary sclerosing             Buzzword = "Painless
cholangitis - PSC (main riskfa cto r in the West), recurrent
pyogenic "oriental" cholangitis (main risk factor in the         Jaundice." (just like
East), Caroli Disease, Hepatitis, HIV, history o f
cholangitis, and fucking Liver Worms (Clonorchis).            ^  pancreatic head CA)
Another risk factor is undergoing a semi-voluntary
cerebral angiogram performed by a Nazi with a cleft                     THIS vs THAT:
asshole (in 1930s Germany, Thorotrast was the
preferred angiographic contrast agent).                       HCC = Invades the Portal Vein
                                                              Cholangiocarcinoma = Encases the
What does it look like? It is variable and the                Portal Vein
described subtypes overlap. The easiest way to
conceptualize this thing is as a scar generating cancer.          Classic Features:
F ibrosis (scar) is the main thing you are seeing -
either primarily as a mass that enhances on delayed           Delayed Enhancement
imaging (just like scar in the heart), or secondarily         Peripheral Biliary Dilation
through the desmoplastic pulling of the scar (example         Liver Capsular Retraction
capsular retraction and ductal dilation). The dilation        NO tumor capsule
o f ducts is most likely to be shown as unilateral and
peripheral, although if the lesion is central the entire
system can obstruct.

Klatskin Tumor: Cholangiocarcinoma that occurs at the bifurcation of the right and left
hepatic ducts. It's usually small but still causes biliary obstruction ("shouldering / abrupt
tapering" on MRCP). These things are mean as cat shit. It is a "named" subtype, so that
increases the likelihood o f it showing up on a multiple choice exam.

Staging Pearls: There are like 3-4 major systems, each one has rules on the subtype
(intrahepatic, extrahepatic, hilar/Klastskin), and honestly resectability is incredibly variable
depending on how much o f a gun slinger the surgeons at your institution are. This
combination of factors makes specifics nearly untestable (under "fair" conditions). Having
said that, here are some potentially testable pearls:

 Proximal extent o f involvement is a key factor for surgical candidacy (more = bad).
 Atrophy o f a lobe implies biliary +/- vascular involvement o f that lobe (imaging often

    underestimates disease burden).
 Typically combinations of bilateral involvement (veins on the right, ducts on the left - vice

    versa, etc.. e tc ... etc... ) is bad news.

            This Could Be Useful

Cholangio:  CEA ^   CA 19-9

Pancreatic CA: CEA  CA 19-9

Colon CA:   CEA^    CA19-9

                                  314
Hepatic Angiosarcoma: This used to be the go to for thorotrast questions. Even though
everyone who got thorotrast died 30 years ago, a few dinosaurs writing multiple choice test questions
still might ask it. Hepatic Angiosarcoma is very rare, although technically the most common primary
sarcoma of the liver. It is associated with toxic exposure - arsenic use (latent period is about 25years),
Polyvinyl chloride exposure, Radiation, and yes... thorotrast. Additional trivia, is that you can see it
in Hemochromatosis andN Fl patients.

It's usually multifocal, and has a propensity to bleed.

Biliary Cystadenoma Uncommon benign

cystic neoplasm of the liver. Usually seen in

middle aged women. Can sometimes present with

pain, or even jaundice. They can be unilocular or

multilocular and there are no reliable methods for

distinguishing from biliary cystadenocarcinoma

(which is unfortunate). Having said that - the

primary distinguishing characteristic of the        Cystadenocarcinoma: the primary distinguishing is
cystadenocarcinoma is a solid and nodular           a solid and nodular enhancing component (arrow).
enhancing component.

Mets to the Liver: This is way more common than a primary liver cancer (like 20-40x more
common). If you see mets in the liver, first think colon. Calcified mets are usually the result of a
mucinous neoplasm (colon, ovary, pancreas).

With regard to ultrasound: Hyperechoic mets are often hypervascular (renal, melanoma, carcinoid,
choriocarcinoma, thyroid, islet cell). Hypoechoic mets are often hypovascular (colon, lung, pancreas)
- this is the more common look. A halo of low density (target) is a classic description.

With regard to CT: Think low
density masses with a continuous rim
of enhancement (not discontinuous
like hemangioma). A background
fatty liver may result in the lesions
looking bright (higher density).

"Too Small To Characterize " - even           Low Density Lesions      Higher Density Lesions
in the setting o f breast cancer (with no     Normal Liver Background  Fatty Liver Background
definite hepatic mets) tiny
hypodensities have famously been
shown to be benign 90-95% of the time.

Lymphoma: Hodgkins lymphoma involves the liver 60% of the time (Non Hodgkins is around
50%), and may be hypoechoic.

Kaposi Sarcoma: Seen in patients with AIDS. Causes diffuse periportal hypoechoic infiltration.
Looks similar to biliary duct dilation.

                                                    315
Cysts                             Ultrasound Rapid Review

Hemangioma       Anechoic with well defined, thin walls.
                 Single or multiple - less than 2 cm.
Focal Nodular
Hyperplasia     Things to suggest maybe it's not a cyst and
                instead possibly a parasite (i.e. Hydatid)?

                 Bigger than 2 cm.
                 Presence of membranes.
                 Abundant sediment in cysts.

                Most common liver tumor.
                Classic; well defined, homogeneously
                echogenic. No intemal doppler flow (because it
                is a slow flow lesion).
                Will see posterior enhancement (because like a
                cyst, the blood is just slow flowing, so the signal
                passes through it quickly.)

                Things to suggest maybe it's not a hemangioma:
                 Intemal flow

                 Young woman - most classic
                 Seen after chemotherapy treatment with
                 oxaliplatin (chemotherapy for bowel cancer)
                 Can occur with other lesions
                 (most commonly hemangioma)

                 Classic; Isoechoic to the liver and very difficult
                 to see - so they must either show the lesion;
                 Bulging the liver,
                 Presence of a central scar, or
                 Classic spoke wheel appearance on doppler.

Hepatic         Development is induced by intake of anabolic                                 -40%
Adenoma         hormones and oral contraceptives.                                            Hypoechoic
                Association; Glycogen storage diseases
                Association: Being a fat ass with diabetes                                   ~ 30%
                Classic ; Round mass with well defined borders.                              Hyperechoic
                Hvpoechoic halo of fatty sparing.
                **Appearance is highly variably because of
                hemorrhage, fat, calcification, necrosis

                Classic Doppler: perilesional increased flow
                (although this is also variable)

Hepatocellular  - Basically anything with a shit ton of intemal
Carcinoma          flow or peripheral flow on Doppler (other than
                   your typical spoke wheel pattern o f FNH) you
Mets               gotta be worried.

                - A thin peripheral halo of hypoechogenicity can

                represent either focal fatty sparing (in the case of

                an Adenoma) or... a fibrous capsule (target) as is    Note the Cirrhotic
                often seen in HCC - so this should also be            Liver Contour
                conceming.                                            (that is a huge hint)

                Multiple lesions -
                Especially if there is a halo (target sign).

                316
                           Benign Liver iViasses

                 Ultrasound     CT                MR                      Trivia

Hemangioma       Hyperechoic    Peripheral        T2 Bright   Rare in         Kasabach-
                 with           Nodular                       Cirrhotics      Merritt; the
                 increased      Discontinuous                                 sequestration
                 through        Enhancement                                   of platelets
                 transmission                                                 from giant
                                                                              cavernous
                                                                              hemangioma

FNH              Spoke Wheel    Homogenous        "Stealth    Central Scar    Bright on
                                Arterial          Lesion -                    Delayed
                                Enhancement       Iso on T1                   Eovist (Gd-
                                                  and T2"                     EOB-DTPA)

Hepatic          Variable       Variable          Fat         OCP use,        Can explode
Adenoma                                           Containing  Glycogen        and bleed
                                                  on In/Out   Storage
                                                  Phase       Disease

Hepatic          Hyperechoic    Gross Fat         T1/T2       Unlike renal    Tuberous
Angiomyolipoma                                    Bright      AML, 50%        Sclerosis
                                                              don't have fat

Incidental Liver Lesion on CT - Algorithm

         Size < 1cm                                          Size > 1cm

                                                                          \

Low Risk         High Risk      Benign Features Suspicious Features           Flash Filing
(Not a Drunk,    (Drinking,
IVD rug User,    Whoring,        Sharp margins  Blurry margins              1.5 cm > L5 cm
or someone with  IV Drug User,
Cancer)          with Cancer)    Density < 20 HU  Thick septa, nodular                      MRI

    I               I            Characteristic  or heterogeneous                 High Risk
                                                                                   (Drinking,
No Follow up          MRI       Benign             Density > 20 HU                Whoring,
                                                                                   IV Drug User,
                                Enhancement       on portal venous--               with Cancer)

                                (i.e. discontinuous) phase imaging

                                     I              /         Low Risk
                                                  MRI         (Not a Drunk,
                                No Follow up                  IV Drug User,
                                                              or someone
                                                              with Cancer)

                                                                   I               \
                                                                                  MRI
                                                              No Follow up

                                           317
                                   -Congenital Liver-

Cystic Kidney Disease (both AD and AR): Patient's with AD polycystic kidney disease
will also have cysts in the liver. This is in contrast to the AR form in which the liver tends to have
fibrosis.

Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (Osier-Weber-Rendu) Autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by multiple AVMs in the liver and lungs. It leads to cirrhosis and a
massively dilated hepatic artery.

Trivia: The lung AVMs set you up for brain abscess.

-Liver infections-

Infection of the liver can be thought of as either viral, abscess (pyogenic or amoebic), fungal,
parasitic, or granulomatous. As previously mentioned, the long intra-hepatic course of the right
portal vein results in most hematogenous infection favoring the right hepatic lobe.

Viral: Hepatitis which is chronic in B and C, and acute with the rest. A point of trivia is that HCC

in the setting of hepatitis can occur in the acute form of Hep B (as well as chronic). Obviously,
chronic hep C increases risk for HCC. On ultrasound the "starry sky" appearance can be seen.
Although, this is non-specific and basically just the result of liver edema making the fat surrounding
the portal triads look brighter than normal.

Pyogenic: These can mimic cysts. For the purpose                       infection Buzzwords
                                                            Viral Hepatitis Starry Sky (US)
of multiple choice, a single abscess is Klebsiella, and
multiple are E. Coli. The presence of gas is highly
suggestive of pyogenic abscess.

"Double Target" sign with central low density, rim          Pyogenic         Double Target (CT)
enhancement, surrounded by more low density is the          Abscess
classic sign of a liver abscess on CT.                      Candida          Bull's Eye (US)
                                                                             "Extra Hepatic
Hydatic Cyst (Echinococcus) favors the liver (2nd most      Amoebic          Extension"
common is the lung), and is often asymptomatic. If it is    Abscess
symptomatic the classic history is "enlarging liver". It
has several classic imaging patterns depending on the       Hydatid          Sand Daughter Water
age / stage of disease including: the water lily, sand      Disease           Storm Cysts Lilly
storm, and the daughter cyst. Treatment is surgical
(usually).                                                  Schistosomiasis  Tortoise Shell

Amebic Abscess: A special situation (potentially testable)
is the amebic abscess in the left lobe. Those needs to be
emergently drained (they can rupture into the
pericardium).

Fitz-Hugh-Curtis Syndrome - This syndrome is seen exclusively

in women of questionable moral standard ("free spirits"). It manifests on
multiple choice exams in the setting of known pelvic inflammatory
disease (Gonococcal salpingitis and/or Chlamydia infection), with right
upper quadrant pain.

The classic imaging features are enhancement of the anterior liver
capsule, perihepatic ascites, and peritoneal septations. They could show
you a tubo-ovarian abscess in the pelvis to cue you in on the
excessively promiscuous behaviors this young lady has been engaging in.

318
                         - Diffuse Liver Processes -

F s t t y L iV G r : Very common in America. Can be focal (next to gallbladder or ligamentum teres),
can be diffuse, or can be diffuse with sparing. You can call it a few different ways.

For CT: If it's a non-contrast study, 40 HU is a slam dunk. If it's contrasted, some people say you can
NEVER call it. Others say it's ok if (a) it's a good portal venous phase (b) the HU is less than 100,
and (c) it's 25 H.U. less than the spleen.

On US: If the liver is brighter than the right kidney you can call it. Hepatosteatosis is a fat liver.
NASH (hepatitis from a fat liver) has abnormal LFTs.

On MRI: Two standard deviation difference between in and out of phase imaging. Remember the drop
out is on the out of phase images (india ink ones - done at T.E 2.2 ms - assuming 1.5T).

Fuckery: This signal drop out assumes there is more water than fat in the liver. As such, the degree
of signal loss is maximum when the fat infiltration is 50% (exactly 1:1 signal loss). When the
percentage of fat grows larger than 50% you will actually see a less significant signal loss on out of
phase imaging, relative to that maximum 50%.

What causes it? McDonalds, Burger King, and Taco Bell. Additional causes include chemotherapv
(breast cancer), steroids, cystic fibrosis.

Hemochromatosis: Iron overload. They can show this three main ways:

(1) The liver and spleen being T1 and T2 dark.

(2) They show a single T2. The spleen is absent and the liver is darker (lower signal) than muscle.
     On T2 a normal liver should always have a signal higher than muscle. In the setting of chronic
     hemolytic anemia (a condition requiring multiple blood transfusions - that can cause
     hemochromatosis) the spleen is often removed surgically.

(3) The second (and more likely) way this will be shown is in and out o fphase changes the opposite
     o f those seen in hepatic steatosis. Low signal on in phase, and high signal on out of phase.
     ("Iron on In-phase")

          Watch out now -- this is the opposite of the fat drop out
**FAT - Drop out on OUT of phase (india ink one - T.E. 2.2 ms) -1.5 T
**IRON - Drop out on IN phase (non india ink one - T.E. 4.4 ms) - 1.5 T

The second main piece of trivia is to tell                     Hemochromatosis
primary V5secondary.

Primary is the inherited type, caused by more GI uptake, with      Primary         Secondary
resulting iron overload. The key point is the pancreas is      Genetic -
involved and the spleen is spared.                             increased        Acquired -
                                                               absorption       chronic illness,
Secondary is the result of either chronic inflammation or                       and multiple
multiple transfusions. The body reacts by trying the "Eat the  Liver, Pancreas  transfusions
Iron," with the reticuloendothelial system. The key point is
the pancreas is spared and the spleen is not.                                   Liver, Spleen

"Primary = Pancreas" , "Secondary = Spleen"                    Heart, Thyroid,
                                                               Pituitary

                                            319
Budd Chiari Syndrome: Classic multiple choice scenario is a pregnant woman, but can
occur in any situation where you are hypercoagulable {most common cause is idiopathic). The
result of hepatic vein thrombosis.

The characteristic findings o f Budd-Chiari syndrome include hepatic venous outflow
obstruction, intrahepatic and systemic collateral veins, and large regenerative (hyperplastic)
nodules in a dysmorphic liver. The caudate lobe is often massively enlarged (spared from
separate drainage into the IVC). In the acute phase, the liver will show the classic ``flip-flop
pattern " on portal phase with low attenuation centrally, and high peripherally. The liver has
been described as "nutmeg" with an inhomogeneous mottled appearance, and delayed
enhancement o f the periphery o f the liver.

Who gets a "Nutmeg L iver" ???                  Arterial: Central Enhancement
     Budd Chiari                                           Peripheral Minimal
     Hepatic Veno-occlusive disease
     Right Heart Failure (Hepatic Congestion)  Portal V: Central Washout
     Constrictive Pericarditis                              Peripheral Enhancement

Regenerative (hyperplastic) nodules can be difficult to distinguish from multifocal
hepatocellular carcinoma. They are bright on T1 and typically dark or iso on T2. M ultiple big
(>10cm) and small (<4cm) nodules in the setting o f Budd-Chiari suggest a benign process. T2
dark also helps (HCC is usually T2 bright).

Presentation can be acute or chronic. Acute from thrombus into the hepatic vein or IVC. These
guys will present with rapid onset ascites. Chronic from fibrosis o f the intrahepatic veins,
presumably from inflammation.

Who gets massive caudate lobe hypertrophy???
     Budd Chiari
     Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
      Primary Biliary Cirrhosis

Hepatic Veno-occlusive Disease: This is a form o f Budd Chiari that occurs from
occlusion o f the small hepatic venules. It is endemic in Jamaica (from Alkaloid bush tea). In
the US it's typically the result o f XRT and chemotherapy. The main hepatic veins and IVC will
be patent, but portal waveforms will be abnomial (slow, reversed, or to-and fro).

Passive Congestion: Passive hepatic congestion is caused by stasis o f blood within the
liver due to compromise o f hepatic drainage. It is a common complication o f congesfive heart
failure and constrictive pericarditis. It is essentially the result o f elevated CVP transmitted from
the right atrium to the hepatic veins.

Findings include:
          Refluxed contrast into the hepatic veins
          Increased portal venous pulsatility
          Nutmeg liver

                                                                320
                          -Misc Liver Conditions-

Portal Vein Thrombosis: Occurs in hypercoaguable states (cancer, dehydration,
etc...). Can lead to cavernous transformation, with the development o f a bunch of
serpiginous vessels in the porta hepatis which may reconstitute the right and left portal
veins. This takes like 12 m onths to happen {it proves p o rta l vein is chronically occluded).

Pseudo Cirrhosis: Treated breast cancer mets to the liver can cause contour changes
that mimic cirrhosis. Specifically, multifocal liver retraction and enlargement o f the caudate
has been described. W hy this is specific for breast cancer is not currently known, as other
mets to the liver don't produce this reaction.

Cryptogenic Cirrhosis: Essentially cirrhosis o f unknown cause. Most o f these cases
are probably the result o f nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Liver Transplant: The liver has great ability to regenerate and may double in size in as
little as 3 weeks, making it ideal for partial donation. Hepatitis C is the m ost common
disease requiring transplantation (followed by EtOH liver disease and cryptogenic
cirrhosis). In adults, right lobes (segments 5-8) are most commonly implants. This is the
opposite o f pediatric transplants, which usually donates segments 2-3. The modem surgery
has four connections (IVC, artery, portal vein, CBD).

Contraindications include, extrahepatic malignancy, advanced cardiac disease, advanced
pulm onary disease, or active substance abuse. Portal HTN is NOT a true contraindication
although it does increase the difficulty o f the surgery and increase mortality.

Normal Transplant US              Syndrome of Impending Thrombosis
                                         3-10 days post transplant
 Normal Doppler should have a           (1st) Initial Normal Waveform
                                         (2nd) No diastolic flow
RAPID systolic upstroke                  (3rd) Dampening Systolic flow
                                                   Tardus Parvus
  Diastolic -> Systolic in less                   RI < 0.5
                                         (4`h) Loss o f Hepatic W aveform
   than 80msec (0.08 seconds)

Resistive Index is Normally

between 0.5 - 0.7

Hepatic Artery Peak Velocity

should be < 200 cm/sec

As mentioned before, the normal liver gets 70% blood flow from the portal vein, m aking it
the key player. In the transplanted liver, the hepatic artery is the king and is the prim ary
source of blood flow for the bile ducts (which undergo necrosis with hepatic artery failure).
Hepatic artery thrombosis comes in two flavors: early (< 1 5 days), and later (years). The
late form is associated with chronic rejection and sepsis.

Trivia: Tardus Parvus is m ore likely secondary to stenosis than throm bosis

                                  321
                                           -Biliary-

THIS vs THAT: Portal Venous Gas vs Pneumobilia -- These are the two patterns of

branching air in the hver. The classic way to distinguish between the two is Central (Pneumobilia) vs
Peripheral (PVG). The way to remember this is that bile is draining out of the liver into the bowel - so
it is flowing towards the porta-hepatis and should be central. Portal blood, on the other hand, is being
pumped into the liver - so it will be traveling towards the periphery. The potential trivia question is
how peripheral is peripheral -- and that is 2cm. Within 2cm of the liver capsule = portal venous gas.
Other things to remember - gas in the bile is usually related to a prior procedure (anything that fucks
with the sphincter of Oddi). Gas in the portal system can be from lots of stuff (benign things like
COPD or bad things - the most classic being bowel necrosis -look for pneumatosis*).

Jaundice: You always think about common duct stone, but the most common etiology is actually
from a benign stricture (post traumatic from surgery or biliary intervention).

Bacterial Ciiolangitis: Hepatic abscess can develop secondary to cholangitis, usually as the
result of stasis (so think stones). The triad of jaundice, fever, and right upper quadrant pain is the step
1 question.

Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC): Chronic cholestatic                 Dilated intrahepatic
                                                                          bile ducts is very
liver disease of unknown etiology characterized by progressive            rare in all forms of
inflammation which leads to multifocal strictures of the intra and /or    cirrhosis
extrahepatic bile ducts. The disease often results in cirrhosis, and is
strongly associated with cholangiocarcinoma. The buzzword for the         EXCEPT
cirrhotic pattern is "central regenerative hypertrophy". It is
associated with inflammatory bowel disease (Ulcerative Colitis 80%,       Primary Sclerosing
Crohn's 20%). It is an indication for transplant, with a post transplant  Cholangitis
recurrence of about 20%.

-S B PSC Buzzwords:
       ."Withered Tree" - The appearance on MRCP, from abrupt narrowing of the branches
       ."Beaded Appearance" - Strictures + Focal Dilations

AIDS Cholangiopathy: Infection of the biliary epithelium {classically Cryptosporidium) can
cause ductal disease in patients with AIDS. The appearance mimics PSC with intrahepatic and/or
extrahepatic multifocal strictures.

The classic association/finding is papillarv stenosis (which occurs 60% of the time).

THIS vs THAT: AIDS Cholangiopathy vs Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis

AIDS                                                                      PSC

Focal Strictures o f the extrahepatic duct > 2cm Extrahepatic strictures rarely > 5mm

Absent saccular deformities o f the ducts  Has saccular defoiiiiities o f the ducts

Associated Papillary Stenosis

                                           322
O rie n ta l C h o la n g itis (Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis): Common in Southeast Asia (hence
the culturally insensitive name). They always show it as dilated ducts that are full of
pigmented stones.

        Buzzword: "straight rigid intrahepatic ducts."      The anatomically longer,
                                                            flatter left biliary system
The cause o f the disease is not known, but it may be       tends to make the disease
associated with clonorchiasis, ascariasis, and nutritional  burden left dominant
deficiency. These guys don't do as well with endoscopic     (the opposite o f
decompression and often need surgical decompression.        hematogenous processes
                                                            which favor the right
Remember this is a major risk factor for                    lobe).
cholangiocarcinoma in the East.

Primary Biliary Cirriiosis: An autoimmune disease that results in the destruction of
small & medium bile ducts (intra not extra). It primarily affects middle-aged women, who
are often asymptomatic. In the early disease, normal bile ducts help distinguish it from PSC.
In later stages, there is irregular dilation o f the intrahepatic ducts, with normal extrahepatic
ducts. Classically has a lace-like pattern o f fibrosis. There is increased risk o f HCC. If caught
early it has an excellent prognosis and responds to medical therapy with ursodeoxycholic acid.
The step 1 trivia is "antim itochondrial antibodies (A M A )" w hich are present 95% o f the
time.

Long Common Channel:                     Normal             Long
An anatomic variant in which the                            Common
common bile and pancreatic duct                             Channel
fuse prematurely at the level o f the
pancreatic head (prior to the
sphincter o f Oddi complex).

The testable consequence is the
increased incidence o f pancreatitis -
as reflux o f enzymes is more
common.

           There is also an association
          with Type 1
          choledochocysts.

Type 1
F o ca l Dilation of
the C B D

                                         323
Choledochal Cysts I C aroli's: Choledochal cysts are congenital dilations o f the bile
ducts -classified into 5 types by some dude named Todani.

The high yield trivia is type 1 isfo ca l
dilation o f the CBD a n d is by fa r the most
common.

Type 2 and 3 are super rare. Type 2 is          Normal  Type 1  Type 2
basically a diverticulum o f the bile duct.
                                                        *most
Type 3 is a "choledochocele."                           common

Type 4 is both intra and extra.

Type 5 is C aroli's. and is intrahepatic only.

                                                Type 3  Type 4  Type 5

                                                                *Caroli's

Caroli's is an A R disease associated with                    Central Dot
polycystic kidney disease and medullary
sponge kidney. The hallm ark is intrahepatic            W -V essel in a dilated duct
duct dilation, that is large and saccular.
Buzzw ord is " cen tral dot sign" which
corresponds to the portal vein surrounded by
dilated bile ducts.

Complications
                 Cholangiocarcinoma
                   Cirrhosis
                   Cholangitis
                   Intraductal Stones

     Gamesmanship: If they give you imaging o f dilated biliary ducts and a history of
     repeated cholangitis, think choledochal cyst. These things get stones in them and can
be recurrently infected.

                                                324
- Ductal High Yield Sum mary -

Caroli's                             Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis

-Communicates with the ducts         -40 year old Male with U.C.
-Type 5 Cyst                         -Withering Tree
-Central Dot Sign (on CT, MR, US)    -Beading
-Associated with Polycystic Kidney,  -Mild Dilation
Medullary Sponge Kidney,             -Strongly Associated with Ulcerative
Cholangiocarcinoma                   Colitis & Cholangiocarcinoma

Oriental Cholangiohepatitis        AIDS Cholangiopathy
(Recurrent Pyogenic)               -Related to Cryptosporidium or
-Associations with clonorchiasis,  cytomegalovirus.
ascariasis                         -Segmental Strictures (looks like PSC)
-Lots of Stones                    -Ducts look like P S C + Papillary
-Favors the left ductal system     Stenosis
- Strongly Associated with         -Associated with Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma

      Association:             Cholangiocarcinoma VS B9 Strictures:

If you can't remember what    CA Strictures tends to be long, with "shouldering.'
the association is, and it's  B9 strictures tend to be abrupt and short.
ductal pathology, always
guess Cholangiocarcinoma.

                                     325
