                           - Ileus-

What is this "ileus " ? Ileus is best thought about as paralyzed or "sleepy" bowel. You have this thing
called a migrating myoelectric complex, which is basically the electrical system of the bowel. It keeps
the poop train running. This thing works constantly to clear the stomach and small bowel even when you
aren't eating. It flushes the residual food, secretions, dead cells, all that crap into the colon. The problem
occurs when the myoelectric process finds an excuse to fake outrage. It does this because it lacks any true
purpose in life and needs to virtue signal to obtain validation.

Numerous etiologies including abdominal inflammation, infection, Jordan Peterson, chemical /
pharmacological causes, trauma etc... etc.. so on and so forth -- all these things can make the electrical
system "cancel" bowel peristalsis. The classic offender is surgery. Post operative ileus is very common
- and will be the most common clinical setting you will see this. Ileus comes in two flavors:

(1) Generalized; The large and small bowel are extensively air filled but not dilated. Some people will
say "ileus is when the large and small bowel look the same". This is in contradistinction to obstruction
which tends to be asymmetric - dilated small bowel, paucity of large bowel gas.

THIS vs THAT Obstruction:                        Ileus:

                                                                     :'/·
                                                                              

Supine: Dilated loops  Upright: Many dilated     Supine: Disorderly  ..:
arranged in            air-fluid levels in both  loops scattered
"stepladder" fashion.  limbs of a given loop,    throughout the      Upright: Fewer and/or
Orderly. A bag of      at different heights      abdomen. A bag of    smaller (less dilated)
sausages.              (candy canes).            popcorn.             air-fluid levels
                                                                      scattered throughout
                                                                      the abdomen.

(2) Reactive (Focal) Ileus -- Remember the migrating myoelectric complex is
easily offended by abdominal infections or inflammation. If the process is
local - the "canceling" of bowel movement will also be local. So - classic
examples would be an appendicitis (RLQ), pancreatitis (central abdomen),
diverticulitis (LLQ) - for the location of a "sentinel loop".

A "sentinel loop" is a segment of bowel that it dilated --in response to some
adjacent infection or inflammatory process. In this case (black arrow) the
dilated loop is in the central abdomen - so you'd think pancreatitis.

Gasless Abdomen: This is a scenario where there is basically no bowel gas. It is non-specific and can be
the result of fluid filled bowel in the setting of diarrhea or the result of fluid filled bowel in the setting of
obstruction. Clinical context (pre-test probability) is the way to differentiate.

                                                                294
