                                       S E C T I O N 8:
                                          S pleen

Normal Trivia
By the age o f 15 the spleen reaches its normal adult size. The spleen contains both "red
pulp" and "white pulp" which contribute to its tiger striped appearance during arterial phase
imaging. The red pulp is filled with blood (a lot o f blood), and can contain up to one liter of
blood at any time. The spleen is usually about 20 HU less dense than the liver, and slightly
more echogenic than the liver (equal to the left kidney). The splenic artery (which usually
arises from the celiac trunk) is essentially an end vessel, with minimal collaterals.
Occlusion o f the splenic artery will therefore result in splenic infarction.
Pathology involving the spleen can be categorized as either congenital, acquired (as the
sequela o f trauma or portal hypertension), or related to a "mass." A general rule is that most
things in the spleen are benign with exception o f lymphoma or the rare primary
angiosarcoma.

Normal Spleen on MRI:

   It's Bright on T 2        It's D a rk on T1    Just like a lym ph node it
-R elative to the liver  -R elative to the liver   will restrict diffusion

The spleen is basically a big waterv lymph node. It restricts diffusion (like a lymph node).

                         347
Heterotaxy Syndromes and Sickle Cell: I discuss these in the Peds chapter.

Accessory Spleens (Splenule): Can be called "splenunculus" for the purpose of fucking with
you on the exam. These are common (you probably have one). Some potential fuckery:

· Can mimic a pancreatic tail mass or a bad lymph node - sulfur colloid can tell the difference.
· They will often follow the spleen on different CT contrast phases (they stripe on the arterial phase).
· They can hypertrophy -- classic scenario is post splenectomy for something like ITP or autoimmune

  hemolytic anemia. The trick is that in that scenario, hypertrophy of an accessory spleen can result in a
  recurrence of the original hematologic disease.

Wandering Spleen: A normal spleen that "wanders" off and is in an unexpected location. Because
of the laxity in the peritoneal ligaments holding the spleen, a wandering spleen is associated with
abnormalities of intestinal rotation. The other key piece of trivia is that unusual locations set the spleen up
for torsion and subsequent infarction. A chronic partial torsion can lead to gastric varices.

Trauma: The spleen is the most common solid organ injured in trauma. This combined with the fact
that the spleen contains a unit or so of blood means splenic trauma can be life threatening. Remember the
trauma scan is done in portal venous phase (70 second), otherwise you'd have to tell if that is the normal
tiger-striped arterial-phase spleen or it is lacerated.

Splenosis: This occurs post trauma where a smashed spleen implants and then recruits blood supply.
The implants are usually multiple and grow into spherical nodules typically in the peritoneal cavity of the
upper abdomen {but can be anywhere). If the diaphragm has been ruptured - they can be pleural based
nodules. It's more common than you think and has been reported in 40-60% of trauma. Again, Tc Sulfur
colloid (or heat-treated RBC) can confirm that the implants are spleen and not ovarian mets or some other
terrible thing.

Gamesmanship: If they show you an absent spleen (or small nodular looking spleen) and they show you
lots of soft tissue masses - think splenosis... *especially if the history is prior trauma. If you are just
about ready to say "mets" -- check and make sure the spleen is normal.

Sarcoidosis: Sarcoid is a disease of unknown etiology that results in noncaseating granulomas

which form in various tissues of the body {complete discussion in the chest section o f this text). The
spleen is involved in 50% - 80% o f patients. Splenomegaly is usually the only sign. However,
aggregates of granulomatous splenic tissue in some patients may appear on CT as numerous discrete
l-2cm hypodense nodules. Rarely, it can cause a massive splenomegaly and possibly rupture. Don't
forget that the gastric antrum is the most common site in the GI tract.

Gamna Gandy Bodies (Siderotic Module):                  Peliosis: This is a rare condition
These are small foci of hemorrhage in the splenic
parenchyma that are usually associated with             characterized by multiple blood filled cyst-
portal hypertension. They are T2 dark.                        spaces in a solid organ {usually the
                                                               -peliosis hepatitis). When you see it
Gradient is the most
                                                        in the spleen it is usually also in the liver
sensitive sequence.   j |^                              (isolated spleen is extremely rare). The
                                                        etiology is not known, but for the purpose
                                                        of multiple choice tests it occurs in women
                                                        on OCPs, men on anabolic steroids, people
                                                        with AIDS, renal transplant patients (up
                                                        to 20% ), and patients with Hodgkin
                                                         lymphoma. It's usually asymptomatic but
                                                        can explode spontaneously. 

                                                   348
                  -Splenic Vascular Abnormalities-

Splenic Artery Aneurysm is the most common visceral arterial aneurysm. Pseudoaneurysm
can occur in the setting of trauma and pancreatitis. The incidence is higher in women of child bearing
age who have had two or more pregnancies {4x more likely to get them, 3x more likely to rupture).
It's usually saccular and in the mid-to-distal artery. Usually treated when they get around 2-3 cm.

Colossalfuck up to avoid: Don't call them a hypervascular pancreatic islet cell mass and biopsy them.

Splenic Vein Thrombosis frequently occurs as the result of pancreatitis. Can also occur in
the setting of diverticulitis or Crohn's. Can lead to isolated gastric varices.

Infarction can occur from a number of conditions. On a multiple choice test the answer is sickle
cell. The imaging features are classically a wedge-shaped, peripheral, low attenuation defect.

                             -Splenic infections-

Most common radiologically detected splenic infection is histoplasmosis (with multiple round
calcifications). Splenic TB can have a similar appearance (but much less common in the US).
Another possible cause of calcified granuloma in the spleen in brucellosis, but these are usually
solitary and 2 cm or larger. They may have a low density center, encircled by calcification giving the
lesion a "bull's eye" appearance.

In the immunocompetent patient, splenic abscess is usually due to an aerobic organism. Salmonella
is the classic bug - which develops in the setting of underlying splenic damage (trauma or sickle
cell). In immunocompromised patients, unusual organisms such as fungi, TB, MAI, and PCP can
occur and usually present as multiple micro-abscesses. Occasionally, fungal infections may show a
"bulls-eye" appearance on ultrasound.

                - Splenic Size - Too smaii vs Too BIG -

small Spleen                                              BIG Spleen

Sickle Cell                    Passive Congestion (heart failure, portal HTN, splenic vein thrombosis)

Post Radiation                 Lymphoma

Post Thorotrast                Leukemia

Malabsorption Syndromes        Gauchers
(ulcerative colitis > crohns)

                               Felty's Syndrome - abnormality of granulocytes, with a triad:

                               (1) Splenomegaly,          ^

                               (2) Rheumatoid Arthritis,

                               (3) Neutropenia

                                                349
                       - Benign Masses of the Spleen -

Post traumatic cysts (pseudocysts) are the most common cystic lesion in the spleen. They can
occur secondary to infarction, infection, hemorrhage, or extension from a pancreatic pseudocyst. As a
point of trivia they are "pseudo" cysts because they have no epithelial lining. They may have a thick wall
or prominent calcifications peripherally.

Epidermoid cysts are the second most common cystic lesion in the spleen. They are congenital in
origin. As a point of absolutely worthless trivia, they are "true" cysts and have an epithelial lining. They
typically grow slowly and are usually around 10 cm at the time of discovery. They can cause symptoms if
they are large enough They are solitary 80% of the time, and have peripheral calcifications 25% of the
time.

Hydatid or Echinococcal cysts are the third most common cystic lesion in the spleen. They are
caused by the parasite Echinococcus Granulosus. Remember this thing favors the liver (75% of cases) and
the second most common site is actually the lung (not the spleen). As before, there are multiple described
signs including the Water Lilly (floating debris) and the Daughter Cysts.

Hemangioma is the most common benign neoplasm in the spleen. This dude is usually smooth and
well marginated demonstrating contrast uptake and delayed washout. The classic peripheral nodular
discontinuous enhancement seen in hepatic lesions may not occur, especially if the tumor is < 2 cm.

Lymphangiomas are rare entities in the spleen but can occur. Most occur in childhood. They may be
solitary or multiple, although most occur in a subcapsular location. Diffuse lymphangiomas may occur
(lymphangiomatosis).

Hamartomas are also rare in the spleen, but can occur. Typically this is an incidental finding. Most
are hypodense or isodense and show moderate heterogeneous enhancement. They can be hyperdense if
there is hemosiderin deposition.

Littoral Cell Angioma is a zebra that shows up occasionally in books and possibly on multiple
choice tests. Clinical hypersplenism is almost always present. Usually presents as multiple small foci
which are hypoattenuating on late portal phase. MR shows hemosiderin (low T1 & T2).

                    - Malignant Masses of the Spleen -

Most things that occur in the spleen are benign. Other than lymphoma (discussed below) it is highly
unlikely that you will encounter a primary malignancy of the spleen {but if you do it's likely to be
vascular). For the purposes of academic discussion (and possible multiple choice trivia), angiosarcoma is
the most common.

Angiosarcoma: It is aggressive and has a poor prognosis. On CT it can manifest as a poorly defined
area of heterogeneity or low density in an enlarged spleen. They can contain necrosis and get big enough
to rupture (spontaneous rupture occurs like 30% o f the time). Contrast enhancement is usually poor. Yes,
these can occur from prior thorotrast exposure.

Lymphoma is the most common malignant tumor of the spleen, and is usually seen as a manifestation
of systemic disease. Splenomegaly is the most common finding (and maybe the only finding in low-grade
disease). Although both Hodgkins and Non-Hodgkins types can involve the spleen, Hodgkins type and
high-grade lymphomas can show discrete nodules of tumor. With regard to imaging, they are low density
on CT, T1 dark, and are PET hot.

Metastatic Disease to the spleen is rare. When it does occur, it occurs via common things (Breast,
Lung, Melanoma). Trivia: Melanoma is the most common primary neoplasm that mets to the spleen.

                                                                 350
I low did I get here ? C^hopping w(x)d, carrying water.
"I low am I going to be a gold medalist? By chopping wood and carrying water."

                                         --Thomas (Oilman , 2021 World (Champion
I love this quote. Reminds me that there are no days off.
No amount of success and no amount of fame or money buys a day off.
Yesterday - chopping wood and carrying water.
'I'oday - chopping w (X)d and carr\ang water.
1bmorrow - chopping wood and carrying water.
'I'his is the wav.

                                                                 351
   PROMETHEUS

     L iomhart, M.1>.

352
