                   - Large Bowel / Rectum -

THIS THAT: Crohns Disease vs Ulcerative Colitis:

Crohns Disease: Typically seen in a young adult (15-30), but has a second smaller
peak later 60-70. Discontinuous involvement o f the entire GI tract (mouth -> asshole).
Stomach, usually involves antrum (R am 's H orn Deformity). Duodenal involvem ent is rare,
and NEVER occurs without antral involvement. Small bowel is involved 80% o f the time,
with the terminal ileum almost always involved (Marked Narrowing = String Sign). After
surgery the "neo-term inal ileum " will frequently be involved. The colon involvem ent is
usually right sided, and often spares the rectum / sigmoid. Complications include fistulae,
abscess, gallstones, fatty liver, and sacroiliitis.

                             Crohns Buzzwords

Squaring of the folds An early manifestation from obstructive lymphedema

Skip lesions       Discontinuous involvement o f the bowel

Proud loops        Separation o f the loops caused by infiltration o f the mesentery,
                   increase in mesenteric fat and enlarged lymph nodes

Cobblestoning      Irregular appearance to bowel wall caused by longitudinal and
                   transverse ulcers separated by areas o f edema

Pseudopolyps       Islands o f hyperplastic mucosa
Filiform           Post-inflammatory polyps - long and worm-like

Pseudodiverticula  Found on anti-mesenteric side. From bulging area o f normal
                   wall opposite side o f scarring from disease

String-sign        Marked narrowing o f terminal ileum from a combination of
                   edema, spasm, and fibrosis

Trivia: Inflammatory Bowel Diseases are Associated with an Increased Risk of Melanoma
                                                               295
Ulcerative Colitis:

Just like Crohns, it typically occurs in a "young adult" (age 15-40), with a second peak at 60-70.
Favors the male gender. It involves the rectum 95% of the time, and has retrograde progression.
Terminal ileum is involved 5-10% of the time via backwash ileitis (wide open appearance). It is
continuous and does not "skip" like Crohns. It is associated with Colon Cancer, Primary Sclerosing
Cholangitis, and Arthritis (similar to Ankylosing Spondyhtis).

           On Barium, it is said that the colon is ahaustral, with a diffuse granular appearing mucosa.
           "Lead Pipe" is the buzzword (shortened from fibrosis).

Here is a key clinical point: UC has an increased risk of cancer (probably higher than Crohns), and it
doesn't classically have enlarged lymph nodes (like Crohns does), so if you see a big lymph node in
an UC patient (especially one with long standing disease), you have to think that it might be cancer.

More Common In :                                                             Crohns
    Crohns vs UC
                                                                        -String Sign at IC Valve
                   More
              Common IN                                                               m -

Gallstones      Crohns

Primary         Ulcerative
Sclerosing        Colits
Cholangitis

Hepatic         Crohns
Abscess
                                   Ulcerative Coliits
Pancreatitis    Crohns
                              -Haustral Loss, Lead Pipe Appearance

                                  THIS V5THAT:

                Crohns                                              UC

Slightly less common in the USA               SHghtly more common in the USA

Discontinuous "Skips"                         Continuous

Terminal Ileum - String Sign                  Rectum

Ileocecal Valve "Stenosed"                    Ileocecal Valve "Open"

M esenteric Fat Increased "c reep in g fa t"  Perirectal fat Increased

Lymph nodes are usually enlarged              Lymph nodes are NOT usually enlarged

Makes Fistulae                                D oesn't Usually Make Fistulae

                                              296
                      MISGLarge Bowel Pathology

Toxic Megacolon: Ulcerative colitis, and to a lesser degree Crohns, is the primary cause.
C-Diff can also cause it. Gaseous dilation distends the transverse colon (on upright films), and the
right and left colon on supine films. Lack of haustra and pseudopolyps are also seen. Some people
say the presence of normal hausta excludes the diagnosis. Don't do a barium enema because of the
risk of perforation. Another piece of trivia is that peritonitis can occur without perforation.

Behcets: Ulcers of the penis and mouth. Can also affect GI tract (and looks like Crohns) - most
commonly affects the ileocecal region. It is also a cause of pulm onary artery aneurysms (test
writers like to ask that).

Diverticulosis /Diverticulitis: Some trivia worth knowing is that diverticulosis actually
bleeds more than diverticulitis. Right-sided is less common (but is seen in young Asians). Fistula
formation is actually most common with diverticulitis, and can occur to anything around it (another
piece of bowel, the bladder, etc..).

Epiploic Appendagitis I Omental Infarct:

Epiploic appendages along the serosal surface of the colon
can torse, most commonly on the left. There is not
typically concentric bowel wall thickening (unlike
diverticulifis).

Omental infarction is typically a larger mass with a more
oval shape and central low density. It is more common on
the right (R O I- right omental infarct). Both entities are
self-limiting.

Appendicitis: The classic pathways are: obstruction (fecalith or reactive lymphoid tissue) ->
mucinous fluid builds up increasing pressure -> venous supply is compressed -> necrosis starts ->
wall breaks down -> bacteria get into wall -> inflammation causes vague pain (umbilicus) ->
inflamed appendix gets larger and touches parietal peritoneum (pain shifts to RLQ).

It occurs in an adolescent or young adult (or any age). The measurement of 6mm was originally
described with data from ultrasound compression, but people still generally use it for CT as well.
Secondary signs of inflammation are probably more reliable for CT.

Gamesmanship: In pregnancy MRI without contrast is the test of choice

Appendix Mucocele - Mucinous cystadcnomas are the
most common mucinous tumor of the appendix. They produce
mucin and can really dilate up and get big. They look similar to
cystadenocarcinomas and can perforate leading to
pseudomyxoma peritonei. On ultrasound the presence of an
"onion sign" - layering within a cystic mass - is a suggestive
feature of a mucocele.

                                                                297
Colonic Volvulus: Comes in several flavors:                                            I e

 Sigmoid: Most common adult form. Seen in the nursing home patient (chronic
  constipation is a predisposing factor). This is the "Grandma" volvulus. Buzzword is
  coffee bean sign (or inverted 3 sign). Another less common buzzword is Frimann
  Dahl's sign - which refers to 3 dense lines (arrows) converging towards the site of
  obstruction (star). Points to the RUQ. Recurrence rate after decompression = 50%.

 Cecal: Seen in a younger person (20-40). Associated with people with a "long
  mesentery." More often points to the LUQ. Much less common than sigmoid.

 Cecal Bascule: Anterior folding of the cecum, without twisting. Lotta surgical
  text books dispute this thing even being real (they think it's a focal ileus). The
  finding is supposedly dilation of the cecum in an ectopic position in the middle
  abdomen, without a mesenteric twist. As the terminal ileum is not involved, don't

Old Grandma - who needs to poop                 Cecal Volvulus: (less common)
Extends Towards RUQ              Younger Person - with prior surgery, a mass, or a 3rd
Haustra is Lost                  Trimester Baby destined to wear the jeweled crown of
Ascending and Transverse         Aquilonia upon a troubled brow
Colon might be Dilated           Extends Towards LUQ
                                 Haustra is maintained
                                 Small Bowel is dilated

Colonic Pseudo-Obstruction (Colonic Ileus, Ogilvie Syndrome): Usually seen after serious
medical conditions and in nursing home patients. It can persist for years, or progress to bowel necrosis
and perforation. The classic look is marked diffuse dilation of the large bowel, without a discrete
transition point.

Diversion Colitis /Pouchitis: Bacterial overgrowth in a blind loop which gets no poop (surgery
that creates a blind loop without poop). Classic with pre-existing Inflammatory Bowl Disease.

Colitis Cystica: This cystic dilation of the mucous glands comes in two flavors:

(1) Superficial: The superficial kind consists of cysts that are small in the entire colon. It's associated
with vitamin deficiencies and tropical sprue. Can also be seen in terminal leukemia, uremia, thyroid
toxicosis, and mercury poisoning.

(2) Deep /Profunda: These cysts may be large and are seen in the pelvic colon and rectum.

^^1 %   Rectal Cavernous Hemangioma: Obviously very rare. Just know it's associated
i\. iV  with a few syndromes; Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber, and Blue Rubber Bleb. They might show
        you a ton of phleboliths down there.

Gossypiboma: This isn't really a GI pathology but it's an abscess mimic. It's a retained cotton
product or surgical sponge and it can elicit an inflammatory response.

                                 298
         - Infections -

Entamoeba Histolytica:                                                             "C o n e c n
                                                                                   Cecum"
Parasite that causes bloody diarrhea. Can cause liver abscess, spleen abscess, or
even brain abscess. Within the colon it is one of the causes of toxic megacolon.
They are typically "flask-shaped ulcers" on endoscopy. With regard to barium, the
buzzword is '"coned cecum" referring to a change in the normal bulbous
appearance of the cecum, to that of a cone. Involves the cecum and ascending
colon (usually) and unlike many other GI infections, spares the term inal ileum.

Colonic TB:

Typically involves the terminal ileum, and is            Coned
another cause of the "coned cecum" appearance.           Shaped
Cecum is pulled up (via scarring) out of the             Cecum
RLQ. Causes both ulcers and areas of
narrowing.                                               Narrow
                                                         TI
Two other signs:
                                                         Dilated [
(1) Fleischner sign -                                    Ileum
     enlarged gaping IC valve, and narrow TI -
     gives the impression of an inverted umbrella.

(2) Stierlin sign - sign of acute on chronic disease. Swollen lips of the IC valve allow for rapid
     emptying of the contrast from the cecum but persistent barium in the TI

Colonic CMV:                                        Infections that like    infections that
                                                        the Duodenum      like the Terminal
Seen in patients who are immunosuppressed.
Causes deep ulcerations - which can lead to         (and proximal small            Ileum
perforation.                                                   bowel)
                                                                                    TB
Step 1 question: Cowdry Type A intranuclear                   G iardia           Yersinia
inclusion bodies (whatever the fuck that means).
                                                         Strongyloides

C-Diff:

Classically seen after antibiotic therapy, the toxin leads to a
super high WBC count. CT findings of the ''accordion sign"
with enhancing edematous mucosa or contrast trapped inside
mucosal folds is always described in review books and is fair
game for multiple choice. The barium findings include thumb
printing, ulceration, and irregularity. Of course it can cause
toxic megacolon as mentioned on the prior page.

Neutropenic Colitis (Typhlitis):

Infection limited to the cecum occurring in severe neutropenia.

                                                    299
                                         - Colon Cancer -

Adenocarcinoma: Common cause of cancer                          Apple Core Lesion - Cancer
death (#2 overall). Cancers on the right tend to
bleed (present with bloody stools, anemia). Cancers
on the left tend to obstruct. Apple core is a
buzzword.

Gamesmanship: Large bowel intussusception in
adult = Malignancy

Gamesmanship: Colon likes to Met to the Liver.
Liver Mets will classically be T 1 Dark, T2 Mildly
Bright ("evil grey"), heterogenous non-progressive
in enhancement, sometimes target.

Squamous Cell Carcinom a-

Occasionally arises in the anus (think HPV).

                                         -Rectal Cancer-

Trivia:                                                         Nodes in Perirectal Fat (>5mm = ABnormal)
- Nearly always (98%) adenocarcinoma
- If the path says Squamous - the cause was HPV                                                             Muscularis P.

  (use your imagination on how it got there).                                                                               X
- Lower rectal cancer (0-5 cm from the anorectal angle),
                                                                                                          Subserosa/Serosa
  has the highest recurrence rate.
- MRI is used to stage - and you really only need T2

  weighted imaging - contrast doesn't matter
- Stage T3 - called when tumor breaks out of the rectum

  and into the perirectal fat. This is the critical stage that

  changes management (they will get chemo/rads prior to

  surgery).

               High Rectal Cancer                                          Mesorectal Fascia

                - Treated with Low                              Surgical Treatment is
                Anterior Resection (LAR                         classically determined by the
                 - These patients v                             position of the tumor relative
                                                                to the butthole.
                    maintain fecal
                    continence post                             Most people will use the
                                                                number "5 cm" above the
Low Rectal Cancer                                               anorectal angle to delineate
                                                                "high" vs "low."
- Treated with Abdomino-
Perineal Resection (APR)                                        Both surgical approaches are
- These poor bastards will                                      performed with a total
end up with colostomies                                         mesorectal excision (tumor,
                                                                nodes, and blood supply).

                                                     300
                           - Colon Misc Massos -

Lipomas: The second most common tumor in the colon.

Adenoma - The most common benign tumor of the colon and rectum. The villous adenoma
has the largest riskfo r malignancy.

                     McKittrick-Wheelock Syndrome:

This villous
adenoma classically
causes a mucous
diarrhea leading to
severe fluid and
electrolyte
depletion.

The clinical
scenario would be
something like "80
year old lady with
diarrhea,
hyponatremia,
hypokalemia,
hypochloremia...
and this" and they
show you a mass in
the rectum / bowel.

Anatomy Trivia:                           At the level of S3 the    RETRO-Peritoneal
                                          sigmoid colon sheds its         Structures
                                  Coccyx  oppressive mesentery
                                          and becomes the           Duodenum
   "Get yourfingers outta my ass-wallet"  rectum.                    (2nd and 3rdpart)

                                          15 cms later (around      Pancreas
                                          the tip of the coccyx)     (except tail)
                                          the rectum becomes the
                                          anus. The anus (prison    Colon
                                          wallet) is an excellent    (ascending &
                                          place to hide things.      descending)

                                                                   ' Rectum
                                                                     (proximal 1/3)

                                          For the purpose of       For the purpose of
                                          multiple choice the      muhiple choice the distal
                                          proximal 1/3 of the      1/3 of the rectum is
                                          rectum is                entirely extraperitoneal.
                                          retroperitoneal.

                                             301
