                                    - stomach -

                      Malignant                             Benign
Width > Depth                       Depth > Width
Located within Lumen                 Project beyond the expected lumen
Nodular, Irregular Edges             Sharp Contour
Folds adjacent to ulcer             =Folds radiate to ulcer
Aunt Minnie: Carmen M eniscus Sign   Aunt Minnie: H am pton's Line
Can be anywhere                      Mostly on Lesser Curvature

-Gastric Tumors-

GIST (Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor) - These can be benign or malignant

This is the most common mesenchymal tumor of the GI tract (70% in stomach, duodenum is second
most common -- colon is actually the least common). Think old person (it's rare before age 40).

Some tricks to know:                                   Absence o fperigastric
                                                       lymphadenopathyfavors a
· Lymph node enlargement is NOT a classic feature -    benign GIST over a
                                                       malignant GIST or
· Malignant ones tend to be big angry mother fuckers   Gastric Adenocarcinoma
  (>5 cm with ulceration - and possible perforation).

· If they do met - it is typically to the liver.            Carneys Triad
                                                       " C arn ey 's E at G arbage"
· Having said that, malignancy is rare with these.
  They typically don't met anywhere,                   Chondroma (pulmonary)
  which is why lymph node enlargement is uncommon.     Extra Adrenal Pheo
                                                       G IST
  The association with C arney's triad

  The association with NF-1

                                    272
                 - Gastric Tumors 2 - The Final Chapter

Gastric "Cancer" is either Lymphoma (<5%) or Adenocarcinoma (95%).... Rarely a malignant GIST.

Gastric Adenocarcinoma - usually a disease of an old person (median age 70 - rare before 40).
H. Pylori is the most tested risk factor.

Trivia to know:                                               Ulcer Trivia:

· Can obstruct - if it involves the antrum       Gastric Ulcers - 5% chance of being cancer.

· Metastatic spread to the ovary is referred to  Gastric Ulcers occurs from "altered mucosal
  as a K rukenberg Tumor.                        resistance", and favor the bulb

· Gastroenterostomy performed for gastric        Multiple Gastric Ulcer - think chronic aspirin therapy
  ulcer disease (old school - prior to PPIs)
  have a 2x - 6x- increased risk for             Duodenal Ulcers - Are never cancer
  development of carcinoma within the gastric                          (on multiple choice)
  remnant - "stump cancer" they call it.
                                                 Duodenal Ulcers - 2-3x more common
· Other random risk factors:                                            than Gastric Ulcers.
  Pernicious anemia, Menetrier's disease
                                                 Duodenal Ulcers occur from "increased peptic acid"
· Step 1 trivia question: swollen left
  supraclavicular node = Virchow Node.           Duodenal Ulcers- usually solitary,
                                                                        If multiple think ZE.

The Look: Gastric Adenocarcinoma looks very different (usually) than a GIST.

                                                              Gastric Adenocarcinoma
                                                              (arrow) is usually a large,
                                                              ulcerated, heterogenous
                                                              mass.

                                                              The "mass" is often
                                                              asymmetric wall
                                                              thickening - focal and
                                                              nodular - more than
                                                              12mm.

GIST (arrow) is usually                                       Benign Gastritis would be
smoothly marginated and                                       more diffuse stratified gastric
exophytic                                                     wall thickening

Gastric Lymphoma, can be primary (MALT), or                    Lymphoma - Crossing the Pylorus
secondary (systemic lymphoma). The stomach is the
most common extranodal site for non-Hodgkin                   Classic Look =
lymphoma.                                                     · Diffiise wall thickening (>1 cm)
                                                              · Without gastric outlet obstruction
Just like adenocarcinoma - H. Pylori is a risk factor

Even when extensive, it rarely causes gastric outlet
obstruction. It was classically described as "crossing
the pylorus " , although since gastric carcinoma is like
lOx more common, it is actually more likely to do that.
Has multiple looks and can be big, little, ulcerative,
polypoid, or look like target lesions. It can also look like
Linitis Plastica (discussed on the following page).

Trivia: It can rupture with treatment (chemo).

                                                 273
                - Gastric Tumors 3 - A New Beginning

              Gastric Cancer is "More Likely" Than Lymphoma to...
      ·More Likely to Cause Gastric Outlet Obstruction
      ·More Likely to be in the distal stomach
      ·More Likely to extend beyond the serosa and obliterate adjacent fat plains
      ·More Likely to be a focal mass (95% of primary gastric tumors are adenocarcinoma)

Mets to the Stomach: This is actually very rare.

Melanoma is probably the most common culprit, when it does occur.
This obviously has a variable appearance but multiple button type
soft tissue nodules is probably the m ost classic look.

Breast (most classic) and Lung are other possibilities -and these are
known for producing a particular look o f diffuse infiltration and a
contracted desmoplastic deformity resembling a stiff leather bottle.
This is the so called Linitis Plastica appearance - which can also be
a look for lymphoma as above.
Lobular carcinoma is the most common breast cancer histological
type which presents with gastric metastases

                               - Misc. Gastric Conditions -

Chronic Aspirin Therapy: "Multiple gastric ulcers" is the buzzword. Obviously this is non­
specific, but some sources say it occurs in 80% of patient's with chronic aspirin use. As a point of
trivia, aspirin does NOT cause duodenal ulcers.
If you see multiple duodenal ulcers (most duodenal ulcers are solitary) you should think Zollinger-
Ellison.
Areae Gastricae: This is a normal fine reticular pattern seen on double contrast. A favorite
piece of trivia to ask is when does this "enlarge " ? The answer is that it enlarges in elderly and
patient's with H. Pylori. Also it can focally enlarge next to an ulcer. It becomes obliterated by cancer
or atrophic gastritis.

                                                                274
                      - Misc. Gastric Conditions - Continued

Menetrier's Disease: Rare and has a French sounding name, so it's almost guaranteed to be on
the test. It's an idiopathic gastropathy, with regular rugal thickening that classically involves the
fundus and spares the antrum. Bimodal age distribution (childhood form thought to be CMV related).
They end up with low albumin, from loss into gastric lumen.

Essential Trivia: Involves the fundus, and spares the antrum.

Ram's Horn Deformity (Pseudo Billroth 1)             Normal
Tapering of the antrum causes the stomach to look
like a Ram's Horn. This is a differential case, and                 Rams Horn - tubular, conical
can be seen with Scarring via peptic ulcers,                        shape of the distal stomach
Granulomatous Disease (Crohns, Sarcoid, TB,
Syphilis), or Scirrhous Carcinoma.

Essential Trivia: The stomach is the
most common GI tract location for sarcoid.

Gastric Volvulus                                                    Organoaxial
Two Flavors:

Organoaxial - the greater curvature flips over the lesser curvature. This is
seen in old ladies with paraesophageal hernias. It's way more common.

Gastric Antrum BELOW the GE Junction

Mesenteroaxial -      over the mesentery. Can cause ischemia and

needs to be fixed. Additionally this type causes obstruction. This type is

more common in kids.

Gastric Antrum ABOVE the GE Junction                                Mesenteroaxial

Gastric Diverticulum:

The way they always ask this is by trying to get you to call it an
adrenal mass (it's most commonly in the posterior fundus).

Gamesmanship: Find the normal adrenal.

Gastric Varices: This gets mentioned in the pancreas section, but I just want to hammer home
that test writers love to ask splenic vein thrombus causing isolated gastric varices. Some sneaky
ways they can ask this is by saying "pancreatic cancer" or "Pancreatitis" causes gastric varices.
Which is true.... because they are associated with splenic vein thrombus. So, just watch out for that.

                                                                275
