                           Small Bowel

Introduction, the Lost Art, and Historical Perspective:

In the m odem age a legitimate working know ledge o f the barium fluoroscopic exam ination is
exceedingly rare. Ever since the late Cretaceous period, when the Oort cloud o f comets rained
down upon the dinosaurs o f the Yucatan Peninsula, legitimate expertise in the field has been
essentially extinct. Now all that remains o f this ancient practice is a collection o f pretenders
who spend their days in the swamps o f fuckery deploying the phrase "O f course I know what
I 'm looking a t " as subterfuge.

Understanding that this barbaric ancient practice still represents "fair game" on the modem
boards, I set out on a joum ey to re-discover the lost knowledge. This journey took me across
the globe, into the most primitive comers o f the world - as these were the only locations the
modality is still commonly practiced. I was searching for any ancient relic that I could use to
constmct a high yield summary. My joum ey was a treacherous one, necessitating significant
risk to gain favor with the natives. I barely survived several bouts o f malaria and one (five)
bouts of gonorrhea in my quest to discover the ancient methods o f fluoroscopic interpretation.
Eventually, as is often the case in life - my persistence was rewarded. I was confldent I had
finally unearthed a legitimate method o f interpretation that I could use to complete the section
on bowel fold pattems.

The method I discovered is as ancient as the practice o f barium driven fluoroscopic imaging.
Originally described in the scrolls of Xuthal (a city-state o f ancient Valusia) during the
Hyborian Age. The knowledge contained in the scrolls details the chronicle o f a low bom son
of a village blacksmith whom after the destm ction o f the Aquilonian fortress o f Venarium,
was stmck by wanderlust and began a joumey. According to his chronicle - this 20 year
joum ey saw him encounter skulking monsters, evil wizards, tavern wenches, and beautiful
princesses.

It was during his travels he leamed many things, including the ancient 3 step method o f the
small bowel follow through - the details o f which I will now discuss.

                                                                 283
                STEP 1 - Evaluate the Folds

Thin (<3mm)                    \\ \\ \ \ 1 1 / /            ·Mechanical Obstruction

Straight Folds                 \\ \\\\ //////               *
with Dilation
                                                            ·Scleroderma

Thick Straight   Segmental         ^«1 1 I f                · Ischemia
                Distribution
Folds >3mm                     \\\ W / /m/m/                · A"djacent-Inflammation

Thick Straight     Diffuse                       i£         · Low Protein
                Distribution   \\ \
Folds >3mm                      W                           ·Venous Congestion

  Thick Folds Segmental                  - . 11 ,           . Cirrhosis
with N odularity Distribution
                                                            ·Crohns

                               A \%\l ifi^                    Whipples
                               \ VI 11f / / 9
                               W                            ·Lymphoid Hyperplasia
Thick Folds     Diffuse         V        ^
                                                               (nodules 2-4mm, uniform sizes)
with N odularity Distribution
                                                            · Lymphoma
                                                            · Mets

                                                               (nodules > 4mm, variable sizes)

                                                            · Intestinal Lymphangiectasia

STEP 2a - Evaluate for Loop Separation with or without Tethering

    Loop        W ithout                                /V  * Ascites,
Seperation      Tethering                                   * Wall Thickening
                                      ^n~
                                                              (Crohns, Lymphoma),
                               ) /
                                                            * Adenopathy
                                                            · Mesenteric Tumors

    Loop           With        --^       I ^                Tethering looks like
Seperation      Tethering                                   someone is pinching and
                                                    /       pulling the loops towards
                                                            the displacing mass.

                                                            * Carcinoid

A pearl is that an extrinsic processes will spare the mucosa, intrinsic process will alter the mucosa.

                                    284
STEP 2b - If Nodules are Present Evaluate the Distribution and Secondary
                            Findings To Help Narrow the Differential.

"Sand Like Nodules"   Diffuse micronodules in  * W hipples (Tropheryma whipplei)
                      the jejunum.               Pseudo-W hipples (MAC Infection)

     Uniform                                   Lymphoid Hyperplasia
2-4mm Nodules

Nodules of Larger or                           Cancer - think Mets (Melanoma)
     Varying Sizes

"Cobblestoning"                                Raised islands of mucosa separated by linear
                                               streaks running perpendicular to the lumen of
                                               the bowel.

                                               These streaks represent ulceration.

                                               This findings (especially when combined with
                                               areas of stricture, and loop separation from fat
                                               proliferation) should make you think
                                               Crohns

STEP 3: Trademark Features:

After comparing this 3 main features - many multiple choice distractors can be eliminated. If necessary
specific features of each disease can be compared - with that discussion to follow.

Ribbon Bowel                                   Bowel is featxireless,
                                               atrophic, and has fold
                                               thickening (ribbon-like).

                                               Graft vs Host

                      285
STEP 3: Trademark Features - Continued:                              Narrow separation
                                                                     of normal folds
  Hidebound Bowel                                                    with mild bowel
                                                                     dilation.
    Moulage sign
     (tube of wax)                                                   Scleroderma

    Fold Reversal                                                    Dilated jejunal
                                                                     loop with
  A Fucking Worm                                                     complete loss of
                                                                     jejunal folds -
As a general rule, avoid                                             opacified like a
drinking water that pigs                                             "tube of wax"
shit in.
                                                                     Celiac
                                                                286
                                                                     Jejunum loses folds
                                                                     to look more like the
                                                                     normal Ileum, Ileum
                                                                     gains folds (in the
                                                                     right lower
                                                                     quadrant) to look
                                                                     more like normal
                                                                     Jejunum
                                                                     Celiac

                                                                     Thread Like Defect in
                                                                     the Barium Column

                                                                     Ascaris Suum
                                                                     (asshole demon worm)
- Selected Small Bowel Path -

The Target Sign:                    Clover Leaf Sign:

     ·Single Target: GIST, Primary  This is an Aunt Minnie for Healed Peptic Ulcer of the
     Adenocarcinoma, Lymphoma,      Duodenal Bulb.
     Ectopic Pancreatic Rest, Met
     (Melanoma).

     ·Multiple Target: Lymphoma,
          Met (Melanoma)

Whipples: Rare infection (Tropheryma Whipplei). Just like a stripper - it prefers white men in their
50s. The bug infiltrates the lamina propria with large macrophages infected by intracellular whipple
bacilli leading to marked swelling of intestinal villi and thickened irregular mucosal folds primarily in
duodenum and proximal jejunum. The buzzword is "sand like nodules" referring to diffuse
micronodules in the jejunum. Jejunal mucosal folds are thickened. This is another cause of low
density (near fat) enlarged lymph nodes.

Pseudo-Whipples: Also an infection - but this time MAI (instead of T Whipplei). This is seen in
AIDS patients with CD4<100. The imaging findings of nodules in the jejunum and retroperitoneal
nodes are similar to Whipples (hence the name). The distinction between the two is not done with
imaging but instead via an acid fast stain (MAC is positive).

Intestinal Lymphangiectasia: Lymphangiectasia results from obstrucfion to the flow of
lymph from the small intestine into the mesentery. This results in dilation of the intestinal and serosal
lymphatic channels. This can be primary from lymphatic hypoplasia, or secondary from obstruction of
the thoracic duct (or any place in between).

Graft vs Host: Buzzword = Ribbon bowel. It occurs in padents after bone
marrow transplant. It's less common with modem anti-rejection drugs. Skin,
Liver, and GI tract get hit. Small bowel is usually the most severely affected.
Bowel is featureless, atrophic, and has fold thickening (ribbon-like).

SMA Syndrome: This is a compression of the portion
of the duodenum (D3) by the SMA (it pinches the duodenum
in the midline). Stomach and Proximal Duodenum (DI,D2)
will be dilated.

It is seen in patients who have recently lost a lot of weight
(loss of the normal mesenteric fat under the SMA).

                                                                287
Celiac Sprue: Small bowel malabsorption of gluten.

High yield points:

· Can cause malabsorption of iron, and lead to iron deficiency anemia.
· Associated with Idiopathic Pulmonary Hemosiderosis (Lane Hamilton Syndrome)
· Increased Risk of bowel wall lymphoma
· Gold standard is biopsy {surprisingly not barium)
· Dermatitis Herpetiformis - some skin thing (remember that from step 1)
· Tissue transglutaminase antibody (tTG), IgA class (blood screening - step 1 trivia)

Findings (CT / Barium)

· Fold Reversal is the Buzzword (Jejunum like Ileum, Ileum like Jejunum)

· Moulage Sign - dilated bowel with effaced folds (tube with wax poured in it)

· Cavitary Lymph Nodes (low density)

· Splenic Atrophy

Meckel's Diverticulum I Diverticulitis: This is a congenital true diverticulum of the distal
ileum. A piece of total trivia is that it is a persistent piece of the omphalomesenteric duct. Step 1 style,
"rule of 2s" occurs in 2% of the population, has 2 types of heterotopic mucosa (gastric and pancreatic),
located 2 feet from the IC valve, it's usually 2 inches long (and 2 cm in diameter), and usually has
symptoms before the child is 2. If it has gastric mucosa (the ones that bleed typically do) it will take up
Tc-Pertechnetate just like the stomach (hence the Meckel's scan).

High Yield Meckel's Trivia (Regarding Complications)

     · Can get diverticulitis in the Meckels (mimic appendix)
          GI Bleed from Gastric Mucosa (causes 30% of symptomatic cases)
          Can be a lead point for intussusception (seen with inverted diverticulum)
          Can cause Obstruction

Duodenal Inflammatory Disease: You can have fold thickening of the duodenum from
adjacent inflammatory processes of the pancreas or gallbladder. You can also have thickening and fistula
formation with Crohn's (usually when the colon is the primary site). Primary duodenal Crohns can
happen, but is super rare. Chronic dialysis patients may get severely thickened duodenal folds which
can mimic the appearance of pancreatitis on barium.

Jejunal Diverticulosis: Less common than colonic diverticulosis, but does occur. They occur
along the mesenteric border. Important association is bacterial overgrowth and malabsorption. They
could show this with CT, but more likely will show it with barium (if they show it at all).

Gallstone Ileus: Not a true ileus, instead a mechanical obstruction secondary to the passage of a
gallstone in the lumen of the bowel. Gallstones access the bowel by eroding through the duodenum
(usually). As you can imagine, only elderly or weak patients (those unworthy of serving in the spartan
infantry) are susceptible to this erosion.

          Classic multiple choice trivia includes the "Riglers Triad" ofpneumobilia, obstruction, and an

A ectopic location o f a gallstone. The classic trick is to try and get you to say that free air - the
          "Riglers Sign" - is part of the Riglers Triad (it isn't) -- mumble to yourself "nice try assholes."

                                                                 288
- Trauma to the Bowel and the Bowel in Trauma -

Bowel Trauma:                                                                    Direct Signs
                                                                      Spilled Oral Contrast
Penetrating Trauma (bullets, knives, light saber, the claws of a      Active Mesenteric Bleed
frantic gerbil desperately attempting to escape the rectum, etc...)
can yield both direct and indirect signs of injury. It is important            Indirect Signs
to remember that the absence of direct signs does not exclude         Fat Stranding
injury to the bowel, and the presence of indirect signs does not      Fluid Layering Along the Bowel
confirm it (although it does raise suspicion in the correct clinical
context). This can be tested by asking you what is a direct or
indirect sign, or by showing you a picture containing the findings.

Gamesmanship: Watch the wording on the oral contrast. Yes... oral contrast is helpful when evaluating
possible bowel injury or post surgical leak. However, the type of contrast is important. Barium is always
Bad for any situation where it could possibly end up outside the lumen of the bowel ( "barium gone bad" -
is discussed later in the chapter). So, water soluble contrast is what you want to see. Use your
imagination in how this wording could be used to try and trick you.

Bowel in Trauma -- "Shock Bowel"                                      Shock Complex Features Include:
"Hypovolemic Shock Complex"
                                                                      · Thickened Enhancing Bowel
This is typically seen with severe hypotension , although               Loops (small bowel involved
anything that gives you low volume - (cardiac arrest, septic            more than larger bowel)
shock, bacterial endocarditis, diabetic ketoacidosis, etc.. so on
and so forth) can also cause it.                                      · On Non-Contrast, bowel loops
                                                                        may appear denser than the psoas
Diffuse Intense          imf
Bowel Mucosal                                                         . Collapsed IVC

  Enhancement                                                         · HYPO-enhancement of solid
                                                                        organs (liver and spleen)
Flat IVC (arrow)
                                                                      · Bilateral delayed nephrograms
                                                                        (persistent nephrograms)

                                                                      · HYPER-enhancement of the
                                                                        adrenals

This vs That: Bowel Trauma vs Shock Bowel                             Shock Bowel

                              Bowel Trauma

                  Focal                                               Diffuse

                     Wall Thickening with                                      Wall Thickening with
    High Attenuation Blood in the Submucosa                            Near Water Attenuation Edema

Mucosa enhances normally (or less than normal)               Mucosa demonstrates intense enhancement

Secondary signs of injury (free air, leaked contrast,                      Other signs of shock
mesenteric hematoma, e tc ... e tc ... so on and so forth).        (bright adrenals, flat IVC, etc...)

                              289
                         -Small Bowel Cancer-

Adenocarcinoma: Most common in the proximal small bowel (usually duodenum). Increased
incidence with celiac disease and regional enteritis. Focal circumferential bowel wall thickening in
proximal small bowel is characteristic on CT. The duodenal web does NOT increase the risk.

Gamesmanship: Adenocarcinoma is more likely to obstruct relative to lymphoma.

Lymphoma: It's usually the non-Hodgkin
flavor. Patients with celiac, Crohns, AIDS, and
SLE are higher risk. It can look like anything
(infiltrative, polypoid, multiple nodules etc....).
Key piece of trivia is they usually do NOT
obstruct, even with massive circumferential
involvement. The Hodgkin subtype is more likely
to cause a desmoplastic reaction.

Trivia: Small bowel lymphoma favors the ileum.

Gamesmanship: Obstruction is rare (lymphoma is
a "soft" tumor).

                                                      Lymphoma - CH'cumferential Involvement

Carcinoid: This has an Aunt Minnie look with              Carcinoid - Sunburst Desmoplastic Rx

a mass + desmoplastic stranding. "Starburst"
appearance of the mesenteric mass with
calcifications. This tumor most commonly occurs
in young adults. The primary tumor is often not
seen. That calcified crap you are seeing is the
desmoplastic reaction. Liver mets are often hyper
vascular. Step 1 style, you don't get carcinoid
syndrome (flushing, diarrhea) until you met to the
liver. The most common primary location is the
distal ileum (older literature says appendix). The
appendix, has the best prognosis of all GI primary
sites. Systemic serotonin degrades the heart valves
(right sided), and classically causes tricuspid
regurgitation - more on this in the cardiac chapter.
MIBG or Octreotide scans can assist with diagnosis
and staging - more on this in the nuclear medicine
chapter

Mets: This is usually melanoma (which hits the small bowel in 50% of fatal cases). You can also
get hematogenous seeding of the small bowel with breast, lung, and Kaposi sarcoma. Melanoma will
classically have multiple targets.

                                                     290
