                                              S E C T I O N 3:

                                  C ystic D isease

Bosniak Cyst Classification:
·Class 1: Simple - less than 15 HU with no enhancement
·Class 2: Hyperdense (< 3 cm). Thin calcifications, Thin septations
·Class 2F: Hyperdense (> 3 cm). Minimally thickened calcifications (5% chance cancer)
·Class 3: Thick Septations, Mural Nodule (50% chance cancer)
·Class 4: Any enhancement (>15 HU)

Class 1:           Class 2:              Class 2F:           Class 3:               Class 4:
-Simple Anechoic   -Hyperdense (<3cm)                                               -Any Enhancement
- 0% chance of CA  -Thin Calcifications  -Hyperdense (>3cm) -Thick Calcifications   -100% chance of CA
                   -Thin Septations
                   - 0% chance of CA     -Thin Calcifications -Mural Nodule        This is your classic lool<

                                         - < 5% chance of CA -50% chance of CA     for a clear cell R C C

Hyperdense Cysts: Basically, if the mass is greater than 70 HU and homogenous, it's benign
(hemorrhagic or proteinaceous cyst) 99.9% of the time.

Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) - Kidneys get
progressively larger and lose function (you get dialysis by the 5* decade). Hyperdense contents &
calcified wall are frequently seen due to prior hemorrhage. What you need to know is: (1) it's
Autosomal Dominant "ADuU", (2) They get cysts in the liver 70% of the time, (3) they get seminal
vesicle cysts (some sources say 60%), and (4) they get Berry Aneurysms. As mentioned before, they
don't have an intrinsic risk of cancer, but do get cancer once they are on dialysis.

Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease (ARPKD)-T heseguys getHTN
and renal failure. The liver involvement is different than the adult form. Instead of cysts they have
abnormal bile ducts and fibrosis. This congenital hepatic fibrosis is ALWAYS present in ARPKD.
The ratio of liver and kidney disease is inversely related. The worse the liver is the better the kidneys
do. The better the liver is, the worse the kidneys do. On ultrasound the kidneys are smoothly enlarged
and diffusely echogenic, with a loss of corticomedullary differentiation.

Seriously Motherfuckers ? - A nasty trick is to show you a nasty looking cystic lesion that
makes you think cystic neoplasm. The trick is a subacute or chronic renal abscess can look just like a
cystic renal neoplasm - and this differentiation can be very difficult - especially on a single image with
no history (prompting you to refiexively think - "seriously motherfuckers ?").

History of fever, leukocytosis, or previously treated
urinary tract infection - all should activate your
spider-sense.

If that isn't available, look for peri-renal stranding
and thickening of the fascia - as shown in this
awesome illustration I made (arrow).

More on this in the next section.

                                                        364
Lithium Nepiiropathy - Occurs in patients who take lithium long term. Can lead to diabetes
insipidus and renal insufficiency. The kidneys are normal to small in volume with multiple
(innumerable") tiny cysts, usually 2-5 mm in diameters. These "microcysts" are distinguishable
from larger cysts associated with acquired cystic disease of uremia. They are probably going to
show this on MRI with the history of bipolar disorder.

Uremic Cystic Kidney Disease - About 40% of patients with end stage renal disease
develop cysts. This rises with duration of dialysis and is seen in about 90% in patients after 5 year
of dialysis. The thing to know is: Increased risk of malignancy with dialysis (3-6x).

Trivia: The cysts will regress after renal transplant.

Von Hippei Lindau-Autosomal dominant multi-system                                  Cysts in   Kidneys
disorder. 50-75% have renal cysts. 25-50% develop RCC              ADPKD                      are BIG
(clear cell).
                                                                                  1L i v e r
     Pancreas: Cysts, Serous Microcystic Adenomas,
     Neuroendocrine (islet cell) tumor                             VHL         Cysts in 1
     Adrenal: Pheochromocytoma (often multiple)                                Pancreas
     CNS: Hemangioblastoma of the cerebellum, brain stem,
     and spinal cord. Endolymphatic sac tumors.                    Acquired                   Kidneys
     Urogenital: Epididymal cysts, cystadenomas                    (Uremic) i                 are small

Tuberous Sclerosis - Autosomal dominant multi-system disorder. You have hamartomas

everywhere (brain, lung, heart, skin, kidneys). The renal findings are multiple bilateral
angiomyolipomas. They also have renal cysts, and occasionally RCC (same rate as general
population, but in younger patient population). With regard to other organ
systems:

Lung - LAM - thin walled cysts and chylothorax                          Tuberous Sclerosis can
Cardiac - Rhabdomyosarcoma (typically involve cardiac septum)           be referred to as
Brain - Giant Cell Astrocytoma, Cortical and Subcortical Tubers,        Bourneville Disease
Subependymal Nodules                                                    (for the purpose o f
Renal - AMLs, RCC (in younger patients)                                 fucking with you)

Calyceal Diverticulum: The classic look is shown on a
contrasted CT delayed (excretory phase). There will be a round
Fluid-Fluid Level near the collecting system. The levels you arc
seeing are excreted contrast layered under urine without contrast
within the diverticulum.

A common trick is to show a non-contrasted study that also appears
to have a fluid-fluid level. However, in this case it is actually a
fluid - debris level, representing "Milk of Calcium" in that same
calyceal diverticulum.

More on this in section 5.

365
                               T2 Dark Renal Cyst

Cysts are supposed to be T2 bright. If you see the "T2 Dark Cyst" then you are deahng with the
classic differential of:

(1) Lipid Poor AML
  · A small percentage of AMLs are lipid poor in the
     general population.
  · For the purpose of multiple choice - If you see a lipid
     poor AML (especially if you see a bunch of them)
     you need to think about Tuberous Sclerosis - about
     30% of their AMLs are lipid poor.

(2) Hemorrhagic Cyst
  · These will likely be T1 bright

(3) Papillary Subtype RCC
  · Remember that clear cells (the most common sub-type) are T2 HYPER Intense.
  · Both Clear Cell and Papillary will enhance, - but the clear cell enhances more avidly (equal
     to cortex on cortico-medullary phase).

Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney:
This is a peds thing (and is discussed in that chapter).
Quick refresher - this is the situation where you have multiple tiny
cysts forming in utero from some type of insult.

What you should know:
· "No functioning renal tissue, " - shown with MAG 3 exam.
· Contralateral renal tract abnormalities occur like 50% of the time.

  Typically you think of reflux (VUR) and UPJ Obstructions

THIS vs THAT: MCDK vs Bad Hydro                                        UPJ
                                                                       Obstruction
                                                                       Contralateral
                                                                       Kidney

In hydronephrosis, the cystic spaces are seen to communicate.
In difficult cases renal scintigraphy can be useful. MCDK will show no excretory function.

THIS vs THAT:Peripelvic Cyst vs Parapelvic Cyst

Para (beside): Originates from parenchyma, may compress the collecting
system. These look a lot like the cortical cysts that you see all the time, but
instead of bulging out - they bulge in.

Peri (around): Originates from renal sinus, mimics hydro. If you didn't
have a pyelogram (delayed) phase - might be tricky to tell apart.

                                 366
