             S E C T I O N 6:
PERFUSION / VASCULAR

Page Kidney

- This is a subcapsular hematoma which causes
renal compression and complex fuckery with
the renin-angiotensin system. The result is
hypertension.

The capsule is the real issue here. That capsule  Subcapsular Hematoma + HTN = Page
is tough and w on't expand so the hem atoma
puts the squeeze on the "meat" of the kidney.
You could never get a "page pancreas" because
the pancreas has no capsule. This is the same
reason why resistive indices are worthless in
a pancreas (no capsule) but sometimes useful
in a kidney (which has a capsule).

Classic Clinical History: Hypertension post biopsy, lithotripsy, or trauma.

        THIS vs THAT D e lay e d vs P e r s i s t e n t N e p h ro g ra m

Delayed Nephrogram - One kidney enhances and the other doesn't (or does to a lesser
degree). Basically this is happening from pressure on the kidney, either extrinsic from a
Page kidney situation, or intrinsic from an obstructing stone.

Persistent Nephrogram - This is seen with hypotension/shock and ATN. They can show
this two ways, the first would be on a plain film of the abdomen (with dense kidneys), the
second would be on CT. The tip offs are going to be that they tell you the time (3 hours
etc...) and it's gonna be bilateral.

                      I

Delayed Nephrogram                                     Persistent Nephrogram

                                                  374
Renal Infarct

So wedge shaped hypodensities in the kidney can be seen with lots o f stuff (infarct, tumor,
infection, etc...). Renal infarcts are most easily identified on post contrast imaging in the
cortical phase. I f the entire renal artery is out, w ell then it w on't enhance (duh).

Two tricks that they could pull are the:

(1) "Cortical Rim Sign " - which is absent
immediately after the insult, but is seen 8 hours
to days later. You have a dual blood supply,
which allows the cortex to stay perfused.
(2) "Flip Flop E nhancem ent" can be seen
where a region of hypodensity / poor
enhancement on early phases becomes
relatively hyperdense on delayed imaging.

Renal Vein Thrombosis

Numerous causes; including dehydration, indwelling umbilical venous catheters (most
common in neonates), and nephrotic syndrome (most common in adults). This can mimic a
renal stone; presenting with flank pain, an enlarged kidney, and a delayed nephrogram.

On Doppler they are going to show you Reversed arterial diastolic flow and absent venous
flow. *This is discussed again in the subsequent transplant section.

Acute Cortical Necrosis                                      Reverse Rim (the cortex is dark)

· Rare type o f acute renal failure with necrosis involving
  only the renal cortex.

· Occurs secondary to severe hypovolemia (think shock,
  severe sepsis, intravascular hemolysis, and OBGYN
  complications such as abruption etc).

· Classically shown with the Reverse Rim Sign - non­
  enhancing dark cortex with normal enhancement o f the
  renal medulla.

· A veeeery thin rim o f contrast enhancement (cortical
  rim sign) can persist and this should not be mistaken for
  sufficient perfusion.

· In the chronic phase, the renal cortex becomes calcified.

375
