Developmental Ureteral Anomalies: Discussed in the Peds chapter.

                   Ureter Infection / Inflammation:

Stones - Stones tend to lodge in 3 spots: UPJ, UVJ, pelvic brim.

Ureteral Wall Calcifications - Wall calcifications should make you think about
two things: (1) TB, (2) Schistosomiasis (worms).

Ureteritis cystica - Numerous tiny subepithelial fluid-filled cysts within the w all o f
the ureter. The condition is the result o f chronic inflammation (from stones and/or chronic
infection). Typically this is seen in diabetics w ith recurrent UTI. There may be an increased
risk of cancer.

Ureteral Pseudodiverticulosis - This is similar to ureteritis cystica in that both
conditions are the result o f chronic inflammation (stones, infection). Instead of being cystic
filling defects, these guys are multiple small outpouchings. They are bilateral 75% o f the
time, and favor the upper and middle third. There is an association with malignancy.

Malakoplakia ( "The A ccu rsed ") - Form er Lord o f the D ark Elves o f Svartalfheim and
rare chronic granulomatous condition, this pathology can create soft tissue nodularity /
plaques in the bladder and ureters (bladder more often). It is seen in the setting o f chronic
UTIs (highly associated with E.ColiV often in fem ale im m unocom prom ised patients.
There is also a more remote association w ith the Casket o f A ncient Winters. Since
malakoplakia most frequently manifests as a mucosal mass involving the ureter or bladder,
the most common renal finding is obstruction secondary to a lesion in the lower tract.
Step 1 buzzword = M ichaelis-Gutmann Bodies.

The most easily tested piece o f trivia is  ------------------------------------------------------------
this: M alakoplakia is                           Leukoplakia = Premalignant
NOT premalignant, and usually gets
better with antibiotics.                    Malakoplakia = NOT Premalignant

Leukoplakia - This is essentially squamous m etaplasia secondary to chronic irritation
(stones or infections). The bladder is more commonly involved than the ureter. Imaging
findings are unlikely to be shown, but would be mural filling defects.

The m ost easily tested piece o f trivia is this: Leukoplakia is considered prem alignant and the
cancer is squamous cell.

Trivia: Leukoplakia is associated w ith squamous cell carcinom a N O T transitional cell.

                                            384
Retroperitoneal Fibrosis

This condition is characterized by proliferation o f aberrant fibro-inflamm atory tissue, which
typically surrounds the aorta, IVC, iliac vessels, and frequently traps and obstructs the
ureters. It is idiopathic 75% o f the time. Other causes include prior radiation, medications
(methyldopa, ergotamine, methysergide), inflammatory causes (pancreatitis, pyelonephritis,
inflammatory aneurysm), and malignancy (desmoplastic reaction, lymphoma).

Things (trivia) to know:
 Mostly (75 %) idiopathic AKA"Ormond Disease"
 Associated with IgG4 disorders (autoimmune pancreatitis, Riedel's thyroiditis,

     inflammatory pseudotumor)
 Classically shown with medial deviation o f ureters
 It's more com mon in men
 Malignancy associated RP fibrosis occurs about 10% o f the time (some people advocate

     using PET to find a primary)
 The Fibrosis will be Gallium avid, and PET hot in its early stages and cold in its late

     stages (mirroring its inflammatory stages). M etabolically active RP fibrosis will show
     increased FDG and Gallium uptake, regardless of a benign or malignant underlying
     cause

Subepitheiiai Renal Pelvis Hematoma:

This tends to occur in patients on long-term anticoagulation or a history o f hem ophilia. You
are going to have a thickened upper tract wall - which is a classic mimic for TCC.

          Gamesmanship: I would expect pre and post contrast images so that you can make
          the classic findings o f hyperdense clot on the pre-contrast that does NOT
          enhance. Although a non-contrast alone (showing blood in the urinary pelvis) with
          the history o f hemophilia should also be enough to seal the deal.

THIS vs THAT: Deviation of the Ureters

Lateral Deviation of the            Medial Deviation
          Ureters              "Waisting" of the Ureters

      Retroperitoneal           Retroperitoneal Fibrosis
        Adenopathy
                                     Retrocaval Ureter
     Aortic Aneurysm                     (right side)

                                    Pelvic Lipomatosis

Psoas Hypertrophy              Psoas Hypertrophy
 (proximal ureter)                (distal ureter)

                          385
