                                    S E C T I O N 5:
                               C alcifications

Nephrolithiasis (kidney stones)                                 Staghorn Stones

There are several different stone types. The most       - A mini Promethean Dialogue -
Hkely testable trivia for each is:
                                                   The big branching "staghom" stones that you
 Calcium Oxalate - most common type (75%)         sometimes see filling the entire collecting system
 Struvite Stone - More common in women and        are usually (but not always) "struvite" stones.

  associated with UTI                              These struvite stones require alkaline urine to
 Uric Acid - "Unseen" on x-ray.                   form and grow. As such, these patients often have
 Cystine - Rare and associated with congenital    a urease producing infection (Proteus or
                                                   Klebsiella) - hence their classic presentation is
  disorders of metabolism                          fever and flank pain (not renal colic). These
 Indinavir - Stones in HIV patients which are     stones are described as "insidious," forged in the
                                                   dark mountains of Mordor, and growing slowly
  the ONLY stones NOT seen on CT.                  into branching casts of the collecting system.
                                                   Their large size , branching morphology, and
Treatment Trivia: There are two pieces of trivia   affiliation with the Necromancer of Dol Guldur
that matter with regard to treatment.              makes passage rare. If they are to come out - it
                                                   often requires intervention.
Size Matters:
 Stones measuring 5 mm or smaller have a high     TLDR; Struvite Stones form Staghoms. They are
                                                   Insidious in their background of Infection and
  likelihood of spontaneously passing.             prefer to cause Fever rather than the Fearsome
 Stones measuring 1 cm or larger have a high      pain of urinary colic.

  likelihood of NOT passing spontaneously.

Composition (Uric Acid vs Not Uric Acid):
 Uric acid stones very rarely will require any kind of invasive intervention (lithotripsy, etc...).

  The reason is they are very pH dependent. Big Fat People and/or diabetics tend to have more
  acidic urine (from all that Mountain Dew) which leads to an increase in uric acid stones. They
  can be treated with medical therapy (potassium citrate or sodium bicarbonate) to increase the pH
  and melt the stones. You can't melt a calcium stone by messing with the pH.

Diagnosis of UricAcid Stones:

Since identification of a uric acid stone is going to change management that makes it a target for
trivia on multiple choice. There are 2 things that I would know:

(1) Uric Acid Stones tend to have lower attenuation (< 500 HU).
(2) Uric Acid Stones will have little if any change in H.U. with dual energy CT. The reason is they

     are composed of "light elements." The larger atoms (Calcium, Phosphorous, Magnesium, and
     Sulfur) tend to have a larger change - which is the basis of dual energy CT (80 kv, and 140 kv)
     identification of stone composition.

Trivia: Non Uric Acid Stones will have higher HU at 80 kVp relative to 140 kVp.

Trivia: Uric Acid Stones will be very similar at 80 kVp relative to 140 kVp. *If they do show a
small change it will be the opposite - with a slightly higher HU at 140 kVp.

Trivia: Calcium stones are going to show the biggest HU change between high and low energies.
In general, low/high energy ratios are going to be around 1.1 for uric acid, 1.25 for cystine, and >
1.25 for calcium.

                                                   372
Milk of Calcium -
I touched on this briefly in section 3 in the setting of a calyceal diverticulum.
Milk of calcium is a suspension of
calcium crystals which frequently
masquerades as renal calculi within
a cyst or calyceal diverticulum. This
can be an easily tested source of
radiologic trivia - perfect for a lazy
question writer.

The classic look: Ultrasound
showing the layering "fluid - debris
level" that changes with positioning
of the patient.

 Cortical Nephrocalcinosis
 This is typically the sequela of cortical necrosis, which can be seen after
 an acute drop in blood pressure (shock, postpartum, bum patients, etc...).
 It starts out as a hypodense non-enhancing rim that later develops thin
 calcifications.
 Mimic is disseminated PCP.
 Also remember TB can have a variable calcification pattern as discussed
 earlier in the chapter.

 Medullary Nephrocalcinosis
 Hyperechoic renal papilla / pyramids which may or may not shadow on
 ultrasound.
 Causes:
  Hyperparathyroidism - Most people say this is the most common.
  Medullary Sponge Kidney - Some people say this is the most common.
  Lasix - Common cause in children.
  Renal Tubular Acidosis (distal subtype - type 1)
 Trivia: RTA and Hyper PTH - tend to cause a more dense calcification
 than medullary sponge.

 Medullary Sponge Kidney
 A congenital cause of medullary nephrocalcinosis (usually asymmetric). The underlying mechanism
 is a cystic dilation of the collecting tubules of the kidney - so the testable association with Ehlers-
 Danlos makes sense. The association with Caroli's also sorta makes sense. The association with
 Beckwith-Wiedemann doesn't really make sense (and therefore is the most likely to be tested).

 Think about medullary sponge kidney with unilateral less dense medullary nephrocalcinosis.

                                                                373
