                                      SECTION 1l:
                                         B ladder

Normal Anatomy: Normal bladder is an extraperitoneal structure, with 4 layers. The dome

of the bladder has a peritoneal cover. It's lined with transitional urothelium.

                             - Developmental Anomalies -

Prune Belly (Eagle Barrett Syndrome)
This is a malformation triad which occurs in males. Classically
shown on a babygram with a kid shaped like a pear (big wide
belly).

Triad.
 Deficiency of abdominal musculature
 Hydroureteronephrosis
 Cryptorchidism

     (bladder distention interferes with descent o f testes)

Urachus : This is also discussed in the Peds chapter. I will briefly
mention that the primary concern is the development o f a midline
adenocarcinoma. Most o f the time the presence o f a midline mass makes
it obvious although calcification within any urachal soft tissue should
make you think cancer.

Bladder Diverticula - These are more common in boys, and can be seen in a few situations.
Most bladder diverticula can also be acquired secondary to chronic outlet obstruction (big
prostate). There are a few syndromes (Ehlers Danlos is the big testable one) that you see them in
as well.

`^Hutch Diverticulum:" Also discussed in the Peds chapter.

Quick refresher on some key points.
 NOT associated with posterior urethral valves or neurogenic bladder.
 Hutch Diverticula is associated with ipsilateral reflux - and referred to as "secondary reflux"
 Bladder Diverticula typically arise from the lateral walls or near the ureteral orifices
 Diverticula at the anterior / superior bladder are more likely to be urachal diverticula
 Most Diverticula are acquired (not congenital)
 Ureters more commonly deviate medially adjacent to a diverticula

Bladder Ears - "Transitory extraperitoneal herniation o f the bladder" if you want to sound
smart. This is not a diverticulum. Instead, it's transient lateral protrusion o f the bladder into the
inguinal canal. It's very common to see, and likely doesn't mean crap. However, some sources
say an inguinal hernia may be present 20% of the time. Smooth walls, and usually wide necks can
help distinguish them from diverticula.

                                                                387
                           -Bladder Cancer-

Gamesmanship: GROSS hematuria confers a 4x greater risk than microscopic hematuria. If the

question header specifically indicates "GROSS" hematuria - think bladder cancer first.

c  Next Step: Along these lines if the history is GROSS hematuria, and the patient is 50 or older 
   they should get a CT Hematuria Protocol / Urography (pre and post, with delays), and also
   cystoscopy.

What Does Marcelus Wallus' Bladder Cancer Look Like ? Short answer = soft tissue in the bladder.
If you are looking at a well distended bladder (which is pretty much required to say shit about the
bladder) focal wall thickening or nodules should be considered cancer till proven otherwise.

What about diffuse circumferential bladder wall thickening ? This isn't usually cancer, especially in
the world of multiple choice. This is probably more of an inflammation or infection situation - or chronic
partial outlet obstruction (if the prostate is enormous). I'd only call a cancer in this situation if there was
really asymmetric nodular thickening superimposed on circumferential thickening.

What about enhancement ? You will hear people refer to bladder cancers as hypovascular tumors - but
they can and often do enhance, especially on early arterial phases. Any focal enhancement should trigger
you to think cancer - unless you've got good reasons to think otherwise. Having said all that - most
people will say the delaved phase is the most important for identifying bladder cancers - and that is the
choice I would recommend if you are forced to choose (white background of contrast - makes soft tissue
masses easier to se e ).

Types of Cancer I Mimics:

Rhabdomyosarcoma - This is the most common bladder cancer in humans less than 10 years of age.
They are often infiltrative, and it's hard to tell where they originate. "Paratesticular Mass" is often a
buzzword. They can met to the lungs, bones, and nodes. The Botryoid variant produces a polypoid
mass, which looks like a bunch of grapes.

Transitional Cell Carcinoma (Urothelial Carcinoma) - As stated above, the bladder is the most
common site, and this is by far the most common subtype. All the risk factors, are the same as above.
If anyone asks "superficial papillary" is the most common TCC bladder subtype.

Squamous Cell Carcinoma - When I say Squamous Cell Bladder, you say Schistosomiasis. This is
convenient because they both start with an "S." The classic picture is a heavily calcified bladder and
distal ureters (usually shown on plain film, but could also be on CT). Another common association
with squamous cell cancer of the bladder in the presence of a longstanding Suprapubic catheter. This
also starts with an "S."

Adenocarcinoma of the Bladder - This is a common trick question. When I say Adenocarcinoma of
the Bladder, you say Urachus. 90% of urachal cancers are located midline at the bladder dome.
Bladder Exstrophy is also associated with an increased risk of adenocarcinoma.

Leiomyoma ("bladder fibroid") - Benign .

tumor (not cancer - even though the section is .       (smooth, solid, homogeneous)

bladder cancer). It s often incidentally  . young/Middle Age People (usually)

discovered (most common at the trigone). . clinical Buzzword "urinary hesitancy" or "dribbling"

                                                  388
                                Types of Bladder Cancer

Transitional Cell - also        Squamous Cell           Adenocarcinoma Rhabdomyosarcoma
known as Urothelial
Carcinoma

By far the Most Common          Second Most             Third Most           Most common bladder
Type (like 90%)                                                              tumor in Peds.
                                Common Type (like ~ Common Type

                                8 %)                    (like 2%)

Smoking is the classic risk     Classic Associations:   Classic              They are often
factor, but other poisons        Recurrent urinary     Associations:        infiltrative, and it's
including arsenic, aniline,                              Urachal Remnant    hard to tell where they
benzidine - etc or as they        tract infections and   Bladder            originate.
call it in Flint Michigan "Tap    stone disease
Water" - have a documented       Schistosoma             Exstrophy          "Paratesticular
relationship                      Hematobium                                 Mass" is often a
                                  (asshole jungle                            buzzword.
Bladder Diverticulum -            worm)
2-10% increased risk (related    Longstanding                               They can met to the
to stasis). In this setting       Suprapubic                                 lungs, bones, and
early perivesical fat invasion    Catheter                                   nodes.
is classic (because a
diverticulum has limited        This is convenient
muscle in the wall to slow      because they both
the invasion)                   start with an "S."

Favors the base                                         90% of urachal
(inferior posterior)                                    cancers are located
                                                        midline at the
                                                        bladder dome.

Sub-divided into                The classic picture is  The classic picture  The classic look is
Papillary vs                    a heavily calcified     is a large midline   Grape-like polypoid
Non-Papillary.                  bladder and distal      mass associated      masses -- this is the
                                ureters (usually        with a urachal       sarcoma botryoides
Papillary ones look like        shown on plain film,    remnant with         variant
shrubs "frond like" and tend    but could also be on    scattered
to be low grade.                CT).                    calcifications.

Non-Papillary tends to be       Tumor favors the        70% of cases have
more aggressive.                trigone and lateral     calcification (if
                                walls                   you see
                                                        calcifications in a
                                The ones NOT            urachal remnant it
                                associated with         should make you
                                Schistosomiasis tend    think about an
                                to be more              early cancer).
                                aggressive.

                                               389
- Bladder Hap Hematoma -

This isn't a bladder surgery but rather a surgical "complication" from a c-section. Remember that the
uterus sits directly behind the bladder and can easily be injured directly during a wild west / 3rd world
style panic c-section ("the trainee caused a complication"). More common than the bladder being directly
lacerated by the Attending (and blamed on the resident) is the formation of a bladder flap hematoma.

So what is a bladder flap hematoma ? This is essentially blood (hematoma) that drapes over the top and
back of the bladder after a c-section performed with the common technique of a lower uterine incision.

As shown in these awesome illustrations I made, the uterus is cut open at the lower segment to access this
big headed rascal. After he's been removed from the warm safety of his mother's womb and plunged into
a cold callus universe, there will remain a potential defect in the uterus. If bleeding occurs there, it will
droop (ooze) down on top of the bladder forming the legendary bladder flap hematoma. This basically
always happens and is considered "normal" in OB literature as long as it is under 4 cm. They go away on
their own with time. The only thing you worry about is super infection. If the history says they got a
fever , etc... etc... few days later and there is gas in the collection -- it's probably infection.

Incision is made in    Defect in uterus allows     Blood (black)       Classic Look on Ultrasound
lower uterine segment  blood to ooze down (arrow)  accumulates behind  Hematoma flapped over the
                                                   the bladder (B)     bladder

-Dhieislon Surgery-

After radical cystectomy for bladder cancer there are several urinary diversion procedures that can be
done. People generally group these into incontinent and continent procedures. There are a ton of these
(over 50 have been described). I just want to touch on the big points, and focus on complications (the
most testable subject matter). The general idea is that a piece of bowel is made into either a conduit or
reservoir, and then the ureters are attached to it.

Early Complications:                         Late Complications ( > 30 days)

 Alteration in bowelfunction:                Urinary infection: This can be early or late.
  Adynamic ileus is the most common
  early complication, occurring in            Stones: Remember to look on the non-contrast study.
  almost 25% of cases. In about 3% of
  cases you can get SBO, usually from         Parastomal Herniation: This occurs about 15% of the
  adhesions near the enteroentcric             time with ileal conduits. Obesity is a contributing
  anastomosis.                                 factor. Most don't matter, but 10% will need a surgical
                                               fix.
 Urinary Leakage: This occurs in about
  5% of cases, and usually at the             Urinary stricture: The left side is higher risk than
  ureteral-reservoir anastomosis. A            the right, secondary to the angulation (it's brought
  urinoma can develop when the leaked          through or under the mesentery).
  urine is not collected by urinary drains.
                                              Tumor Recurrence: The more advanced the original
 Fistula: This is uncommon and seen           disease, the higher the risk for recurrence. The
  more in patients who have had pelvic         incidence is between 3-15%, and can present as a soft
  radiation.                                   tissue mass at the ureter, bladder, or pelvic lymph
                                               node.

                                             390
                                - Psoas Hitch -

The "psoas hitch" procedure results in an Aunt M innie appearance o f the bladder, making it
uniquely testable.
This procedure is done in the situation where you have had an injury or pathology (stricture,
cancer, etc...) involving a long segment o f the distal ureter. Normally you would just cut that
shit out and re-im plant into the bladder. But w hat if the left over portion o f the ureter is too
short? The solution is to stretch the ipsilateral portion o f the bladder towards the short ureter
and sew it ("hitch it") to the psoas muscle. That way you can get away with a short ureter,
because you stretched the bladder to bridge the gap.

Key Points:

 fVhy i t 's done? Used for people with long segm ent distal ureter injury / disease
 Aunt Minnie Appearance on CT IVP or Plain Film IVP (with contrast filling the bladder).

                                                                                            Aunt Minnie Appearance of the

                                                                           Hitched Bladder filled with
                                                                           contrast on a delayed IVP.
                                                                           The "hitched" side has an upward
                                                                           projection towards the psoas
                                                                           muscle.

                                                                391
           - "Acquired " -- Infectious / infiammatien -

Emphysematous Cystitis - Gas forming organism in the wall o f the bladder. More
than h alf the time it's a diabetic patient. It's usually from E. Coli. It's gorma be very obvious
on plain film and CT. Ultrasound would be sneaky, and y o u 'd see dirty shadowing.

TB - The upper GU tract is more com monly effected, with secondary involvem ent o f the
bladder. Can eventually lead to a thick contracted bladder - buzzword: `Thim ble' bladder.
Calcifications might be present.

Schistosomiasis - Comm on in the third world. Eggs are deposited in the bladder wall
which leads to chronic inflammation. Things to know: the entire bladder will calcify (often
shown on plain film or CT), and you get squamous cell cancer.

Fistula - This occurs basically in 3         Fistula - Most Common Etiology
conditions; (1) diverticulitis,
(2) Crohns, (3) Cancer. This is more   Colovesicial Fistula = Diverticular Disease
common in men, although women are      Ileovesical Fistula = Crohns
at significantly increased risk after  Rectovesical Fistula = Neoplasm or Trauma
hysterectomy (the uterus protects the
bladder).

Neurogenic Bladder - This comes in two flavors: (a) small contracted
bladder, (b) atonic large bladder. The buzzw ord / classic sign is "p in e cone "
bladder, because o f its appearance. It can lead to urine stasis, and that stasis
can predispose to bladder CA, stones, and infection.

Acquired Bladder Diverticula - As menfioned above, these can be acquired mainly
via outlet obstruction (just think big prostate). They are most common at the UVJ. They can
lead to stasis, and that stasis can predispose to bladder CA, stones, and infection.

Bladder Stones - These guys show up in two scenarios: (1) they are bom as kidney
stones and drop into the bladder (2) they develop in the bladder secondary to stasis (outlet
obstrucfion, or neurogenic bladder). They can cause chronic irritation and are a known risk
factor for both TCC and SCC.

"Pear Shaped Bladder" - This is more o f a sign than a pathology.
Think two things (I) pelvic lipomatosis, and (2) hematoma.

                                                                                                                                                         or

                                       392
                              -Bladder Trauma-

In the setting o f bladder trauma - Cystography (scanning the bladder after filling it with contrast
"retrograde" via foley) is the gold standard -- this can be done under fluoro or CT. I've head people say
this is " 100%" sensitive for bladder rupture. It's pretty obvious -- if it looks intact ... its intact. If it
looks like a deflated balloon -- its ruptured. Having said that -- here is a testable piece of trivia, you
must distend the bladder -- that means 300-400 mL of diluted water soluble (not barium!) contrast.
Inadequate bladder distention = loss of sensitivity.

What they want you to know is; extra versus intra peritoneal rupture. CT Cystography (contrast
distending bladder) is the best test - make sure the bladder is distended (300-400 mL).

Extraperitoneal-This one is more common (80-90%). Almost always associated with pelvic fracture.
This can be managed medically.

 If there is a pelvic fracture, then the chance of a bladder rupture is 10%.
 If there is a bladder rupture, there is almost always a pelvic fracture
 Molar Tooth Sign: Contrast surrounding the bladder, in the prevesicle space of Retzius. This indicates

   extraperitoneal bladder rupture.

             "Normal"         Trauma!              Molar Tooth Appearance
Potential Prevesicle Space  EP Rupture         Contrast from the B ladder filling
                                                the Prevesicle S pace (Rezius)
   Anterior to the Bladder

Intraperitoneal - This one is less common. A direct blow to a full bladder, basically pops the balloon and
blows the top off (bladder dome is the weakest part). The dude will have contrast outlining bowel loops
and in the paracolic gutters. This requires surgery.

Normal                      Tf                      Contrast
                                               Outlines Bowel
                                     Trauma!

                                   IP Rupture

"Pseudo Azotemia" (Pseudo Renal Failure) - If the bladder is ruptured the creatinine in urine can be
absorbed via the peritoneal lining. This will massively elevate the creatinine making it seem like the
patient is in acute renal failure. The kidneys are normal.

                            393
