                                        S E C TIO N 12:

                                      URETHRA

- Male -

Normal Anatomy (most commonly seen on a RUG), is high yield. Here are the basics:

 The length is highly variable with most texts using the following graded scale;
  (itty bitty ^ teeny tiny ^ tiny ^ small ^ medium ^ large extra large ^ Lionhart sized).

 Anatomists divide the thing into two main parts - anterior and posterior. The anterior part is made
  up of the penile urethra + the bulbar urethra. The posterior part is made up of the membranous and
  prostatic urethra.

 The most anterior portion of the urethra is termed the fossa navicularis which has a Latin / French
  sound to it, so it is probably testable.

 The "Verumontanum" (another fancy sounding term) is an ovoid mound that lies in the posterior
  wall of the prostatic urethra. An additional testable piece of trivia is that in the center of this thing is
  the prostatic utricle (which is an embryologic "mullerian" remnant).

 The anterior part fills with a retrograde study (RUG). The posterior part fills with an antegrade
  study (voiding urethrography). "Dynamic Urethrography" is the term used when these studies are
  combined. You can fill the whole thing with a RUG - but that requires pressure to overcome the
  normal spasms of this cruel and unusual procedure.

 There are two methods for identifying the bulbar-membranous junction (which is important for
  delineating pathology - anterior vs posterior). The first is to find the "cone" shaped appearance of
  the proximal bulbar urethra. The cone will taper into the membranous portion. The second (used if
  you can't opacify the urethra) is to draw a line connecting the inferior margins of the obturator
  foramina.
Trauma:

Trauma + Blood in the meatus = "N ext Step" RUG.

Anterior Injury - Classic = Crashed your bicycle (or tricycle), i.e. = Straddle Injury. Unicycle
w reck is less often associated with urethral injury (because o f the lack o f cross bar) but is
often associated with various juggling, fire eating, and sword swallowing injury patterns - as
well as mania, and histrionic personality disorder.

Posterior Injury - Classic = Crashed your Ferrari. Testable trivia = Often associated with a
pelvic fracture and bladder injury. I speculate that crashing one's Ferrari is also associated
with sudden and severe atrophy o f the penis.

1970s Classification System - Fair Game for the "Exam of Future.'

        Type1                 Type 2           Type 3       Type 4                    Type 5
"S T R E T C H E D "                    (most common)                         Bulbous Urethra
                      Membraneous                                             "Anterior"
Posterior             Urethra Tear      Membraneous +       Bladder Base      Anterior
Urethra is intact                       Bulbar Urethra      injury extending
and normal on         Posterior         Tear                into Prostatic    Straddle Injury
RUG                                                         Urethra
                      A BOVE an
                      INTACT UG         Anterior +          Posterior
                      Diaphram          Posterior
                      Extraperitoneal
                      contrast is       UG Diaphragm is
                      present           ruptured.
                      No perineum
                      contrast (intact  Extraperitoneal
                      UG diaphragm      contrast is
                      prevents this)    present

                      Associated with   Perineum
                      Incontinance      contrast (UG
                                        diaphragm is
                                        torn). Contrast in
                                        the scrotum.

                                        Associated with     Associated with
                                        Incontinance        Incontinance

                                                    395
                        - Urethral Strictures -

               THIS vs THAT: The Bicycle Crossbar Injury VS

        The Injury From a Woman of Questionable Moral Standard

Straddle Injury: The m ost
common external cause of
traumatic stricture is this type o f
mechanism. The physiology is
compression o f the urethra
against the inferior edge o f the
pubic symphysis. The bulbous
urethra is the site of injury
(this is the most likely
question).

Gonococcal Urethral Stricture: This tends to be a long irregular stricture
(the straddle stricture was short). It occurs in the distal bulbous urethra.

               Straddle Injury                             Gonococcal
Short Segm ent - Bulbous Urethra  Long S egm ent & Irregular- Bulbous Urethra

                                  396
                     other Male Urethral Pathologies:

Pancreatic Transplant: This has been known to cause urethral injury, if the drainage is to the
bladder (the old way of doing it). Extravasation from urethral injury is said to occur in about 5% of
cases and is secondary to pancreatic enzymes jacking the urethra.

Condyloma Acuminatum - Multiple small filling defects seen on a RUG should make you
think this. Although, instrumentation including a retrograde urethrography is actually not
recommended because of the possibility of retrograde seeding.

Urethrorectal Fistula: This may occur post radiation, and is classically described with
brachytherapy (occurs in 1% o f patients).

Urethral Diverticulum: In a man, this is almost always the result of long term foley
placement.

Cancer: Malignant tumors of the male urethra are rare. When they do occur, 80% are squamous
cell cancers (the exception is that prostatic urethra actually has transitional cell 90% o f the time).

Urethral Diverticulum Cancer: Cancer in a urethral diverticulum is nearly ALWAYS
adenocarcinoma (rather than squamous cell).

                              female Urethra:

Female Urethral Diverticulum: Urethral diverticulum is way more common in females.
They are usually the result of repeated infection of the periurethral glands (classic history is
"repeated urinary tract infections").

In case books and
conferences this is
classically shown as
a Sagittal MRI. The
majority of urethral
diverticula are located
in the middle third of
the urethra and
involve the
posterolateral wall

It often coexists with stress urinary incontinence (60%) and urinary infection.

The buzzword is "saddle-bag" configuration, which supposedly is how you tell it from the urethra.

Stones can also develop in these things. All this infection and irritation leads to increased risk of
cancer, and the very common high yield factoid is this is most commonly adenocarcinoma (60%).

                                                                397
               - GU Cancer Blitz! -

Renal Cancer (Adenocarcinoma)

    Subtype    Enhances equal to cortex             Syndrome /Association
Clear Cell     on CM Phase
                                          Overall Most Common in Gen Pop
Papillary                                 Von Hippel-Lindau

               Enhances less than cortex  Hereditary Papillary Renal Carcinoma
               on CM Phase                Transplant Kidney

Chromophobe    Denser than cortex         Birt Hogg Dube
Medullary      on non-con CT
Translocation                             Sickle Cell Trait
                                          Most Common in Kids
                                          Hx of prior cytotoxic chemotherapy is classic.

Ureteral Cancer (Transitional Cell - now called Urothelial)

Location - think about where you get the most stasis
 Renal Pelvis - Twice as common as Ureter
 Distal Third o f Ureter - Most common site
 M iddle is 2nd, and Proximal is Third

Relationship to Bladder CA
 Bladder CA is w ay more com mon (like lOOx more).
 So if you have bladder CA you don't need upper tract CA.

   Since upper tract CA is not all that common, if you smoked
   enough Marlboro Reds to get renal pelvis CA, you probably
   smoked enough to get multifocal disease including the
   bladder.
 Bottom Line: Bladder can be isolated , Ureteral CA usually
   also has bladder CA

                                          398
Bladder Cancer

Transitional Cell                       Squamous Cell                     Adenocarcinoma

(Urothelial Carcinoma)                  - Think this when you see         - Midline Location is Classic
                                           Calcifications                 - Association with Urachal
- "The usual one" - like 90%
- Favors the base (inferior posterior)  - Favors the Trigone and Lateral      Remnant
- 40% of them are multiple                 Walls                          - Association with Bladder
- "Frond like " Papillary Tumors are
                                        - Association with                    Exstrophy
   the Most Common Subtype                 Schistosomiasis
- Known to be multicentric with
                                        - Association with Chronic
   synchronous and metachronous            Suprapubic Catheter / Urinary
   bladder and upper tract lesions --      Status
   but remember the bladder is the
   most common site.

Urethral Cancer

Urethral
Diverticulum

-Adenocarcinom a

                                                                       Prostatic Urethra

                                                                                            -Transitional Cell (90% )
                                                                                            -T h in k ab o u t it like a B la d d e r C A

                           Bulbar / Penile Urethra

                                  -Squam ous Cell C A (80% )

                                                             399
   PROMETHEUS

  ' L iomhact, m ,t>.

400
