                          SECTION 4:
                     O vary / Adnexa

Before we begin, a few general tips (1) never biopsy or recommend biopsy o f an ovary,
(2) on CT if you can't find the ovary, follow the gonadal vein, and (3) hemorrhage in a
cystic mass usually means it's benign.

A quick note on ovarian size; ovarian volume can be considered normal up until 15 ml
(some say 20 ml). The post menopausal ovary should NOT be larger than 6 cc.

Let's talk about ovulation - to help understand the normal variation in the ovary.

                     Ovulation                           Luteal Phase

m                    O

   LH                LH Surge

   Follicular Phase      Almost Ovulation                Corpus
                     *Note Dominant Follicle             Luteum

Follicles seen during the early menstrual cycle are typically small (< 5 mm in diameter). By
day 10 o f the cycle, there is usually one follicle that has emerged as the dominant follicle.
By mid cycle, this dominant follicle has gotten pretty big (around 20 mm).

The size isn't surprising because it contains a mature   Meaningless Vocab (High Yield)
ovum. The LH surge causes the dominant follicle to         Premenopausal Ovarian Cyst
rupture, releasing the egg. The follicle then regresses
in size, forming a Corpus Luteum. A small amount o f     < 1 cm = Follicle
fluid can be seen in the cul-de-sac. Occasionally, a     1-2 cm = Dominant Follicle
follicle bleeds and re-expands (hemorrhagic cyst) -      > 3 cm = Cyst
more on this later.

                               417
Cumulus Oophorus

This is a piece of anatomy trivia. It is a collection of
cells in a mature dominant follicle that protrudes into the
follicular cavity, and signals imminent ovulation (its
absence means nothing).

                                                             Cumulus Oophorus

Fertility Meds

Medications such as a Clomiphene Citrate (Clomid), force the maturation of multiple
bilateral ovarian cysts. It is not uncommon for the ovaries of women taking this drug to

  have multiple follicles measuring more than 20 mm in diameter by mid cycle.

Theca Lutein Cysts - this is a type of functional            Theca Lutein Cyst
cyst (more on that below), related to overstimulation
from b-HCG. What you see are large cysts (~ 2-3 cm)
and the ovary has a typical multilocular cystic "spoke-
wheel" appearance.

Think about 3 things:

·Multifetal pregnancy,
·Gestational trophoblastic disease (moles),
·Ovarian Hyperstimulation syndrome.

Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome - This is a complication associated with fertility
therapy (occurs in like 5%). They will show you the ovaries with theca lutein cysts, then ascites,
and pleural effusions. They may also have pericardial effusions. Complications include increased
risk for ovarian torsion (big ovaries) and hypovolemic shock.

Paraovarian (Paratubal) Cyst = Cyst that is in the adnexa but not within the ovary. Instead
these things are located adjacent to the ovary or tube. If the cyst is simple (not septated or nodular) and
clearly not ovarian they will not need followup -- is doesn't matter how big it is, as they have incredibly
low rate of malignancy.

TLDR; Simple paraovarian cysts do not require follow up.

                418
                THIS vs THAT: O ld vs Y o u n g

Premenstrual:

· The ovaries o f a pediatric patient stay small until around age 8-9.

· Ovaries may contain small follicles.

Premenopausal:

· A piece o f trivia; premenopausal ovaries m ay be HOT on PET
  (depending on the menstrual cycle).

· This is why you do a PET in the first week o f the menstrual cycle.

Postmenopausal                                    If the cyst is simple, regardless of age it's almost
( > one year after menses stops):                 certainly benign.

· Considered abnorm al if it exceeds the          Gamesmanship: What if they don't tell you if the
  upper limit o f normal, or is twice the size    patient is pre or post menopausal ? You can use 50
   o f the other ovary (even if no mass is        years old as a cut off. Under 50 Pre, 50 & up Post.
   present).
                                                Incidental Simple Appearing Ovarian Cyst
· Small cysts (< 3 cm) are seen in around       -Shown on CT-
  20% o f post menopausal women.                PreMenopausal: < 3 cm = Call it Normal Follicle
                                                PreMenopausal: > 3 cm = Get an US
· In general, postmenopausal ovaries are
  atrophic, lack follicles, and can be          PostMenopausal: < 1cm = Call it Normal Cyst
  difficult to find with ultrasound.            PostMenopausal: > 1cm = Get an US

· The ovarian volume will decrease from         Incidental Simple Appearing Ovarian Cyst
  around 8cc at age 40, to around 1cc at        -Shown on US-
  age 70.                                       PreMenopausal: < 7 cm = No Follow Up
                                                PreMenopausal: > 7 cm = Follow Up (3 months)
· The maximum ovarian volum e in a
  post menopausal woman is 6 ml.                PostMenopausal: < 5 cm = No Follow Up
                                                PostMenopausal: > 5 cm = Follow Up (3 months)
· Unlike premenopausal ovaries, post
  menopausal ovaries should NOT be                Cyst is not simple (irregular septations, papillary
  hot on PET.                                     projections, or solid elements) = GYN consult.

                                                419
In most clinical practices, the overwhelm ing m ajority o f ovarian masses are benign (don't
worry, I 'll talk about cancer, too).

          Physiologic and functioning follicles
          Corpora lutea
          Hemorrhagic cysts
          Endometriomas
          Benign cystic teratomas (dermoids)
          Polycystic ovaries

Functioning Ovarian Cysts: Functioning cysts (folhcles) are affected by the menstrual
cycle (as I detailed eloquently above). These cysts are benign and usually 25 mm or less in
diameter. They will usually change / disappear in 6 weeks. If a cyst persists and either does not
change or increases in size, it is considered a nonfunctioning cyst (not under hormonal control).

Simple cysts that are > 7 cm in size may need further evaluation with MR (or surgical
evaluation). Just because it's hard to evaluate them completely on US when they are that big,
and you risk torsion with a cyst that size.

Corpus Luteum: The normal corpus luteum arises from a dominant follicle (as I detailed
eloquently above). These things can be large (up to 5-6 cm) with a variable appearance (solid
hypoechoic, anechoic, thin-walled, thick-walled, cyst with debris). The most common
appearance is solid and hypoechoic with a "ring o f fire" (intense peripheral blood flow).

THIS THAT:Corpus Luteum VS Ectopic Pregnancy

They both can have that "ring of fire" appearance,          Ectopic            Corpus
but please don't be an idiot about this. Most ectopic                          Luteum
pregnancies occur in the tube (the corpus luteum is     RI < 0.4, or > 0.7    RI 0 .4 -0 .7
an ovarian structure). If you are really lucky, a             THICK
"hint" is that the corpus luteum should move with the                             Thin
ovary, where an ectopic will move separate from the      Echogenic Rim      Echogenic Rim
ovary (you can push the ectopic away from it). Also,
the tubal ring of an ectopic pregnancy is usually more    "Ring of Fire"    "Ring of Fire"
echogenic when compared to the ovarian
parenchyma. Whereas, the wall of the corpus luteum      Moves Separate           Moves
is usually less echogenic.                              from the Ovary      with the Ovary

A specific (but not sensitive) finding in ectopic
pregnancy is a RI of <0.4 or >0.7.

420
Endometrioma:

This targets young women during their reproductive years and can cause chronic pelvic pain associated
with menstruation. The traditional clinical history of endometriosis is the triad of infertility,
dysmenorrhea, and dyspareunia. Laparoscopy is the diagnostic gold standard for endometriosis.

The classic appearance is a rounded mass with homogeneous low level internal echoes and increased
through transmission (seen in 95% of cases). Fluid-fluid levels and internal septations can also be seen.
It can look a lot like a hemorrhagic cyst (sometimes).

As a general rule, the more unusual or varied the echogenicity and   Q: What is the most sensitive
the more ovoid or irregular the shape, the more likelv the mass is   imaging feature on MRI for the
an endometrioma. Additionally, and of more practical value, they     diagnosis of malignancy in an
are not going to change on follow up (hemorrhagic cysts are). In     endometrioma ?
about 30% of cases you can get small echogenic foci adhering to
the walls (this helps make the endometrioma diagnosis more           A: An enhancing mural nodule
likely). Obviously, you want to differentiate this from a true wall
nodule.

The complications of endometriosis (bowel obstruction, infertility, etc...) are due to a fibrotic reaction
associated with the implant. The most common location for solid endometriosis is the uterosacral
ligaments. They can also occur in or near C-section scars. Most people will tell you that if vou see an
Endometrioma on MRI that vou should look for "dropped implants" in the deeper pelvis and along the
abdominal scar. This can be shown with MRI (TI bright) or ultrasound of the c-section scar (well defined
solid lesion).

Do Endometriomas Ever Become Cancer? About 1% of endometriomas undergo malignant
transformation (usually endometrioid or clear cell carcinoma). How do you tell which one is which???
Malignancy is very rare in endometriomas smaller than 6 cm. They usually have to be bigger than 9 cm.
Additionally, the majority of women with carcinoma in an endometrioma are older than 45 years. So risk
factors for turning into cancer: (a) older than 45, (b) bigger than 6-9 cm.

Pregnancy Trivia: There is a thing called a "decidualized
endometrioma. " This is a vocab word used to describe a solid
nodule with blood flow in an endometrioma of a pregnant girl.
Obviously this is still gonna get followed up - but is a mimic
of malignancy. The thing never to forget is that if the patient
is NOT pregnant and you see a solid nodule with blood flow -
that is malignant degeneration - period - no hesitation, next
question.

Endometrioma on MRI: Will be TI bright (from the blood).
Fat saturation will not suppress the signal (showing you it's
not a teratoma). Will be T2 dark! (from iron in the
endometrioma).

The shading sign is a buzzword for endometriomas on MR
imaging. On T2 you should look for "shading."

The shading sign describes T2 shortening (getting dark) of
a lesion that is TI bright.

                                                                     Endometrioma - "Shading Sign"

               421
Hemorrhagic Cysts:

As mentioned on prior pages, sometimes a ruptured follicle bleeds internally and re-
expands. The result is a homogenous mass with enhanced through transmission (tumor
w o n 't do that) with a very sim ilar look to an endom etriom a. A lacy "fishnet appearance"
is sometimes seen and is considered classic. Doppler flow will be absent. The traditional
way to tell the difference between a hemorrhagic cyst vs endometrioma, is that the
hemorrhagic cyst will go away in 1-2 m enstrual cycles (so repeat in 6-12 weeks).

Hemorrhagic Cyst on Mi?/ - Will be TI bright (from the blood). Fat saturation will not
suppress the signal (showing you it's not a teratoma). The lesion should N O T enhance.

Hemorrhagic cysts in old ladies? Postmenopausal women may occasionally ovulate, so
you don't necessarily need to freak out (follow up in 6-12 weeks). Now, late
postmenopausal women should NEVER have a hemorrhagic cyst and if you are shown
something that looks like a hem orrhagic cyst in a 70 year old - it's cancer till proven
otherwise.

    THIS vs THAT; Endometrioma vs Hemorrhagic Cyst

         Endometrioma                   Hemorrhagic Cyst
Homogeneous with Low Level Echoes        Lacy Fishnet Appearance

                                   422
Dermoid:

These things typically occur in young women (20s-30s), and are the most common ovarian
neoplasm in patients younger than 20. The "Tip o f the Iceberg Sign" is a classic buzzword and
refers to absorption o f most o f the US beam at the top o f the mass. The typical ultrasound
appearance is that o f a cystic mass, with a hyperechoic solid mural nodule, (Rokitansky nodule or
dermoid plug). Septations are seen in about 10%.

Dermoid on MRl: Will be bright on T 1  T1 T1FS T2
(from the fat). There will be fat                                      Endometrioma
suppression (not true o f hemorrhagic
cysts, and endometriomas).                  Dermoid

                                         O  Hemorrhagic
                                            Cyst
                                       \

Do Dermoids Ever Become Cancer? About 1% o f dermoids can undergo malignant
transformation (almost always to squamous cell CA). Again, risk factors are size (usually
larger than 10cm), and age (usually older than 50).

Rare C an cer Transform ation Subtypes

E ndom etriom a                             Clear Cell

Dermoid                                     Squamous

Dermoid Gamesmanship = Gross Fat containing ovarian mass on CT

Dermoid Gamesmanship = The Old Tooth Trick - shown on plain film, CT, or even as
susceptibility (dark stuff) on MR. Remember Dermoids are basically teratomas, and
teratomas grow all kinds o f gross shit including teeth, hair, finger nails etc... The tooth is
obviously the classic one.

Dermoid Gamesmanship = "Dot -dash" pattern has been described for hair within a cyst.

Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome:
--Typically an overweight girl with infertility, acne, and a pencil mustache (not a full Ron Swanson)

The imaging criteria is:

          Ten or more peripheral simple cysts (typically small < 5 mm)
          Usually Characteristic 'string-of-pearls'
          Ovaries are typically enlarged (>10 cc),
          although in 30% of patients the ovaries have a normal volume

                                                                423
