      SECTION 5:
O varian C a n cer

Ovarian cancers often present as complex cystic and solid masses. They are typically intra-
ovarian (most extra-ovarian m asses are benign). The role o f im aging is not to come down
hard on histology (although the exam may ask this o f you), but instead to distinguish benign
from malignant and let the surgeon handle it from there.

Think Cancer if:

          * Unilateral (or bilateral) complex cystic adnexal masses with thick ( > 3 mm)
                  septations, and papillary projections (nodule with blood flow).

          * Solid adnexal masses with variable necrosis
          * Ancillary findings present: ascites, evidence o f invasive spread, LAD

Knee Jerks:

                  Multiple thin or thick septations = Call the Surgeon
                  Nodule with Flow = Call the Surgeon
                  Solid Nodules Without Flow =
               o Get an M R to make sure it's not a derm oid plug,
               o If it's not a dermoid, then call the surgeon

Serous Ovarian I Cystadenocarcinom a /Cystadenoma

Serous tumors are the most common type of           Serous Ovarian Neoplasm
ovarian malignancy. About 60% o f serous
tumors are benign, and about 15% are considered     -Large, Unilocular, Few Septations
borderline (the rest are malignant). They favor
women o f childbearing age, with the malignant
ones tending to occur in older women. They
typically are unilocular with few septations. They
are frequently bilateral (especially when
malignant). Papillary projections are a common
finding, and are suggestive of malignancy. If you
see ascites, they have mets (70% have peritoneal
involvement at the time of diagnosis).

424
Mucinous Ovarian Cystadenocarcinoma

Often a large mass. They are typically multi-loculated (although septa are often thin).
Papillary projections are less common than with serous tumors. You can see low level
echos (from mucin). These dudes can get Pseudomyxoma peritonei with scalloping
along soHd organs. Smoking is a known risk factor (especially for mucinous types).

TH IS vs THAT: Serous vs M ucinous

                        Serous:                        Mucinous:
Unilocular (fewer septations)    M ulti-locular (more septations)
Papillary Projections Common     Papillary Projections Less Common

Endometrioid Ovarian Cancer:                                         Gamesmanship:
                                                                        Ovarian Mass +
This is the second most common ovarian cancer (serous
number one, mucinous number three). These things are             Endometrial Tiiickening
bilateral about 15% of the time.
                                                                This is a way to show both
What to know:                                                   Endometrioid CA (which
                                                                often has both ovarian and
· 25% o f women will have concomitant endometrial cancer,       endometrial CA), and
  with the endom etrial cancer as the prim ary (ovary is met).  Granulosa-Theca Cell
                                                                Tumor (which produce
· Endometriomas can turn into endometrioid cancer               estrogen - and cause
· 15% are bilateral                                             endometrial hyperplasia)

        B.F.M's - for Adults

It's useful to have a differential for a B .F.M .
(Big Fucking Mass) in an adult and a child. I
discuss the child version o f this on page 81.
For adults think about 3 main things:

(1) Ovarian Masses - Mucinous and Serous
(2) Desmoids - Remember Gardner Syndrome
(3) Sarcomas

                                 425
Fibroma I Fibrothecoma:

The ovarian fibroma is a benign ovarian tumor, most commonly seen in middle aged women.
The fibrothecoma / thecoma spectrum has similar histology. It's very similar to a fibroid. On
ultrasound it's going to be hypoechoic and solid. On MRI it's going to be T1 and T2 dark, with
a band of T2 dark signal around the tumor on all planes. Calcifications are rare.

Similar or Related Conditions:

· Meigs Syndrome: This is the triad o f ascites, pleural effusion, and a benign ovarian tumor
  (most commonly fibroma).

k i  ·Fibromatosis: This is a zebra. You have tumor-like enlargement of the
     ovaries due to ovarian fibrosis. It typically hits girls around the age o f 25.
     It's associated with omental fibrosis and sclerosing peritonitis. You are
     going to get dark T1 and T2 signal. The buzzword for that T2 signal is
     "black garland sign. " The condition is benign, and sometimes managed
     with surgical removal of the ovaries.

Brenner Tumor: Epithelial tumor o f the ovary seen in women in their 50s-70s. It's fibrous
and T2 dark. Unlike Fibromas, calcifications are common (80%). They are also sometimes
referred to as "Ovarian Transitional Cell Carcinoma " for the purpose of fucking with you.

Struma Ovarii:

These things are actually a subtype of ovarian teratoma. On imaging you are looking for a
multilocular, predominantly cystic mass with an INTENSELY enhancing solid component. On
MRI - the give away is very low T2 signal in the "cystic" areas which is actually the thick
colloid. These tumors contain THYROID TISSUE, and even though it's very rare (like 5%), I
would expect that the question stem will lead you to this diagnosis by telling you the patient is
hyperthyroid or in a thyroid storm.

Metastatic Disease to tlie Ovary

Around 10% o f malignant ovarian tumors are mets. The primary is most commonly from
colon, gastric, breast, lung, and contralateral ovary. The most common look is bilateral solid
tumors.

Krukenburg Tumor

- This is a metastatic tumor to the ovaries from the GI tract (usually stomach).

                                426
