                                    SECTION 6:
                       R andom O varian P ath

-Ovarian Torsion

Rotation of the ovarian vascular pedicle (partial or complete) can result in obstruction to venous
outflow and arterial inflow. Torsion is typically associated with a cyst or tumor (anything that makes

   it heavy, so it flops over on itself).

 ^ Critical Point = The most constant finding in ovarian torsion is a large ovary.

Features:

          Unilateral enlarged ovary (greater than 4 cm)
          Mass on the ovary
          Peripheral Cysts +/- fluid-debris levels
          Free Fluid
          Lack of arterial or venous flow

The Ovary is Not a Testicle: The ovary has a dual blood supply. Just because you have flow, does
NOT mean there isn't a torsion. You can torse and de-torse. In other words, big ovary + pain =
torsion. Clinical correlation recommended.

-Hydrosalpinx

Thin (or thick in chronic states) elongated tubular structure in the pelvis.

        The buzzword is "cogwheel appearance," referring to the normal longitudinal folds of a
        fallopian tube becoming thickened. Another buzzword is "string sign" referring to the
        incomplete septae. The "waist sign" describes a tubular mass with indentations of its opposing
        walls (this is suppose to help differentiate hydrosalpinx from an ovarian mass).

There are a variety of causes, the most common is being a skank, infidel, or free spirit (PID).
Additional causes include endometriosis, tubal cancer, post hysterectomy (without salpingectomy /
oophorectomy), and tubal ligation. Rare and late complication is tubal torsion.

- Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) A plague upon the "dirty, slovenly, untidy woman"

Infection or inflammation of the upper female genital tract. It's usually secondary to the cultural
behaviors of trollops and strumpets (collectors of Gonorrhea / Chlamydia). As a hint, the question
writer could describe the patient as "sexually disreputable. " The question could also describe the
patient as recently appearing as a guest on the Maury Show (the "Not the Father!" show -- google if
unfamiliar, it could be on the exam).

On ultrasound you are gonna see a Hydrosalpinx. The margin of the uterus may become ill defmed
("indefinite uterus" - is a buzzword). Later on you can end up with tubo-ovarian abscess or pelvic
abscess. You can even get bowel or urinary tract inflammatory changes.

                                                                427
- Paraovarian Cyst

This is a congenital remnant that arises from the Wolffian duct. They are more common than you
think with some texts claiming these account for 10-20% of adnexal masses. They are classically
round or oval, simple in appearance, and do NOT distort the adjacent ovary (key finding). They
can indent the ovary and mimic an exophytic cyst, but a good sonographer can use the transducer to
separate the two structures.

- Ovarian Vein Thrombophlebitis

This is seen most commonly in postpartum women, often
presenting with acute pelvic pain and fever +/- 10 days post
delivery. For whatever reason, 80% of the time it's on the
right. It's most likely to be shown on CT (could be
ultrasound) with a tubular structure with an enhancing wall
and low-attenuation thrombus (arrow) in the expected location
of the ovarian vein. A dreaded sequela is pulmonary embolus.
Treatment is anticoagulation (and antibiotics - if fever is
present).

- Peritoneal Inclusion Cyst

This is an inflammatory cyst of the peritoneal cavity that occurs when adhesions envelop an ovary.
Adhesions can be thought of as diseased peritoneum. Whereas the normal peritoneum can absorb
fluid, adhesions cannot. So, you end up with normal secretions from an active ovary confined by
adhesions and resulting in an expanding pelvic mass. The classic history is patient with prior pelvic
surgery (they have to tell you that, to clue you in on the presence of adhesions), now with pain.

They could get tricky and say history of PID or endometriosis (some kind of inflammatory process to
piss off the peritoneum). In that case, it is likely they would show an ultrasound (or MR) with a
complex fluid collection occupying pelvic recesses and containing the ovary. It's not uncommon to
have septations, loculations, and particulate matter within the contained fluid.

Key Features:

 Lack of walls. "Passive shape" that conforms
  to and is defined by surrounding structures.

 Entrapment of an ovary. Ovary will be either
  in the collection, or at the periphery.

Classic Vignette: A woman of reproductive age            Peritoneal Inclusion Cyst -
with a history of endometriosis, pelvic surgery,         Adhesions around an Ovary
and pelvic inflammatory disease. Accompanied
by images (most likely ultrasound, less likely CT
or MR) or a fluid-filled mass that conforms to the
shape of the pelvis and surrounds an ovary.

                                                    428
                  - Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

Think about this with marked elevation of B-hCG. They will actually trend betas for tumor
activity. Apparently, elevated B-hCG makes you vomit --so hyperemesis is often part o f the
given history. Other pieces o f trivia is that moles are more common in ages over 40, and prior
moles makes you more likely to get another mole.

Hydatidiform Mole

This is the most common form, and the benign form o f the disease. There are two subtypes:

 Complete Mole (classic mole) (70%); This one involves the entire placenta. There will be no
  fetus. The worthless trivia is that the karyotype is diploid. A total zebra scenario is that you
  have a normal fetus, with a complete mole twin pregnancy (if you see that in the wild, write it
  up). The pathogenesis is fertilization o f an egg that has lost its chromosomes (46XX).

          First Trimester US: Classically shows the uterus to be filled with an echogenic, solid,
          highly vascular mass, often described as "snowstorm" in appearance.

          Second Trimester US: Vesicles that make up the mole enlarge into individual cysts
          (2-30 mm) and produce your "bunch of grapes" appearance.

 Partial Mole (30%): This one involves only a portion o f the placenta. You do have a fetus, but
  it's all jacked up (triploid in karyotype). The pathogenesis is fertilization o f an ovum by two
  sperm (69XXY). Mercifully, it's lethal to the fetus.

          US: The placenta will be enlarged, and have areas o f multiple, diffuse anechoic lesions.
          You may see fetal parts.

Remember I mentioned that Theca Lutein cysts are seen in molar pregnancies.
Theca Lutein Cyst Trivia: Most commonly bilateral and seen in the second trimester

Invasive Mole

This refers to invasion o f molar tissue into the myometrium. You typically see it after the
treatment o f a hydatidiform mole (about 10% o f cases). US may show echogenic tissue in the
myometrium. However, MRI is way better at demonstrating muscle invasive. MRI is going to
demonstrate focal myometrial masses, dilated vessels, and areas of hemorrhage and necrosis.

Choriocarcinoma (the guacamole has gone bad)

This is a very aggressive malignancy that forms only trophoblasts (no villous structure). The
typical attacking pattern o f choriocarcinoma is to spread locally (into the myometrium and
parametrium) then to spread hematogenous to any site in the body. It's very vascular and bleeds
like stink. The classic clinical scenario is serum p-hCG levels that rise in the 8 to 10 weeks
following evacuation o f molar pregnancv. On ultrasound, choriocarcinoma (at any site) results in
a highly echogenic solid mass. Treatment = methotrexate.

                                                                429
