                      SECTION 9:

                  M iscella n eo u s Male

Calcified Vas Deferens:

You see this all the time in bad diabetics.
Who is a "bad" diabetic ? Depends on who you ask
I guess. If you ask me, diabetics who have those
gross long ear hairs are "bad diabetics."

This can be shown on plain film or CT.

P쯮viC C y s ts : First think about lower pelvic  Male Pelvic Cysts
cysts in a male as either midline or lateral.

                                                  Midline      Lateral

                                                   Prostatic      Seminal
                                                    Utricle     Vi'sick' Cyst

                                                  Mullerian    Divcrticulosis
                                                  Duct Cyst    of the ampulla

                                                  Ejaculatory       (1| \I1S
                                                  Duct Cysts      deferens

Lateral  Midline

LATERAL:

Seminal Vesicle Cyst:

The classic look is a unilateral cyst that is lateral to the prostate. If they get large they
can look midline, but if they show you a large one you w on't be able to tell it from a utricle
cyst. They can be congenital or acquired.

Congenital Trivia:
 Associated with renal agenesis
 Associated with vas deferens agenesis
 Associated with ectopic ureter insertion
 Associated with polycystic kidney disease

Acquired Trivia:
 Obstruction often from prostatic hypertrophy, or chronic infection/scarring
 Classic history is prior prostate surgery

                  435
MIDLINE:

                 Prostatic Utricle Cyst:                               iViuiierian Duct Cyst

                           Things to Know                                     Things to Know

This represents a focal dilation in the prostatic urethra              This represents a failed
(remnant of the Mullerian duct) - as such they communicate             regression of the caudal ends
with the urethra and can cause "dribbling" (both on and off            of the Mullerian ducts (male
the basketball court).                                                 equivalent of the vagina /
Hypospadias is the most common associated condition -                  cervix).
which makes sense given the relationship with the urethra.             Does not communicate with
Other Associations: Prune Belly Syndrome, Downs,                       the urethra and does not have
Unilateral Renal Agenesis.                                             the same associations as
and my personal favorite - the Imperforate Anus                        utricle cyst.
The tendency towards superinfection is also explained by the
communication with the urethra.
A sneaky trick would be to show it on a RUG, where a
prostate utricle cyst would look like a focal out-pouching
from the prostatic urethra.

                                 THIS VS THAT:

          utricle Cyst                                        Mullerian Cyst

Pear Shaped and Usually Smaller                      Tear Drop Shaped

Will NOT extend above the base of the prostate       Will extend above the base of the prostate

Conununicates with the Urethra (Utricle), therefore  Does NOT communicate with the Urethra, should
could opacify on a RUG                               not opacify on a RUG

  Both have a tiny risk (mostly case reports) of malignancy (various types: endometrial, clear cell, squamous).

Prostate Abscess: This can cause a thick walled, septated, heterogenous, cystic lesion
anywhere in the prostate. It is usually bacterial (E. coli). When chronic it can have a more "swiss
cheese" appearance referred to as "cavitary prostatitis." Usually this is imaged via transrectal
ultrasound - because it gives you (the urologist) the option to do an image guided drain.

                                                                436
-The Painful Scrotum-

Torsion of the Testicle:

Results from the testis and spermatic cord twisting within the serosal space leading to ischemia.
If it was 1950 you'd call in your nuclear medicine tech for scintigraphy. Now you just get a Doppler
ultrasound.

The grey scale findings are fairly straight forward. The testicle is going to be darker (hypo-echoic)
and asymmetrically enlarged - at least in the chronic setting. If it's chronic then it will shrink up.

The doppler findings are somewhat complex. The most obviously / basic look would be to show you
absent arterial flow. This would be the equivalent of an underhand slow pitch. The curve ball would
be to show you preserved arterial flow BUT with increased resistance and a decreased diastolic flow
(or reversed diastolic flow).

That is correct my friends. Arterial flow does NOT need not be absent for torsion to be
present (depending on the duration and severity). This leads the way for some serious
fuckery if the test writer wants to be an asshole.

The best way to think about it is like this: Testicle = Brain.

Just like the brain requires continuous diastolic flow (the thing is never off), so does the testicle.

So when you look at the waveform for a rule out torsion case you need to remember that torsion has
three possible patterns:

1- Classic Absence of Arterial Flow                             Normal
2 - High resistance Arterial Flow (with
decreased or reversed diastolic flow)                           Abnormal:
3 - Monophasic Arterial Waveform (loss of                       Loss of Diastolic Flow
the normal dicrotic notch)                                      Abnormal:
                                                                Reversal of Diastolic Flow
Fuckery: We are talking about testicular
artery wave forms here. The normal                              Abnormal:
cremasteric artery will not have diastolic flow                 Monophasic
(think about that thing as the artery to a
muscle) - it's normally high resistance.

Cause: The "bell-clapper deformity," which describes an abnormal high attachment of the tunical
vaginalis, increases mobility and predisposes to torsion. It is usually a bilateral finding, so the
contralateral side also gets an orchiopexy.

Viability: The viability is related to the degree of torsion (how many spins), and how long it has
been spun. As a general rule, the surgeons try and get them in the OR before 6 hours.

                                                 437
High Flow States /Hyperemia:

If torsion demonstrates decreased flow, it is useful to have an idea about what can
demonstrate increased flow (decreased R.I. or increased diastolic flow)
Two things worth thinking about in this scenario: (1) Epididymo-orchitis (2) Detorsion.

The distinction between these two will be the clinical scenario.
Orchitis is painfiil. D etorsion is pain free.

Epididymitis: Inflammation o f the epididymis, and the most common cause of acute
onset scrotal pain in adults. In high-school / college age men (likely sexually active men) the
typical cause is chlam ydia or gonorrhea. In m arried men (not likely to be sexually active) it
is more likely to be e-coli, due to a urinary tract source. The epididym al head is the m ost
affected. Increased size and hyperemia are your ultrasound findings. You can have infection
o f the epididymis alone or infection o f the epididymis and testicle (isolated orchitis is rare).

Typical S p re a d : T a il------- Body ------- Head

Gamesmanship: Could be asked as "where is the m ost common location" ? = Tail (because
in most cases it starts there).

Orcliitis: Typically progresses from epididymitis (isolated basically only occurs from
mumps and TB). It looks like asymmetric hyperemia.

Typical: (1) Epididymitis   (2) Epididymitis + Orchitis  Multiple small dark
                                                         (hypoechoic) nodules
Mumps: Straight to Orchitis                              in enlarged testis is
TB: Can also go orchitis first (then epididymitis)       the classic military
                                                         appearance of TB.

Impending Infarct: The swelling of the testicle can become so severe that it compromises
venous flow. In this case you will see loss o f diastolic flow (or reversal) - similar to the
atypical torsion patterns. This is reported as a sign o f "im pending infarct."

Testicular Trauma: The big distinction is rupture vs fracture. Surgical intervention is
required if there is testicular rupture. Intratesticular fracture, and hem atom as (small) do not
get surgery.

 Rupture: Disrupted tunica albuginea, heterogenous testicle, poorly defined testicular
  outline

 Fracture: Intact tunica albuginea, linear hypoechoic band across the parenchyma o f the
  testicle, well defined testicular outline.

                           438
