                                 S E C T IO N 15:

                          C ong en ital F etal

                          - DOWNS-

Ultrasound Findings Concerning for Down Syndrome

Congenital Heart Disease  More than half o f fetuses (or feti, if you prefer) with Downs
                          have congenital heart issues, - m ost com monly AV canal and
                          VSD

Duodenal Atresia          Most common intra abdominal pathology associated with
                          Downs (hard to see before 22 weeks)

Short Femur Length        Not Specific
Echogenic Bowel
                          Not Specific (can be seen with obstruction, infection, CF,
Choroid Plexus Cyst       ischemia, and lots o f other stuff)
                          N ot Specific, and actually seen more with Trisomy 18. It
Nuchal Translucency       should prom pt a close survey for other findings (normal if in
Nuchal Fold Thickness     isolation)
Echogenic Focus in        Translucency > 3mm in the first trimester.
Cardiac Ventricle         Thickness > 6mm in the second trimester- nonspecific and
                          can also be seen with Turners

                          Not Specific, but increased risk o f Downs x 4

Nuchal Lucency:

Measured between 9-12 weeks, this anechoic area
between the neck/ occiput and the skin should be
less than 3 mm.

Measurements > 3 mm are associated with Downs
(trisomy 21) or other chromosomal abnormalities.

Positioning o f the neck is critical to avoid false
positives. The ideal positioning is a neutral neck,
with the nasal bone visualized, and the head in the
mid-sagittal position. A well delineated skin edge.

Maternal blood sample also analyzed for free Beta
hCG and pregnancy associated plasma protein-
A (PAPP-A).

                                                              460
- OTHER HORRIBLE SHIT THAT CAN HAPPEN -

Amniotic Band Syndrome:

The fetus needs to stay in the amniotic cavity, and stay the hell out of      -Amputated Fingers
the chorionic cavity. If the amnion gets disrupted and the fetus wanders
/ floats into the chorionic cavity he/she can get caught in the sticky
fibrous septa. All kinds of terrible can result ranging from decapitation,
to arm/leg amputation.

Losing fingers like this is terrible - it's much better to cut them off in a
more manly way. For example, drunken chainsaw lumberjack work or
trying to do that thing with the knife that the cyborg did in the movie
Aliens (youtube "Aliens: Bishop's Knife Trick"). Not to menfion,
unless you are Jean Jacque Machado (youtube "Heart of the champion
documentary" ) your chances of becoming a world champion in Jiu
Jitsu are going to be significantly decreased.

This is most likely to be shown in one of two ways:

(1) X-ray of a hand or baby gram showing fingers amputated or a hand/arm amputated - with the
     remaining exam normal, or

(2) Fetal ultrasound with the bands entangling the arms or legs of a fetus.

Hydrops:

Fetal hydrops is bad news. This can be from immune or non-immune causes. The most common
cause is probably Rh sensitization from prior pregnancy. Some other causes include; TORCHS,
Turners, Twin Related Stuff, and Alpha Thalassemia. Ultrasound diagnosis is made by the
presence of two o f the following: pleural effusion, ascites, pericardial effusion, and
Subcutaneous Edema. A sneaky trick is to instead show you a thickened placenta (> 4-5cm)
"placentom egaly" - they call it, although I think it's much more likely to show a pleural effusion
and pericardial effusion.

               Hydrops - Body Wall Edema, Pleural Effusion, Ascites
MCA Doppler is useful with an increase in peak systolic flow often occurring before hydrops.

                                                             461
-Chiari II /Open Neural Tube Defect

I think at least some general idea o f the mechanism for this pathology is helpful for
understanding the ultrasound findings. There are a bunch o f proposed mechanisms, and of
course they all think they are right. I don't give a shit which one is the "real m echanism ," I
just picked the one that helps me understand the findings.

So this is the one I like: You have a hole in your back from a neural tube defect (Step 1 trivia
= not enough folate). The hole in your back ("myelomeningocele") lets CSF drip out. So
you end up with a low volume o f CSF. The CSF volume needs to be at a certain pressure to
distend the ventricular system. If it's under distended then the hindbrain structures drop into
a caudal position. This caudal herniation o f the cerebellar vermis, brainstem, and 4th
ventricle is the hallm ark o f Chiari II.

This caudal herniation o f the cerebellum into the foramen magnum obliterate the normal
contour o f the vermis, creating the contour o f a banana.

If you can think about a normal pressure in the developing ventricular system being
necessary for the brain to stretch into a normal shape, then it isn 't a far stretch to think about
this normal pressure being needed to shape the skull correctly, too. The low pressure and
abnormal distention o f the developing brain results in incomplete stretching o f the rostral
(front part) skull. The result is a "lemon shaped" rostral skull. The key point (testable) is
that this lemon shape goes away in the 3rd trimester. So it's only present in the 2nd trimester.
The way I rem em ber this is that the problem was from a lack o f volume. Once the brain
grows big enough (even if there isn 't enough CSF distention) it still gets big enough to put a
normal curve on that rostral skull. So they "grow" out o f it.

Testable Trivia:
 Both banana and lemon signs are classic for the Chiari II / Spina Bifida Path
 The banana sign is present in both 2nd and 3rd trimesters
 The lemon sign is only in the 2nd trim ester (you grow out o f it).
 The banana sign is more sensitive and specific
 The lemon sign is less sensitive and specific; it can also be seen in Dandy Walker, Absent

   Corpus Callosum, Encephaloceles, e tc ... Having said that if you see it on the test it's
   Chiari 2 + Open NTD.
 Hydrocephalus is also seen with Chiari II + Open N TD - but only later in gestation, and
   only when it's severe.

                                                              462
                 Open Neural Tube Defect

        Low CSF Pressure During Development

Chiari II t

             Banana                    Lemon

 -Loss of the normal bilobed       -Flat /Concave
  shaped of the cerebellum         Frontal Bones

This is what it's
supposed to
look like

Normal Bilobed  Cavum Septum       Normal Shape
 Shaped of the    Pellucidum       of the Frontal
                                   ,,
   Cerebellum                      Bone

                              463
Ventriculomegaly - There are multiple causes including hydrocephalus (both
communicating and non-com m unicating), and cerebral atrophy. Obviously this is bad, and
frequently associated with anomalies.
Things to know:
 Aqueductal Stenosis is the most common cause o f non-communicating hydrocephalus

     in a neonate
 Ventricular atrium diam eter > 10 mm = too big
 "Dangling choroid" hanging off the wall more than 3 mm = too big

                  Ventriculomegaly - Shows dangling choroid

Choroid Plexus Cyst -
This is one o f those incidental findings
that in isolation means nothing. Having
said that, the incidence o f this finding is
increased in trisom y 18. trisom y 21,
Turner's Syndrome, and K linefelter
Syndrome.

                                                          Choroid Plexus Cyst
Facial Clefts - This is the m ost com m on fetal facial anomaly. A bout 30% o f the time
you are dealing with chromosome anomalies. Around 80% o f babies with cleft lips have
cerebral palsy. You can see cleft lips, but cleft palate (in isolation) is very hard to see.
Cystic Hygroma - If they show you a com plex cystic mass in the posterior neck, in
the antenatal period, this is the answer. The follow-up is the association with Turners and
Downs.

                                                              464
Anencephaly - This is the most com m on neural tube defect. You have total absence of
the cranial vault and brain above the level of the orbits. Obviously this is not compatible
with life.

                   Anencephaly - No brain / vault above the orbits

Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia - A bdominal contents push into the chest.
Nearly all are on the left (85%). The things to know is that it (1) causes a high mortality
because o f its association with pulmonary hypoplasia, and (2) that all the kids are
malrotated (it messes with normal gut rotation). If they show this it will either be (a) a
newborn chest x-ray, or (b) a 3rd trimester MRI.

Echogenic intracardiac Focus (EIF) - This is a calcification seen in a papillary
muscle (usually in the left ventricle). You see them all the time, they don't m ean that much
but are seen at a higher rate Trisom y 21 (12%) and Trisom y 13. So you are supposed to look
for more features.

Highest Yield Trivia:

 It occurs in the
  normal general
  population - around
  5%,

 It occurs more in
  Downs patients -
  around 12%.

                       Echogenic Intracardiac Focus (EIF)

Abnormal Heart Rate: Tachycardia is defined as a rate > 180 bpm.
Bradycardia is defined as a rate < 100 bpm.

                                                             465
Double Bubble:                                        Double Bubble - Duodenal Atresia

Not the good kind o f bubble you get from
eating ice cream and doing squats (or buying
those stretchy pants).
This is the bad bubble - described in detail in
the Peds Chapter.

Just realize this can be shown with antenatal
ultrasound or MRI. It's still duodenal atresia.

Echogenic Bowel: This can be a norm al variant but can also be associated with
significant badness. N orm ally bowel is isoechoic to the liver. I f it's equal to the iliac crest bone
then it's too bright. The DDx includes CF, Downs and other Trisomies, Viral Infections, and
Bowel Atresia.

Sacrococcygeal Teratoma: This is the m ost com mon tum or o f the fetus or infant.
These solid or cystic masses are typically large and found either on prenatal imaging or birth. They
can cause mass effect on the GI system, hip dislocation, nerve compression causing
incontinence, and high output cardiac failure. Additionally, they may cause issues with
premature delivery, dystocia, and hemorrhage o f the tumor. They are usually benign (80%).
Those presenting in older infants tend to have a higher malignant potential. The location o f the
mass is either external to the pelvis (47% ), internal to the pelvis (9%), or dum bell'd both
inside and outside (34%).

Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease - The classic look is
massively enlarged bilateral kidneys with oligohydramnios. Additional details in the Peds
chapter.

Posterior Urethral Valves: The classic look is bilateral hydro on either fetal US or 3rd
Trimester MRI.

Short Femur: A short femur (below the            percentile) can make you think o f a skeletal
dysplasia.

                                                 466
