                                       S E C T IO N 17:

                         MULTIPLE G e s t a t io n s

Placentation Terminology: So you can have monozygotic twins (identical) or dizygotic
twins (not-identical). The dizygotics are always dichorionic and diamniotic. The placenta of the
monozygotics is more variable and depends on the timing of fertilized ovum splitting (before 8 days =
diamniotic, after 8 days = monoamniotic). As a point of trivia, a late splitting (after 13 days) can
cause a conjoined twin. As a general rule, the later the split the worse things do (monoamniotics have
more bad outcomes - they get all tangled up, and the conjoined ones have even more problems).

M on o ch orio nic   IVionochorionic  Dichorionic     Dichorionic
M o n o am n io tic  D ia m n io tic  Diam niotic     D ia m n io tic
                                      Fused Placenta  Separate Placentas

                     THIS vs THAT: Monochorionic VS Dichorionic

Membrane Thickness: To differentiate the different types, some people use a method classifying
thin and thick membranes. Thick = "easy to see" 1-2 mm. Thin = "hard to see." Thick is supposed
to be 4 layers (dichorionic). Thin is supposed to be 2 layers (monochorionic). Obviously this
method is very subjective.

Twin-Peak Sign: A beak-like tongue between the two membranes of dichorionic diamniotic
fetuses. This excludes a monochorionic pregnancy.

T Sign: Think about this as basically the absence of the twin peak sign. You don't see chorion
between membrane layers. T sign = monochorionic pregnancy.

                                      468
Twin Growth - You can use normal growth charts in the first and second trimester (but not the third).
The femur length tends to work best for twin age in later pregnancy. More than 15% difference in fetal
weight or abdominal circumference between twins is considered significant.

Monochorionic Twins share a             Chronic Feto-Fetal Transfusion
placenta. This placenta (if it has
abnormal vascular connections) can      "Fast flow " ^                      ^ "Slow flow"
allow for blood to be transferred from
one fetus to the other - this is bad.   TTTS/ TRAP                                 TAPS
                                        -Characterized                          -No TOPS-
                                                                            -Hgb Differences-
                                           by TOPS-

Twin- Twin Transfusion Syndrome (TTTS) - This occurs in monochorionic twins when a

vascular communication exists in the placenta. You end up with one greedy fat twin who takes all the
blood and nutrients, and one skinny wimpy looking kid who gets the scraps. It is best to think about this
pathology like an episode of "My 600 pound life" (that reality show about big fat people -- where the
skinny boyfriend feeds the gigantic fat girlfriend). The somewhat counter intuitive part is that the skinny
kid actually does better, and the fat one usually gets hydrops and dies.

You are going to have unequal fluid in the amniotic sacs, with the  TOPS Twin Oligohydramnios
donor (skinny) twin having severe oligohydramnios and is               Polyhydramnios Sequence
sometimes (*buzzword) "stuck to the wall of the uterus," or
"shrink wrapped." The fat twin floats freely in his                 Oligohydramnios for the donor
polyhydramniotic sac. This imbalance is referred to as "TOPS".      Polyhydramnios for the recipient

The donor (skinny) twin will also have a high resistance umbilical artery.

Twin Reversed Arterial Perfusion Syndrome (TRAP) - This is a severe variant of TTTS.
Similar to TTTS you have a greedy twin (which is described in OB literature as the "parasite twin") and
an enabling "pump" twin -- which I call "the skinny boyfriend twin." In this more extreme situation the
greedy twin is so greedy that he/she doesn't even bother to develop a heart. Instead, it just uses the heart
of the "pump twin." Although you might think not having a heart would give you an advantage in life
(especially in business, politics, or various board games - like monopoly) these kids don't do well. They
usually have wrecked / totally deformed upper bodies - so they probably wouldn't make it very far in
politics and would have trouble rolling the dice in monopoly (since they don't have arms) ... plus they all
die in utero.

The "pump twin" is usually normal, and does ok as long as the strain on his/her heart isn't too much.
Although if the acardiac twin is a really big set of legs (> 70% estimated fetal weight of the co-twin) then
the strain can kill the pump twin too. They could show this as a Doppler ultrasound demonstrating
umbilical artery flow toward the acardiac twin, or umbilical vein flow away from the fucked up acardiac
twin ... who is basically a set of legs.

Twin Anemia Polycythemia Sequence (TAPS) - This is another syndrome related to feto-
fetal transfusion but this time there is no difference in amniotic fluid. Instead you essentially have a
transfer of hemoglobin (Hgb) with one anemic twin and one twin with polycythemia.

Classic Scenario: TAPS occurs after incomplete laser treatment for TTTS
Classic Finding: Discordant MCA Doppler with elevated peak systolic velocitv in the anemic twin

One Dead Twin - At any point during the pregnancy one of the twins can die. It's a bigger problem
(for the surviving twin) if it occurs later in the pregnancy. "Fetus Papyraceous" is a fancy sounding Latin
word for a pressed flat dead fetus.

"Twin-Embolization Syndrome" is when you have embolized, necrotic, dead baby being
transferred to the living fetus (soylent green is people!). This can result in DIC, tissue ischemia, and
infarct. By the way, a testable point is that this transfer can only occur in a monochorionic pregnancy.

469
     fROMETHEUS

       Liom hart, M.1>.

470
