SECTION 13:

                            Early Pregnancy-

Vocab:

·Menstrual Age: Embryologic Age + 14 days
·Embryo: 0-10 weeks (menstrual age)
·Fetus: > 10 weeks (menstrual age)
·Threatened Abortion - Bleeding with closed cervix
·Inevitable Abortion - Cervical dilation and/or placental and/or fetal tissue hanging out
·Incomplete Abortion - Residual products in the uterus
·Complete Abortion - All products out
·Missed Abortion - Fetus is dead, but still in the uterus.

Intradecidual Sign: This is the early gestational
sac. W hen seen covered by echogenic decidua is very
characteristic o f early pregnancy. You can see it
around 4.5 weeks. You want to see the thin echogenic
line o f the uterine cavity pass by (not stop at) the sac
to avoid calling a little bit o f fluid in the canal a sac.

                            Small amount of
                              fluid between

                           Decidua Vera     Double Decidual Sac Sign:
       Decidua Capsularis                  This is another positive sign o f early
                                           pregnancy.
Double Decidual Sac Sign                    It's produced by visualizing the layers
                                            o f decidua.

                                         445
Yolk Sac: This is the first structure visible
within the GS. The classic teaching was you
should always see it when the GS measures
8mm in diameter. The thing should be oval or
round, fluid filled, and smaller than 6 mm.

The yolk sac is located in the chorionic cavity,
and hooked up to the umbilicus o f the embryo
by the vitelline duct.

Yolk Sac Gone Bad: The yolk sac shouldn't be      Yolk Sac - in the chorionic cavity
too big (> 6 mm), shouldn't be too small
(< 3 mm), and shouldn't be solid or calcified.

The Amnion: The membranes o f the                 A= Amniotic Space
amniotic sac and chorionic space                  Arrow = Amnion
typically remain separated by a thin              C= Chorionic Space
layer o f fluid, until about 14-16 weeks
at which point fusion is normal. If the
amnion gets disrupted before 10 weeks
the fetus might cross into the chorionic
cavity and get tangled up in the fibrous
bands. This is the etiology o f amniotic
band syndrome, which can be terrible
(decapitation, limb amputation, etc...).

Double Bleb Sign: This is the earliest visualization o f the embryo. This is two fluid
filled sacs (yolk and amniotic) with the flat embryo in the middle.

Double Bleb Sign

             446
Crown Rump Length - This is typically used to estimate gestational age, and is more accurate
than menstrual history. *Embryo is normally visible at 6 weeks.

Anembryonic Pregnancy - A gestational sac without an embryo. When you see this, the
choices are (a) very early pregnancy, or (b) non-viable pregnancy. The classic teaching was you
should see the yolk sac at 8 mm (on TV). Just remember that a large sac (>8-10 mm) without a yolk
sac, and a distorted contour is pretty reliable for a non-viable pregnancy.

Pseudogestational Sac - This is not
the same thing as an anembryonic pregnancy.
This is seen in the presence of an ectopic
pregnancy. What you are seeing is a little bit
of blood in the uterine cavity with
surrounding bright decidual endometrium
(charged up from the pregnancy hormones).

Subchorionic Hemorrhage: These are very common.
The thing to know is that the percentage of placental
detachment is the prognostic factor most strongly associated
with fetal demise; hematoma greater than 2/3 the
circumference of the chorion has a 2x increased risk of
abortion. Other trivia: women older than 35 have worse
outcomes with these.

Implantation Bleeding: This is a nonspecific term referring to a small subchorionic hemorrhage that
occurs at the attachment of the chorion to the endometrium.

Criteria for Fetal Demise:

Diagnostic of Pregnancy Failure                Suspicious for Pregnancy Failure

Crown-rump length of >7 mm and no heartbeat No embryo >6 wk after last menstrual period

Mean sac diameter o f >25 mm and no embryo     Mean sac diameter of 16-24 mm and no
                                               embryo

No embryo with heartbeat >2 wk after a scan No embryo with heartbeat 13 days after a scan
that showed a gestational sac without a yolk sac that showed a gestational sac without a yolk sac

No embryo with heartbeat >11 days after a scan No embryo with heartbeat 10 days after a scan

that showed a gestational sac with a yolk sac  that showed a gestational sac with a yolk sac

                                               447
Pregnancy of Unknown Location: This is the vocabulary used when neither a normal lUP
or ectopic pregnancy is identified in the setting of a positive b-hCG. Typically this just means it is a
very very early pregnancy, but you can't say that with certainty. In these cases you have three
possibilities:

1 - Normal Early Pregnancy  The management is follow up (serial b-hCG) and repeat US
2 - Occult Ectopic          assuming the patient is hemodynamically stable.
3 - Complete Miscarriage

Ectop ic : The following increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy: Being a free spirit (Hx of FID),

Tubal Surgery, Endometriosis, Ovulation Induction, Previous Ectopic, Use of an lUD.

The majority of ectopic pregnancies (nearly 95%) occur in the fallopian tube (usually the ampulla). A
small percentage (around 2%) are "interstitial" developing in the portion of the tube which passes
through the uterine wall. These interstitials are high risk, as they can grow large before rupture and
cause a catastrophic hemorrhage. It is also possible (although very rare) to have implantation sites in
the abdominal cavity, ovary, and cervix.

Always start down the ectopic pathway with a positive BhCG. At around 1500-2000 mlU/L you
should see a gestational sac. At around 5000 mlU/L you should see a yolk sac. As a general rule, a
normal doubling time makes ectopic less likely.

Tubal Ring Sign: An echogenic ring,

which surrounds an un-ruptured ectopic
pregnancy. This is an excellent sign of ectopic
pregnancy - and has been described as 95%
specific.

Heterotopic Pregnancy: This is a baby
in the uterus and a baby in the tube (or other
ectopic location). This is pretty rare, and
typically only seen in women taking ovulation
drugs, or with prior bad PID.

     The Big 3 to Remember with Ectopics (positive B-hCG)

(1) Live Pregnancy / Yolk Sac outside the uterus = Slam Dunk
(2) Nothing in the uterus + anything on the adnexa (other than corpus luteum) =

     75-85% PPV for ectopic
          a. A moderate volume o f free fluid increases this to 97% PPV

(3) Nothing in the uterus + moderate free fluid = 70% PPV
          a. More risk if the fluid is echogenic

                                                        448
                     Fetal Blometrv and Fetal Growth:

In the second and third trimesters, four standard measurements o f fetal growth are made
(Biparietal, Head Circumference, Abdominal Circumference, and Femur Length). The
testable trivia seems to include what level you make the m easurem ent, and what is and is not
included (see chart).

                     Fetal Measurement For Growth

                     Measurement Made NOT including                     Trivia

Biparietal Diameter  Recorded at the level                            Affected by the shape
"BPD"                o f the thalamus from                            o f the fetal skull
                     the outeiinost edge of                           (false large from
                     the near skull to the                            brachycephaly, false
                     inner table o f the far                          small from
                     skull                                            dolichocephaly)

                     Recorded at the same Does NOT include            Affected less by head
Head Circumference slice as BPD                                       shape
                                               the skin

Abdominal            Recorded at the level     Does NOT include
Circumference        o f the junction o f the  the subcutaneous soft
                     umbilical vein and        tissues
                     left portal vein

Femur Length         Longest dim ension o f Fem oral epiphysis is

                     the femoral shaft         NOT included

Estim ated Fetal Weight: This is calculated by the m achine based or either
(1) BPD and AC, or (2) AC and FL.

Gestational Age (GA): Ultrasound estim ates o f gestational age are the m ost accurate
in early pregnancy (and becom e less precise in the later portions). Age in the first trim ester is
made from crown rump length. Second and third trimester estimates for age are typically
done using BPD, HC, AC, and FL - and referred to as a "composite GA."

                      Gestation Age (Less Good Later in the Pregnancy)
First Trimester - Crown Rump Length Accurate to 0.5 weeks

2"^! and                                            Accurate to 1.2 w eeks (between 12 and 18 weeks)
          Trimester - "Composite GA"

                                                    A ccurate to 3.1 w eeks (between 36 and 42 weeks)

                                               449
                  Intrauterine Growth Restriction:

                                  *Baby is smaller than expected

Readings Suggestive of iUGR:

     · Estim ated Fetal Weights Below 10'^ percentile
     · Femur Length / Abdominal Circumference Ratio (F /AC) > 23.5
     · Umbilical Artery Systolic / Diastolic Ratio > 4.0
N ot A ll is lost: I f the kid is measuring small, he m ight ju st be a little guy. If he has
normal Doppler studies - most o f the time they are ok.

Maybe A ll is lost: If the kid is measuring small, suggesting IUGR, and he has
oligohydramnios (AFI < 5) or polyhydramnios, he/she is probably toast.

Trivia: M ost common cause for developing oligohydramnios during the 3rd trimester
= Fetal Growth Restriction associated with Placental Insufficiency.

TH IS vs THAT: Sym m etric vs Asym m etric:

· Asymmetric: Think about this as a restriction o f weight followed by length. It
     is the more common o f the two types. The head will be normal in size, with the
     body being small. Some people call this "head sparing," as the body tries to
     protect the brain. You see this mainly in the third trimester, as a result o f
     extrinsic factors.

· The classic scenario would be normal growth for the first two trimesters, with a
     normal head / small body (small abdominal circumference) in the third trimester -
     with a mom having chronic high BP / pre-eclampsia.

· There are a bunch o f causes. I recommend remembering these three; High BP,
     Severe Malnutrition, Ehler-Danlos.

     Symmetric: This is a global growth restriction, that does NOT spare the head.
     This is seen throughout the pregnancy (including the first trimester). The head
     and body are both small. This has a much w orse prognosis, as the brain doesn't
     develop normally.
     There are also a bunch of causes. I recommend remembering these: TORCH
     infection. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome / Drug Abuse, Chromosomal
     Abnormalities, and Anemia.

                                                                450
Intrauterine Growth Restriction - Continued

Symmetric lUGR                  Asymmetric lUGR

-Small Head                     -Abdomen is small
-Skinny Body                    -Aching Belly (Malnutrition)
-Same Throughout Pregnancy      -Abnormally High BP
-Syphilis {Among other TORCHs)  -"Alastic" skin (Ehler Danlos)
-Scotch Whiskey (Fetal EtOH)    -Asymmetric Time Interval
-Some Extra Chromosomes         (primarily seen in 3rd trimester)

MCA Doppler:

Technique: Measurement should be done at the proximal 1/3 of the vessel.

Normal: The fetal MCA should be a high resistance waveform with
continuous forward flow of diastole (the space between the waveform
peaks).

ABnormal: When the fetal brain experiences hypoxia there is a
reflex response to protect the brain. This "brain-sparing reflex" will
manifest early on as an increase in diastolic flow (less resistance).

Cerebroplacental Ratio - This is a ratio of the pulsatility in the MCA and Umbilical Artery that is used to
evaluate the brain sparing reflex and predict outcomes. High MCA diastolic flow (from hypoxia induced
cerebral vascular dilation) combined with decreased diastolic flow in the umbilical artery (from increased
placental resistance) will result in a devastating outcome (i.e. - kid will have deficits in cognitive
functioning / poor academic achievement possibly resulting in a residency match to family medicine).
Cerebroplacental Ratio: >1:1 is normal
Fetal Anemia : There are a variety of causes (maternal alloimmunization and parvovirus are the most
common). MCA Doppler is useful with an increase in peak svstolic flow often occurring before hydrops.
Other imaging finds include enlargement of the liver and spleen.

                                                                451
Umbilical Artery Systolic /Diastolic Ratio:

The resistance in the umbilical artery should progressively decrease with gestational age. The
general rule is 2-3 a t 32 weeks. The ratio should not be more than 3 at 34 weeks. An elevated
S/D ratio means there is high resistance. High resistance patterns are seen in pre-eclampsia and
lUGR. Worse than an elevated ratio, is absent or reversed diastolic flow - this is associated with
a very poor prognosis.

The way I remember this: I think about the kid starting out as a clump o f cells/mashed up soup.

jiL L im

Early on he/she is basically just a "muscle." Then as he/she gets closer and closer to viable age
he/she becomes more like a "brain." Once you think about it like that - muscle vs brain, it's
much easier to understand why the diastolic flow goes up (S/D ratio goes down).

Remember the brain is always on, so it needs continuous flow. Muscles are only on when you
need to perform amazing feats o f strength. So more brain = more diastolic flow. This also
explains why absent or reversed diastolic flow is so devastatingly bad. In fact, the evil socialist
health care systems in Europe use carotid ultrasound as a cheap brain death test (no diastolic
flow in the ICA = brain dead). Coincidently, the absence o f diastolic flow in the ICA is also
used in many American Radiology Departments as hiring criteria for the QA Officer.

Biophysical Profile: This thing was developed to look for acute and chronic hypoxia. Points
are assigned (2 for norm al, 0 for abnormal). A score of 8-10 is considered normal. To call something
abnormal, technically you have to be watching for 30 mins.

                 Components of Biophysical Profile

Amniotic Fluid   At least 1 pocket measuring > 2 cm in a vertical plane Assess Chronic Hypoxia
Fetal Movement
Fetal Tone       3 discrete movements                                     Assess Acute Hypoxia

                 1 episode of fetal extension from flexion                Assess Acute Hypoxia

Fetal Breathing  1 episode of "Breathing motion" lasting 30 sec           Assess Acute Hypoxia
Non-stress Test                                                           Assess Acute Hypoxia
                 2 or more fetal heart rate accelerations of at least 15
                 beats per minute for 30 seconds or longer

                                       452
                              - Macrosomia -

Babies that are too big (above the 90* percentile). Maternal diabetes (usually gestational, but
could be type 2 as well), is the most common cause. As a point o f trivia, type 1 diabetic mothers
can also have babies that are small secondary to hypoxia from microvascular disease of the
placenta. The big issue with being too big is complications during delivery (shoulder dystocia,
brachial plexus injury) and after delivery (neonatal hypoglycemia, meconium aspiration).

Erb's Palsy:

Injury to the upper trunk of the brachial plexus (C5-C6),
most commonly seen in shoulder dystocia (which kids with
macrosomia are at higher risk for).

If you see an aplastic or hypoplastic humeral head / glenoid
in a kid, you should immediately think about an Erbs Palsy.

Clinical Correlation Recommended.

                             - Afflniotic Fluid -

Early on, the fluid in the amnion and chorionic spaces is the result o f filtrate from the
membranes. After 16 weeks, the fluid is made by the fetus (urine). The balance o f too much
(polyhydramnios) and too little (oligohydramnios) is maintained by swallowing o f the urine
and renal function. In other words, if you have too little fluid you should think kidneys aren't
working. If you have too much fluid you should think swallow or other GI problems. Having
said that, a common cause o f too much fluid is high maternal sugars (gestational diabetes).
Fine particulate in the fluid is normal, especially in the third trimester.

Amniotic Fluid Index.- Made by measuring the vertical height o f the deepest fluid
pocket in each quadrant o f the uterus, then summing the 4 measurements.
Normal is 5-20.
Oligohydramnios is defined as AFI < 5 cm.
Polyhydramnios is defined as AFI > 20 cm , or a single fluid pocket > 8 cm.

O ligoh yd ram n ios        Not Pee'n Enough  Oligohydramnios
-AFI < 5                    -Bad Kidneys      is a frequent
                                              finding in growth-
P olyhyd ram n ios          Not Drinking      restriction related
-AFI > 20 or                Enough Pee        to placental
-Single Pocket > 8 cm       -Bad GI           insufficiency.

                       453
                         -Normal Development-

I'm going to briefly touch on w hat I think is testable trivia regarding normal development.
Brain: Choroid plexus is large and echogenic. There should be less than 3 mm o f
separation o f the choroid plexus from the medial wall o f the lateral ventricle (if more it's
ventriculomegaly). The cistema magna should be between 2 m m -II mm (too small think
Chiari II, too large think Dandy Walker).
Face / Neck: The "fialcrum" o f the upper lip is normal, and should not be called a cleft lip.
Lungs: The lungs are normally homogeneously echogenic, and similar in appearance to the
liver.
Heart: The only thing to know is that papillary muscle can calcify "Echogenic Foci in the
ventricle," and although this is com mon and can mean nothing - it's also associated w ith an
increased risk o f Downs (look hard for other things).
Abdominal: If you only see one artery adjacent to the bladder, you have yourself a two
vessel cord. Bowel should be less than 6mm in diameter. Bowel can be moderately
echogenic in the 2"d and 3^^ trim ester but should never be more than bone. The adrenals
are huge in newborns, and are said to be 20x their relative adult size.

                        ^ Two Vessel Cord - Gamesmanship ^
 There are two main ways to show a two vessel cord. The first one is a single vessel
 running lateral to the bladder down by the cord insertion. The second is to show the cord
 in cross section with two vessels.

                                                                       Cord in Cross Section
                                                                       -Only Two Vessels

 More on the 2 vessel cord in a few pages.

                                                                 454
Classic Normal Pictures                       Welcome to your
                                              nightmare, bitch! j
I H X T LOOK SCXKY

Cystic Rhombencephalon:
The normal rhombencephalon is present
as a cystic structure in the posterior fossa
around 6-8 weeks.
D o n 't call it a Dandy-W alker
malformation, for sure that will be a
distractor.

                                                      Normal Cystic Rhombencephalon (6-8 weeks)

Physiologic Midgut Herniation:
The m idgut norm ally herniates into the um bilical cord around 9-11 weeks.
D o n 't call it an omphalocele, for sure that will be a distractor.

Normal Midgut Herniation (9-11 weeks)

                             455
