                        SECTION lO:
                  T esticular Cancer

Risk Factors: Cryptorchidism (for both testicles), Gonadal Dysgenesis, Klinefelters, Trauma, Orchitis,
and testicular microlithiasis (maybe). The step 1 trivia is that cryptorchidism increases the risk of cancer
(in both testicles), and is not reduced by orchiopexy.

Most Classic: Male age 18-35, history of undescended testicle ^ seminoma.

Gamesmanship: For the purpose of muhiple choice, "non-palpable testicle" = undescended testicle.

/ I Most Classic Sneaky Move:                                           Most testicular
                                                                        tumors met via the
Male age 18-35 with mystery retroperitoneal adenopathy.                 lymphatics
                                                                        (retroperitoneal
Next step ^ Ultrasound his balls                                        nodes at the level of
                                                                        the renal hilum).
Possibly the only thing useful to remember from med school              The testable
embryology is that retroperitoneal (para-aortic & paracaval) nodes are  exception is
the initial landing station / blast off point for testicular cancers.   choriocarcinoma,
                                                                        which mets via the
Subtypes:                          Non Germ Cell (10%)                  blood.
 Germ Cell (90%)

          Seminoma (50%)                              ^ Sertoli
          - seen more in                                  Leydig
          the 4th decade

          Non- Seminoma (50%)
          -Teratoma
          -Yolk Sac
          -Mixed Germ Cell (35%)

Work-Up: Ultrasound of the balls is done with a high frequency (7-10 MHz) probe. It is useful to
differentiate solid vs cystic masses that are within the ball (testicle) or outside it (extra testicular).

Mass in ^    Intratesticular mass                           Sohd
             Extratesticular mass
the       V                                           \ (More likely Malignant)
                                                            Cystic
Ball Sac                                                    (More likely Benign)

                               If it's
                               extratesticular
                               and cystic, it's
                               probably
                               benign.

In general, hypoechoic solid intratesticular masses should be thought of as cancer until proven
otherwise. Doppler flow can be helpful only when it is absent (can suggest hematoma - in the right
clinical setting) -- more on that later.

                                                 439
Generalizations for the Purpose of Multiple Choice:

Seminoma: This is the most common                 Non-Seminomatous Germ Cell
testicular tumor, and has the best prognosis as   Tumors: Basically this is not a seminoma.
they are very radiosensitive. They are much       We are talking about mixed germ cell tumors,
more common (9x) in white people. The             teratomas, yolk sac tumors, and
classic age is around 25. It usually looks like   choriocarcinoma. They typically occur at a
a homogenous hypoechoic round mass, which         young age relative to seminomas (think
classically replaces the entire testicle. On      teenager). They are more heterogeneous and
MRI they are usually homogeneously T2 dark        have larger calcifications.
(non-seminomatous GCTs are often higher in
signal).                                          NSGCTs = heterogeneous with cystic spaces
                                                  and calcifications
Seminomas = hypoechoic and homogeneous

Burned-Out Testicular Tumor                       Time Point 1:         Time Point 2:
                                                  Heterogenous          Mass shrinks, now
(Shrinidng Tumor) - Germ cell tumors              Mass in the Testicle  has calcifications

can sometimes "bum out" and regress into a
small mass or tiny calcification. The idea is
that you've had spontaneous regression of a
germ cell testicular neoplasm, that is now
calcified - after growing too fast for its own
good. This can happen even in the setting of
widespread metastatic disease. An important
pearl is that there can still be viable tumor in
there. Management is somewhat
controversial and unlikely to be asked (most
people pull them out).

Testicular Lymphoma: Can be primary or secondary. The look is highly variable - can be a
diffusely enlarged ill defined hypoechoic testicle or multiple hypoechoic masses. AGE is the
primary discriminator (most common over 60).

Bilateral disease is also a hint - but could be a great source of multiple choice fuckery. Most
testicular lymphoma is unilateral (60%) - BUT bilateral lymphoma is the most common bilateral
testicular tumor - so watch the wording of questions. Just be aware that lymphoma can "hide" in the
testes because of the blood testes barrier. Immunosuppressed patients are at increased risk for
developing extranodal/ testicular lymphoma.

          Buzzword = multiple hypoechoic masses o f the testicle.

                                                  440
                                  High Yield Testicle Tumor Trivia
Seminoma is the most common (Age 18-35) and has the best prognosis (it melts with radiation)
Lymphoma is the most common Age > 60
Lymphoma is usually Diffuse B- Cell Subtype
Lymphoma is usually unilateral (60%) - even though it is the most common bilateral ball cancer
Homogenous and Microcalcifications = Seminoma
Cystic Elements and Macrocalcifications = Mixed Germ Cell Tumor / Teratoma
Most testicular tumors met via the lymphatics to the retroperitoneal nodes
Choriocarcinoma mets via the blood - and tends to bleed like stink
Gynecomastia can be seen with Sertoli Leydig Tumors
Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome can be seen with Sertoli Tumors

Bilateral testicular cancer = Lymphoma
Bilateral hypoechoic masses = Lymphoma
Bilateral solid testicular masses + congenital adrenal hyperplasia = Adrenal Rests
Bilateral solid testicular & epididvmal masses = Testicular Sarcoid
Bilateral 1-6-mm, hyperechoic, avascular masses + Cowden Syndrome = Focal Lipomatosis

Elevated Beta hCG                  Elevated AFP
          Seminoma            Mixed Germ Cell (Non-S)

Choriocarcinoma (Non-S)            Yolk Sac (Non-S)

Sneaky Moves:

· Male older than 60, bilateral testicular masses, with fever/weight loss = Lymphoma

· Male age 18-35, pelvic mass with an ipsilateral draining vein that empties into the inferior vena cava (if
  right sided) or left renal vein (if left sided). Then they show you a scrotum with only one testicle.
  Think cancer of an undescended testicle - whisper to yourself "nice try assholes."

· Black guy with "lung problems" and uveitis. Multiple small hypoechoic testicle lesions that don't
  change over time. Think "sarcoid of the balls" --yes it is a thing. Involvement of the epididymis is
  actually more common. Most likely involvement of the testicle will also have involvement of the
  epididymis.

                         441
                                                     staging Pearl

  Testicular mets should spread to the para-aortic, aortic, caval region (N1-N3).
  It's an embryology thing.

  If you have mets to the pelvic, external iliac, and inguinal nodes - this is considered "non-
  regional" i.e. M l disease. The exception is some kind of inguinal or scrotum surgery was done
  before the cancer manifested - but I wouldn't expect them to get that fancy on the test. Just
  remember inguinal / pelvic nodes are non-regional and a higher stage (Ml).

Mimics: Don't Cut Off My Bails (unless... you really need to)

Infarct: No blood flow on        Hematoma: No increased internal flow on Doppler within
Doppler - History of Acute
Pain - horrible flicking pain -  the "masses" - History of Acute Pain - horrible fucking pain -
like 5 days ago. No Trauma.      like 3 days ago, after getting kick in the nuts while training for
                                 no-gi Pans (standard elevator entry - butterfly to inside
                                 sankaku). Follow up shows the same areas getting smaller.

Infection: Unlike infarcts and hematomas, infection can have increased blood flow and create a

closer mimic of tumor. However, the clinical history will be different. Focal orchitis hurts and these
patients have fever, WBC elevation, etc... The question writer will need to give you some clinical hint
that it is infection and not a tumor. Otherwise, a good clue would be to show a follow up in 2-4 weeks
with improvement.

Epidermoid Cyst: This is a benign                Tubular Ectasia of the Rete Testis:
                                                 This is a common benign finding, resulting from
mass of the testicle (no malignant potential),   obliteration (complete or partial) of the efferent ducts.
with an Aunt Minnie "onion skin" look, -         It's usually bilateral - and in older men. The location of
alternating hypoechoic and hyperechoic           the cystic dilation is next to the mediastinum testis.
rings. It's relatively non-vascular relative to  Think about this as a normal variant. It requires no
the rest of the testicle.                        follow up or further evaluation.

                                                           \

                                                 442
