                                   SECTION 12:
                            T r a n sg en d er Misc

This is an in vogue topic popular in articles of the various academic journals. As such, I feel
compelled (Jordan Peterson style) to at least touch on some of the basics related to this topic.

Vocab: Transgender: Gender self identity does not match their genetic / sex assigned identity at birth.
The alternative is a "Cisgender" - A man who identifies as a man (XY) or a woman who identifies as
a woman (XX). Gender and sexual orientation are different things. Sexual Orientation is the emotion
/ sexual attraction to others. Transgender people are not necessarily homosexual. Gender self identity
is different than who you want to fuck.

Transgender Man: A female (XX) who identifies as the masculine (male) gender

Transgender Woman: A male (XY) who identifies as the feminine (female) gender

"Top and Bottom" Surgeries: Slang for breast & genital procedures (gender-affirming surgery)

Vaginoplasty: Procedure to create a functional and cosmetically acceptable neovagina.

 Penoscrotal inversion (PIV): The most common procedure with the lowest complication rate. It
  involves orchiectomy and "penile disassembly" in a method similar to the induction ceremony of the
  feared Unsullied Army. The skin from the disassembled parts is inverted / folded back to create a
  tunnel. The clitoris is constructed using the native penile neurovascular anatomy.

 Intestinal Interposition: Second line strategy which involves using a segment of bowel (usually
  rectosigmoid colon) to create a neovagina by coloperineal anastomosis. They do this because there
  uhhh - how best to say this - is "insufficient tissue" from the penis to make the tunnel.

Phalloplasty: Procedure to create a functional and cosmetically acceptable neopenis. Standing
urination is a typical metric of success. Several months prior to constructing the neopenis - these
patients typically undergo hysterectomy (+/- oophorectomy).

 Phalloplasty: Vaginectomy and urethroplasty are performed using vascularized vaginal mucosa to
  try and elongate the urethra. Skin flaps often fail - but the "RPFF" or radial flap procedure is
  probably the most common. Most of these skin grafts use a "tube in tube" strategy. I can't believe
  the details would be on the exam - but you can imagine they roll the skin and subcutaneous fat up to
  make something that looks like a dick. Maybe not the most impressive of dicks - but a dick none
  the less. Hey... you know what they say, it's not the size of the dog in the fight - it's the size of the
  fight in the dog. Not sure if this expression applies to a surgically created neo-phallus but I 'm trying
  to be positive.

 Metoidioplasty: An alternate technique to phalloplasty - which has a lower complication rate. The
   downside is the length of the created neopenis is usually not enough to have sex, but they can still
   pee standing up (a major metric to success of the procedure). This technique is performed by first
   using hormones to hypertrophy the clitoris (like a female body builder). Then the urethra is
   lengthened (by dividing various ligaments) and anastomosed to the clitoris, which serves as the
   glans. Labia minora is gonna be the source for skin to construct the shaft.

Testicular prostheses / Scrotoplasty: Generally made of silicone (high density on CT) and placed
around 6 month post phalloplasty. Just like those dick pumps you sometimes see in diabetics - a
hydraulic pump apparatus can be placed - that thing will have tubing and be more water density.

Complications: Older technique didn't resect the vagina - these patients were prone to fistula
between the neourethra and native vagina. DVT / PE is a post op risk if the patient is taking hormone
therapy. Bleeding, infection, urinary complication (urethral stenosis etc) all can occur - as one might
expect.

Some other surgeries that could come up on the exam include breast implants, and the various neck
surgeries to make a dude look less like a dude (thyroid chondroplasty / tracheal shave) and sound less
like a dude (glottoplasty, cricothyroid approximation).

                                                                444
