          S E C T IO N 16:

Ma te r n a l D is o r d e r s

Incompetent Cervix: When shortened, the cervix is associated with a high                 Things That
risk of premature delivery. You call it "short" when the canal is < 2.5 cm in length.
                                                                                        Grow During
Hydronephrosis: occurs in 80% of pregnancies (mechanical compression of
the ureters is likely the cause). It tends to affect the right more than the left        Pregnancy:
(dextrorotation of the pregnant uterus).
                                                                                        Babies
Fibroids: Fibroids tend to grow in early pregnancy secondary to elevated                Splenic Artery
estrogen. Progesterone will have the opposite effect, inhibiting growth, in later
pregnancy. Stretching of the uterus may affect the arterial blood supply and             Aneurysms
promote infarcts and cystic degeneration.                                               Renal AMLs
                                                                                        Fibroids

Uterine Rupture: You see this most commonly in the 3'``>trimester at the site of prior c-section.
Other risk factors worth knowing are the unicomuate uterus, prior uterine curettage, "trapped
uterus" (persistent retroflexion from adhesions), and interstitial implantation.

HELLP Syndrome: Hemolysis, Elevated Liver Enzymes, Low Platelets. This is the most severe
form of pre-eclampsia, and favors young primigravid women in their trimester. It's bad news and
20-40% end up with DIC. If they are going to show this, it will be as a subcapsular hepatic hematoma in
pregnant (or recently pregnant) women.

Peripartum Cardiomyopathy: This is a dilated cardiomyopathy that is seen in the last month of

pregnancy to 5 months postpartum. The cardiac MRI findings include a global depressed fijnction, and
non-vascular territory subepicardial late Gd enhancement - corresponding to cellular lymphocytic
infiltration.

Sheehan Syndrome: This is pituitary apoplexy seen in postpartum female who suffer from large
volume hemorrhage (causing acute hypotension). The pituitary grows during pregnancy, and if you
have an acute hypotensive episode you can stroke it out (it bleeds). The look on MR is variable
depending on the time period, acute it will probably be T1 bright (if they show a picture). Ring
enhancement around an empty sella is a late look.

Ovarian Vein Thrombophlebitis: This can be a cause of postpartum fever. Risk factors
include C-section and endometritis. The right side is affected five times more often than the left. They
could show you an enlarged ovary and a thrombosed adjacent ovarian vein.

Retained Products of Conception: The typical clinical s t o r y ______________
is continued bleeding after delivery (or induced abortion). The most
common appearance is an echogenic mass within the uterine cavity. The
presence or absence of flow is variable, you can have lots or none. A
sneaky way to show this is irregular thickening of the endometrium
(>10mm) with some reflective structures and shadowing - representing
the fetal parts. You can also think about RPOC when the endometrial
thickness is > 5 mm following dilation and curettage. Testable
associations include: medical termination of pregnancy (abortion), 2nd
trimester miscarriage, and placenta acereta.

Endometritis - Broadly speaking, it is an inflammation or infection of the endometrium. The history
will be (if you are given one) fever, and uterine tenderness and recent c-section (or prolonged labor). On
ultrasound you will see a thickened, heterogenous endometrium, with or without fluid / air.

467
