                S E C T IO N 1:

                  A drenal

Anatomy: The adrenal glands are paired retroperitoneal glands that sit on each kidney. The right
gland is triangular in shape, and the left gland tends to be more crescent shaped. If the kidney is
congenitally absent the glands will be more flat, straight, discoid, or "pancake " in appearance. Each
gland gets arterial blood from three arteries (superior from the inferior phrenic, middle from the aorta,
and inferior from the renal artery). The venous drainage is via just one main vein (on the right into the

IVC, on the left into the left renal vein).

Cortex                            Zona Glomerulosa           Step 1 Trivia:
       Medulla                                      There are 4 zones to the
                                  Zona Fasciculata  adrenal, each of which
                                                    makes different stuff.
                mm Zona Reticularis
                                                    · Zona Glomerulosa:
                                    Medulla           Makes Aldosterone -
                                                      prolonged stimulation
                                                      here leads to hypertrophy.

                                                    · Zona Fasciculata:
                                                      Makes Cortisol

                                                    · Zona Reticularis:
                                                      Makes Androgens

                                                    · Medulla: Makes
                                                      Catecholamines

Age related trivia: The relative size of the adrenal changes as you age.
· Second Trimester: Adrenal is Half the Size of the Kidney
· Third Trimester: Adrenal is 1/3 the Size of the Kidney
· Adulthood: Adrenal is 1/13 the Size of the Kidney

Normal Ultrasound:
In babies, the cortex is hypoechoic, and
the medulla is hyperechoic. This gives the
adrenal a triple stripe appearance (dark
cortex, bright medulla, dark cortex).

                Normal Adrenal - Hypoechoic Cortex, Hyperechoic Medulla, Hypoechoic Cortex
                                                                            - like an Oreo, with a cream filling.

                                                    All
         Adrenal Ultrasound Gases - eamesmanshlp

If you see a Pediatric Adrenal Cases you should think about: (a) normal,
(b) congenital, (c) neuroblastoma, (d) hemorrhage, and (e) hyperplasia.

Normal : As discussed on the prior page, will have the "Y" shape and a
normal triple stripe appearance on Ultrasound.

Congenital : There are three classic congenital cases:

· Pancake (Discoid) - 1discussed this in the renal chapter (page 357). If the
   kidney is absent the "Y" shape doesn't form. An elongated flat (pancake)
   adrenal is seen with congenital absence of the kidney.

   Horseshoe - Just like you can get a horseshoe kidney, you can get a horseshoe
   adrenal. This occurs when the limbs of the adrenal glands fuse in the midline,
   and is associated with asplenia (right isomerism). Remember, they can show
   you bilateral trilobed lungs, a horizontal midline liver, an absent spleen,
   malrotation, and congenital heart disease (total anomalous pulmonary venous
   return - most commonly) -- all in association with this horseshoe adrenal
   gland. In fact, I would guess that is the most likely way this would be asked.
   Example, show you a bilateral trilobed lung and ask what the adrenal look like.

   Adrenal Cyst: I'm not sure this is truly congenital - maybe "developmental"
   is a better term. Just like a kidney can get cysts, adrenals can also. They are
   almost always benign. Having said that, in a newborn - they usually get
   resected because you can't tell them apart from cystic neuroblastoma. If there
   has been a history of hematoma, sometimes they watch them to see if they
   will resolve. In an adult, incidentally found, obviously they aren't a
   neuroblastoma - those are ok (probably).

Neuroblastoma:                                                                      ·#

I talk about this a ton in the peds chapter. To rehash the important
parts, they form in the adrenal medulla (usually), and typically look
like an enlarged gland with a hyperechoic component. Having said
that they can have cystic components and look like hemorrhage.
"Complex cystic mass" is a good way to describe these. For the
purpose of multiple choice I'd go with hyperechoic.

                473
Hemorrhage:

This occurs most commonly in the setting o f trauma or stress
(neonates). What this typically looks like on ultrasound is an
enlarged gland with an anechoic component. With time, the
clot changes and it can be more and more anechoic. So
basically, it can look like anything but for the purpose o f
multiple choice I 'd go with anechoic.

Second order path type trivia/knowledge:

S tress: It's classically seen after a breech birth, but can also be seen with fetal distress, and
congenital syphilis. Imaging features change based on the timing o f hemorrhage.
Calcification is often the end result (that could be shown on CT or MR). It should be
avascular. This can occur bilaterally, but favors the right side (75%).

Classic Next Step: Serial ultrasounds (or MRI) can differentiate it from a cystic
neuroblastoma. The hemorrhage will get smaller (cancer will not).

So which is it? Serial ultrasound or M RI? - If forced to pick you w ant serial ultrasounds. It's
cheaper and doesn't require sedation.

Trauma: This is going to be an adult (in the setting o f trauma). M ost likely it will be shown
on CT. It's more com mon on the right.

   Waterhouse-Friderichsen Syndrom e - Hemorrhage o f the adrenal in the setting of

M  fulminant meningitis (from Neisseria Meningitidis).

Hyperplasia:                                                      Cerebriform Pattern

W hat this typically looks like on ultrasound is a "big adrenal"
that "looks like a brain." So what does "b ig " mean ? M ost
sources will say longer than 20mm, and a limb that is thicker
than 4 mm (although this is debated - and will likely not be
asked). For the purpose o f multiple choice I would say that if
they stick calibers on it. then it is too big.

So w hat does "looks like a brain " m ean ? That means the
surface is wrinkled, like it has gyri and sulci.

                                          474
Adrenal Hyperplasia Trivia:                                                      Bilateral Solid
                                                                               Testicular Masses
21-Hydroxylase Deficiency: Congenital adrenal hypertrophy is
caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency in > 90% of cases. It will manifest       Congenital Adrenal
clinically as either genital ambiguity (girls) or some salt losing pathology      Hyperplasia
(boys). The salt losing can actually be life threatening. The look on
imaging is adrenal limb width greater than 4mm. In some cases you lose           Adrenal Rests
the central hyperechoic stripe (the whole thing looks like cortex).

  · I say "Genital ambiguity",
     you say 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency

Too Much Cortisol from overproduction of ACTH - which results in bilateral adrenal gland
hyperplasia. If someone wanted to be a real asshole they could get into the weeds with vocabulary.
For example, the "Disease" vs "Syndrome" THIS vs THAT:

·Cushing Disease: This is an overproduction of ACTH by a pituitary adenoma, resulting in
  too much cortisol. This is actually the most common cause of excess cortisol (75%).

·Cushing Syndrome: The "syndrome" is basically a variety of causes resulting in common
  symptoms. So you can have overproduction o f ACTH by an ACTH secreting tumor (classic step
  1 example is the small cell lung tumor), or overproduction of ACTH via an adrenal adenoma
  (these cases will not have hyperplasia), or you can have straight up primary adrenal hyperplasia.
  You could even get the "syndrome" by taking chronic high dose steroids. Any way you end up
  with a fat moon face and big gross lines all over you belly counts as "syndrome."

Adrenal Mass Mimic:

Infradiaphragmatic extralobar sequestration is the classic mimic of an adrenal mass on imaging.
The ultrasound will show a heterogeneous suprarenal mass. It is really hard to tell this from an adrenal
mass without any "hints." Examples of hints:

Classic extra lobar sequestration history "male neonatal with respiratory distress and cyanosis. "

CT picture clearly showing the blood supply from
the aorta (or branches of the aorta):

475
Summary / Rapid Review--

       Normal:

          - Triple Stripe
              - Hypoechoic Cortex,
               Hyperechoic Medulla,
              " Hypoechoic Cortex

          - Smooth Surface

       Hyperplasia:

          - Big (longer than 20mm)
           Looks like a brain (wrinkled surface)
          - Can sometimes lose the central bright layer
          - "Genital ambiguity", = 21-OH Deficiency

       Hemorrhage:

          - Big with an anechoic (or echogenic) component
           Gets smaller over time
          - Seen with "stress" or trauma

       Neuroblastoma:

           - Big with an echogenic (or anechoic) component
           - Does NOT gets smaller over time

                       476
                        Adrenal Adenoma:

These things are easily the most common tumor in the adrenal gland. Up to 8% o f people
have them. Proving it is an adenom a is an annoying (testable) problem.

     * Non-Contrast; Less than 10 HU
     * Contrast: Two options:

Absolute Washout

Enhanced CT - Delayed CT

                             X 100  Greater than 60% = Adenoma

Enhanced CT - Unenhanced CT

      Relative Washout              Greater than 40% = Adenoma
Enhanced CT - Delayed CT x 100

Enhanced CT

Hypervascular mets (usually renal, less likely HCC) can mimic adenoma washout.
Portal venous HU values > 120 should make you think about a met.

Along those lines Pheochrom ocytom as can also exhibit washout. The trick is the same,
if you are getting HU measurements > 120 on arterial or portal venous phase you can
NOT call the thing an adenoma.

MRI; Look for drop out on In and Out o f phase T l.

Adrenal Adenoma -Signal drop out In and Out o f Phase

                                   477
                   Adrenal Adenoma Continued

   Real Life = Mass in Adrenal = Adenoma
  Multiple Choice = Mass in the Adrenal = Possible Fuckery
  Although m ost adenom as are not functional, C ushing's (too much cortisol) and C onn's (too
  much aldosterone) can present as functional adenomas.

           Tips / Tricks:
  Adenoma are usually homogeneous. If they are showing you hemorrhage (in the absence of
  trauma), calcifications, or necrosis you should start thinking about other things.
  Adenomas are usually small (less than 3 cm). The bigger the mass, the more likely it is to
  be a cancer. How big? Most people will say more than 4 cm = 70% chance cancer, and
  more than 6 cm = 85% chance cancer. The exceptions are bulk fat (myelolipomas) or
  biochemical catecholamines in the question stem (pheo) - those can be big.
  Bilateral Small = Probably adenoma
  Bilateral Large = Pheo or Met (Lung cancer)
  Portal Venous Phase HU > 120 = Probably a met (RCC, HCC) or pheo.

"Collision Tumors" - Two different tum ors that smash together to look like one mass.
Usually one o f them is an adenoma. Rem ember adenoma should be homogenous and small.
If you see heterogenous morphology consider that you could have two tumors. FDG PET
and MRI can both usually tell if the tum or is actually a collision o f two different tumors -
those would be the appropriate next steps.
Conn's Syndrome - Syndrome o f excessive aldosterone production. This is most
commonly caused by a benign adenoma (70%). Cortical-carcinoma can also do it, but that
is much more rare and usually accom panied by hypercortisolism.

                                                              478
                                    Pheochromocytoma

Uncommon in real life (common on multiple choice tests). They are usually large at presentation
(larger than 3 cm). The look is variable (heterogenous, homogenous, cystic areas, calcifications,
sometimes even fat). Having said that, the most classic look is a heterogeneous mass with AVID
ENHANCEMENT. On MRI they are T2 bright. Both MIBG and Octreotide could be used (but
MIBG is better since Octreotide also uptakes in the kidney).

Gamesmanship: The hyper
enhancement washout trick. They
could show you what looks like an
adenoma study (multiple phases to
calculate washout) - but with
mega enhancement (HU > 120).
Remember, I don't care what the
flick washout out numbers you get
- if they show you HU
measurements > 120 on arterial or
portal venous phase you can NOT
call the thing an adenoma.

Gamesmanship: This thing isn't      Pheo at the O rgan of Zuckerkandl - 1 2 Bright
always in the adrenals. They can
be extra adrenal (organ of
Zuckerkandl - usually at the IMA).

"Rule of 10s"

10% are extra adrenal (organ o f Zuckerkandl - usually at the IMA), 10% are bilateral, 10%
are in children, 10% are hereditary, 10% are NOT active (no HTN).

"Syndromes"                                                  MEN 2 (subtypes 2a and 2b)

Associated syndromes: First think Von Hippel        Both subtypes of MEN 2 are associated with
Lindau, then think MEN Ila and Ilb. Other           Pheochromocytomas (50% of patients).
things less likely to be tested include NF-1,
Sturge Weber, and IS .                              In the case of MEN 2 they usually occur
                                                    multiple and bilateral.

                                                    MEN 2 + Adrenal Mass = Pheo

% m  S? «>     ·"Carney Triad"
     u -V
% V            ·Extra-Adrenal Pheo, GIST, and Pulmonary Chondroma (hamartoma).
               ·Don't confuse this with the Carney Complex
               (Cardiac Myxoma, and Skin Pigmentation).

                                               479
                      other Misc Adrenal Masses:

Myelolipoma

· Benign tumor that contains bulk fat.
· About Va have calcifications.
· If they are big (> 4 cm) they can bleed, and present with a retroperitoneal hemorrhage.
· Associated with endocrine disorders (Cushings, Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, Conns). Don't get it

  twisted, these tumors are NOT functional, they just happen to have associated disorders about 5-10% of
  the time.

      Gamesmanship:                                                   discontinuous
                                                                 diaphragm artifact
The fat within these
tumors can cause a
speed displacement
artifact on ultrasound
and make the
diaphragm appear
discontinuous.

Sound travels slower
in fat relative to soft
tissue. This confuses
the ultrasound machine
and results in the
discontinuous
diaphragm.

Adrenal Cyst:                 Calcifications:                    Cortical Carcinoma:

You can get cysts in your     This is often the result of prior  · LARGE (4 cm -10 cm),
adrenal. They are often       trauma or infection (TB).
unilateral, and can be any    Certain tumors (cortical           · May be fimctional (Cushings),
size. The really big ones     carcinoma, neuroblastoma,          · Calcify in about 20% of cases.
can bleed. They have a        myelolipoma) can have              · Bad news & met everywhere
thin wall, and do NOT         calcifications. Melanoma
enhance.                      mets are known to calcify.           (direct invasion often first).
                                                                 · As a pearl, an adrenal carcinoma
Mets:                                Wolman Disease:
                                                                   is not likely to be less than 5 cm
Think breast, lung, and       This is a total Aunt Minnie          and often has central necrosis.
melanoma. They have no        (and massive zebra / unicorn).
specific imaging findings     Bilateral enlarged calcified
and look like lipid poor      adrenals. It's a fat
adenomas. If the dude         metabolism error thing that
has a known primary           kills ("booka" - drive by)
(especially lung, breast, or  before the first year of life.
melanoma), and it's not an
adenoma then it's
probably a met.

                              480
