   S E C T IO N 4:

^  T hyroid

The thyroid likes to drink Iodine (it's sort o f its job). Imaging takes advantage o f this with
Iodine analogs. The distinction between "trapping" and "organification" is a com mon
question.

      "Trapping" - A nalog is transported into gland. >231^ 13 and 99mXc all do this.

     * "Organification " - A nalog is oxidized by thyroid peroxidase and bound to tyrosyl
          moiety. '23i and i^il do this. ''mXc does N O T do this. Instead 99mTc slowly washes
          out o f the gland.

Tracer options / pros and cons.

1-131: The m ajor advantage here is that it's cheap as dirt. The disadvantage is that it has a
long h alf life (8 days), and that it's a high energy (364 keV) beta emitter. The high energy
makes a crappy image with a '/i inch crystal. It's ideal for therapy, not for routine imaging.
It's contraindicated in kids and pregnant women.

Trivia: Thyroidform ation takes p lace in fe tu s at 8-12 weeks.

1-123: This guy has a shorter half life (13 hours) and ideal energy (159 keV). It decays via
electron capture and all around makes a prettier image. The problem is that it costs more.

Tc-99m: Remember that this guy is trapped but not organified. Background levels are higher
because only 1-5% o f the tracer is taken up by the thyroid gland. A com m on scenario to
choose Tc over Iodine is when they've had a recent thyroid blocker on board (iodinated
contrast is the sneaky one).

            Random Trivia on Breastfeeding

                              (You know they love this shit):

Tc-99m: You can resume breastfe ed in g in 12-24 hours
T123: You can resume breastfe ed in g in 2-3 days
1-131: You should not breastfe e d - pum p a n d dump.

   514
Iodine Uptake Test:

You give either 5 micro Ci o f 131 or 10-20 m icro Ci o f 123. This is conventionally reported
at 4-6 hours, and 24 hours. Normals are 5-15% (4-6 hours), and 10-35% at 24 hours. A
correction for background is done on m easurem ents prior to 24 hours (using the neck counts
- thigh counts).

Factors affecting the test
      Renal Function (increases stable iodine pool, reduces numbers)
      Dietary Iodine - variable and controversial
      Medications - thyroid blockers, Nitrates, IV Contrast, A m iodarone

        Increased Uptake                                    Decreased Uptake

Graves                                          Primary or secondary causes of Hypothyroidism

Early Hashimoto                                 Renal Failure

Rebound after Abrupt withdrawal of antithyroid  Medications (thyroid blockers, Nitrates, IV
medication                                      Contrast, Amiodarone)

Dietary Iodine Deficiency                       Dietary Iodine Overload

Graves Disease;

About 75% o f the time, if you have hyperthyroidism the

cause is going to be graves. Graves is an autoimm une

disease where an antibody to the thyrotropin receptor

stimulates the thyroid to produce hormone. TSH will be

very low, where T3 and T4 will be high. The classic         !

clinical scenario is a middle aged women with a protracted

course, pre-tibial edema, and exophthalmos. Scintigraphy

is going to give you a hom ogeneously increased gland,

with uptakes increased at both 4 hours and 24 hours.

Sometimes the 24 hour uptake is lower than the 4 hours (or

even at a normal range) - this is from rapid thyroid

hormone production.

Visualization o f the pyram idal lobe: The pyramidal lobe is seen in about 10%
o f normal thyroids. In patients with Graves disease it is seen as much as 45%
o f the time. Therefore, it's suggestive when you see it.

                                                515
Multi-nodular Toxic Goiter (Plummer Disease): The classic scenario is an
elderiy w om en with w eight loss, anxiety, insomnia, and tachycardia. The gland is typically
heterogeneous, with uptake that is only moderately elevated. The nodules will be hot on the
background o f a cold gland.

Toxic Multi-nodular Goiter vs Non-Toxic Multi-nodular goiter:
The toxic goiter will have hot nodules on a background o f cold thyroid. The Non-toxic one
will have warm/hot nodules on a normal background o f the thyroid.

            Graves                                Toxic M ulti-Nodular Goiter

Uptake High ; 70s (typically > 50%)  Uptake Medium High: 40s (typically <50%)

Homogenous                           Heterogeneous

Hashimotos:

The most common cause of goitrous hypothyroidism (in the US). It is an autoimmune
disease that causes hyper first then hypothyroidism second (as the gland bum s out later). It's
usually hypo - when it's seen. It has an increased risk o f prim ary thyroid lymphoma.
Step 1 trivia; associated with autoantibodies to thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and anti-
thyroglobulin. The appearance o f the hypothyroid gland is typically an inhom ogeneous gland
with focal cold areas. The hyperthyroid (acute) gland looks very much like Graves with
diffusely increased tracer.

Subacute Thyroiditis:

If you have a viral prodrome followed by hyperthyroidism, and then thyroid uptake scan

shows a DECREASED % RAIU you have de Quervains (Granulomatous thyroiditis).

During this acute phase, the disease can mimic Graves with a low TSH, high T3 and high

T4. The difference is the uptake scan. A fter the gland bum s out, it m ay stay hypothyroid or

recover. If they ask you about this, it's m ost likely going to try and fool you into saying

Graves based on the labs, but have a low % RAIU.

                                                    Solitary Nodules

Hot Nodule vs Cold Nodule:                          20-40% Cold Nodules = Cancer

                                                    < Warm Nodules = Cancer

Most thyroid nodules are actually cold, and therefore most are benign (colloid, cysts, etc..).
In fact, cold nodules in a multi-nodular goiter are even less likely to be cancer compared to
a single cold nodule. Having said that, cold nodules are much more likely to be cancer
when compared to a functional (warm) nodule.

Discordant Nodule: This is a nodule that is HOT on Tc^^ but COLD on I '23. Because some
cancers can maintain their ability to trap, but lose the ability to organify a hot nodule on Tc,
it shouldn't be considered benign until you show that it's also hot on I'23.

                                     516
                ^ Gamesmanship: Iodine vs Tc ^

A classic move is to show you a thyroid that will take up Tc, but NOT Iodine on 24 hour
imaging. This can be from a couple o f things: (1) congenital enzyme deficiency that
inhibits organification, (2) a drug like propylthiouracil that blocks organification.

Now if they ju st show you an Iodine Thyroid with low uptake on 24 hours, this is de
Quervains, or a burned out Hashimotos.

        Radioiodine Tiierapy

can be used to treat both m ahgnant and non-malignant thyroid disease.

Cancer

Actual subtypes and pathology o f thyroid cancer have been discussed at length in the
endocrine chapter. However, ju st a few points that are relevant to discuss here. Papillary is
the m ost com m on subtype (papillary is popular), and it does well with surgery + 1-131.
M edullary thyroid CA (the one the M ENs get), does N O T drink the 1-131 and therefore
doesn't respond well to radiotherapy. Prior treatm ent can also make you m ore resistant to
treatment, and re-treatment dosing is typically 50% more than the original dose.

Things that make you treatment resistant:
 Medullary Subtype CA (will not drink the tracer)
 History o f prior 1-131 ("easy gland has been killed o f f ')
 History o f Methimazole treatment (even if years ago)

So, normally the patient gets diagnosed and                  IVledullary Subtype CA
then they go for surgery. After surgery they
will come to nuclear medicine. You expect       Neuroendocrine in origin, so can occasionally
that they will have some residual thyroid       (around 10%) have uptake on MIBG or
(it's really hard to get it all out). Prior to  Octreotide. They will be cold on thyroid scan
actually treating them you will give them a     and don't drink the treatment 1-131. If forced
tiny dose o f 1-131 to see how much thyroid     to pick - I 'd go with Octreoscan for medullary
they have left. If the uptake is less than 5%   CA.
this is ideal. Uptake m ore than 5% will
result in a painful ablation (may need          The more aggressive the tumor, the more
steroids on top o f the NSAIDs) and may         useful PET CT is. It trends with calcitonin:
need to go back to the OR. Next, you will        If the calcitonin is > 1000 PET is sensitive.
treat them. You want their TSH really            If the calcitonin is < 500 , it is shit.
ramped up. The higher the TSH the thirstier
the cancer /residual thyroid tissue. An ideal   Associated with MEN 2a and 2b
TSH is like 50 (30 w ould be a minimum).

                                                517
                           Radioiodine Therapv - Continued

How do you get the TSH up?
      There are two ways;
               o (1) is to stop the thyroid hormone (post op they are obviously hypothyroid),
               0 (2) is to give recombinant TSH "Thyrogen."

How do you decide on dosing?
      Dosing is dependent on the stage o f the disease; 100 for thyroid only, 150 for thyroid
          + nodes, 200 for distal. They are told about the precautions e tc ... Then you give them
          the dose. Before you let them go home, you test them to see if they need to go to the
          hospital.

So when do patients need to be adm itted to the hospital?
      NRC limit is 7mR/h measured at 1 meter from the patient's chest (some agreement
          states use 5 mR/h). The number to remember is 33 mCi of residual activity (or 30
          mCi in some strict agreement states).

Possible Side Effects o f Treatment:
      Can cause pulmonary fibrosis if given to patient with lung mets. This is really only
          the case o f macro-nodular disease (as opposed to micronodular disease). That isn't
          necessarily a contraindication
      Sjogrens have a greater risk of salivary gland damage
      Salivary gland damage is dose related - so cancer treatment patients have a greater risk

What routes does the body use to eliminate f ^ '?
      Urine is the main way it is eliminated but sweat, tears, saliva, and breast milk are other
          routes.

I f they d o n 't need to be adm itted to the hospital, what precautions should they take?
     * There is a whole bunch o f crap they are asked to do. Drink lots o f water (increase renal
          excretion). Suck on hard candy (keep radiotracer from jacking your salivary glands).
          Patients are encouraged to stay away from people (distance principal). Sleep alone for
          3 days (no sex, no kissing - keep that dirty dick in your pants!). Good bathroom
          hygiene (flush twice, and sit down if you are a guy). Use disposable utensils and
          plates. Clothes and linens should be washed separately. M ost o f these things are done
          for 3 days.

Is it ok to breastfeed? Is it ok to try and get pregnant?
      No breast feeding. If you take your breast feeding days are over
          (at least this time around).
      No getting pregnant for at least 6-12 months after therapy

                                                                 518
Radioiodine Tiierapy - Continued

Other Trivia:                                                                  Gamesmanship
 If you participated in the therapy, you need your thyroid checked      - Iodine Post Treatment -

  24 hours later.                                                      If you see an Iodine Scan,
 If the patient got admitted to the hospital the RSO needs to         and you see uptake in the
                                                                       liver , this is ALWAYS a post
  inspect the room after discharge before the janitor can clean it or  treatment scan.
  the next patient can move in.
 Thyroglobulin is a lab test to monitor for recurrence. Anything
  over zero - after thyroidectomy, is technically abnormal,
  although the trend is more important (going up is bad)
 Severe uncontrolled thyrotoxicosis and pregnancy are
  absolute contraindications.

                      C lassic Scenario - Patient is on dialysis and needs Rx

Give 1131 immediately following dialysis to maxim ize the time the I'^i is on board. Decrease
dose as there is limited (essentially no) excretion until next dialysis. D ialysate can go down
sewer. Dialysis tubing needs to stay in storage.

Hyperthyroidism:                                                      Why not just treat if they are
                                                                 experiencing severe thyrotoxicosis ?
I'3i can also be used to treat hyperthyroidism. Dosing depends
on the etiology; 15 mCi for Graves (more vascular), 30 mCi      Supposedly you should never treat
for multi nodular (harder to treat the capsule). Again the TSH  severe thyrotoxicosis because you risk a
must be high for the therapy to be effective. By 3-4 months,    thyroid storm (fever, hypertension,
there should be clinical evidence of resolution of signs and    etc). Most people will say to block
symptoms of hyperthyroidism, if 1-131 therapy was               them with meds, and cool them off.
successful.                                                     Having said that, the risk of a true
                                                                storm is probably exaggerated and you
As an aside, there is no such thing as an "emergent             will hear people say "fuck it dude, treat
hyperthyroid treatment." You can always use meds to cool it     them" ... but even the wildest gun
down. The standard medication is Methimazole. However, if       slingers will still give beta blockers to
there is an allergy to Methimazole, the patient is having WBC   reduce the risk of cardiac
issues (side effect is neutropenia) or the patient is pregnant  complications.
-use propylthiouracil (PTU). PTU is recommended during
pregnancy.

What about Thyroid Eye Disease? It's controversial, but some people believe that thyroid eye
disease will worsen after 1-131 treatment. If you are prompted, I would just have opthal look at
their eyes, bad outcome is likely severity related. *You might not want to treat a bug-eyed dude
(depends on who you ask).

Wolff-ChaikoffEffect: Since we are talking about hyperthyroid treatment, there is no better time than
to discuss the W.C. effect. Essentially, this is a reduction in thyroid hormone levels caused by ingestion
of a large amount of iodine. The Wolff-Chaikoff effect lasts several days (around 10 days), after which
it is followed by an "escape phenomenon." The W.C. effect can be used as a treatment principle
against hyperthyroidism (especially thyroid storm) by infusion of a large amount of iodine to suppress
the thyroid gland. The physiology of the W.C. effect also explains why hypothyroidism is sometimes
produced in patients taking several iodine-containing drugs, including amiodarone.

519
