                                        SECTION 7:

                                      GI N U K E S

Gastric Emptying : Believe it or not, this study is                Standard Meal
actually considered the "gold standard" to evaluate gastric     4 oz o f Egg Whites
motor function. The primary indication is typically             2 Slices o f White Bread
gastroparesis (usually in a diabetic). The exam should be       Strawberry Jam
performed fasting (at least 4 hours). Some texts say that it

should be done in the first 10 days o f the menstrual cycle to  Water

prevent hormones from interfering (I'm sure this                Tc Sulfur Colloid

recommendation is evidence based). M ost commonly Tc

labeled sulfur colloid is used on a standardized liquid meal,

solid meal (egg whites), or both. Solids are more sensitive, but you can have emptying

problems from liquids only and

normal emptying from solids.          Solid Phase                      Liquid Phase

Gamesmanship: One sneaky way          Time
to test this would be related to the
differences between solid food
and liquid food curves. The main
point is that solids have a "lag
phase" in which the stomach
helps grind up the food into
smaller parts (liquids don't have
this). Lag Time can be increased
in diabetic patients.

Gamesmanship: Another possible question is that "attenuation correction" plays a role in
calculation of emptying times, as movement from the back of the stomach to the front can
increase counts due to attenuation.

Pharmacology Trivia:
и Prokinetic drugs (which enhance gastric emptying) metoclopramide (Reglan), tegaserod

   (Zelnorm), erythromycin, and domperidone (Motilium) are stopped at least 2 days prior
   to the test. - this can cause a false negative exam.
и Opiates (which delay gastric emptying) are stopped 2 days prior to the test. These can
   cause a false positive exam.
и Anticholinergic/ Antispasmodic drugs such as Donnatal, Bentyl, Robinul, and Levsin, are
   stopped for 2 days prior to the test
и Serotonin receptor antagonists - the classic one being Ondansetron (Zofran) are fine and can
   be given prior to the exam.

Esophageal Transit: Used (rarely) in the evaluation o f esophageal motility disorders.
The supposed advantage is the ability to give quantitative information. The patient is made to
fast overnight, then fed Tc-99 sulfur colloid. Dynamic imaging is performed and transit time
and /or residual esophageal activity is measured.

                                                  530
Gl Bleeding:                                                               GI bleed scan sensitivity

The goal of a GI bleeding scan is to localize the bleed (not to say there     =0.7 ml/min
is one). Bleeding scan is sensitive to GI bleed rates as low as at 0.1
ml/min (Mesenteric angiography requires 1-1.5 ml/min bleeding).            .  ии и _

First Some Technical Stuff (Very Boring and High Yield)                    Angiogram sensitivity -

                                                                              1.0 ml/min

Before the Tc-99 can be tagged to a RBC {beta chain o f the hemoglobin)', it must first be reduced.
This is accomplished with stannous ion (tin). This is referred to as "tinning." There are 3 methods:

In Vivo

     1. Tin (stannous ion) is injected into the patient
     2. Then Tc-99m pertechnetate is injected
     3. Tin binds to the hem oglobin then reduces the Tc (which then binds)

Although the process is super simple, you only get about 60-80% o f it bound. So you have
a lot o f free Tc and a dirty image (poor target to background).Sometimes it fails miserably
(via drug interaction - heparinized tubing, or recent IV contrast).The images are too
crappy for cardiac wall motion studies, but can work for GI bleeding.

In Vivo - In Vitro (M odified M ethod)

     1. Tin (stannous ion) is injected into the patient
     2. After 15-30 mins, you pull 3-5 cc o f blood out o f an IV line into a syringe with both

          Tc-99m pertechnetate and an anticoagulant
     3. It's then re-injected 10 mins later

This one does a little better, binding close to 85%. Drug interactions (like heparin) are the
most common cause o f failure.

In Vitro

Blood is w ithdraw n and added to a kit with both Tin (stannous ion) and Tc. It's then reГ
injected. This m ethod works the best (98% binding), but is the m ost expensive.

Image Acquisition: GI bleeding scan is acquired with DYNAM IC imaging (as opposed to 5
min static, transmission, SPECT, or dual tracer protocol). This allows the detection of
intermittent bleeds and better localization o f the origin o f the bleed.

531
Reading the Study: You are looking for;           You can get faked out by a lot of stuff; renal
(1) Tracer outside the vascular distribution      or bladder excretion (possibly with hydro),
                                                  transplant kidney (classic trick - but again it
(2) Tracer that Moves like bowel                  won't move), varices or angiodysplasia (these
(can be antegrade or retrograde)                  shouldn't move), a penis with blood in it (this
                                                  will look like a penis), hemangioma (this will
(3) Tracer that Increases Intensity over time     be over the liver or spleen - and not move),
                                                  and the last trick - Free Tc in the stomach.
 The distal colon is an exception to the rule of
mobility -- tracer here may not move.             It you see gastric uptake* next look at the
                                                  salivary glands and thyroid to confirm it's
                                                  free Tc, and not an actual bleed.

                                                       5 min.  30 min.

Normal Scan - No Abnormal Tracer                  Abnormal Scan - Abnormal Tracer
Accumulation. Normal Uptake in Blood              accumulation at the Hepatic Flexure,
Pool, Liver, & Heart.                             increases over time. SMA territory.

Rapid Review of Vascular Territories (localization on GI bleed exam helps direct
angiographic therapy to the specific vascular territory -- plus it's an easy w ay to ask a
multiple choice question).

и Celiac: Distal Esophagus, Stomach, 1st part o f the Duodenum
и SMA: 2nd - 4th Parts of the Duodenum, the rest o f the small and large bowel to the

  transverse colon at the level o f the splenic flexure.
и IMA: Distal 1/3 o f the Transverse Colon to the Proxim al Rectum

Alternative (Stone Age) Way o f D oing A Bleeding Scan; Back w hen dinosaurs roam ed the
earth, they used to do bleeding scans with Tc Sulfur Colloid. This had a variety o f
disadvantages: fast clearance (had to do scan in 30 mins), multiple blind spots (the stomach,
splenic flexure, and hepatic flexures - as sulfur colloid goes to the liver and spleen normally).
The only possible advantages are that it requires less prep and has good target to background.

                                                  532
Meckel Scan:

The Meckel Diverticulum is a remnant o f the
omphalomesenteric duct located near the
distal ileum. These things can have ectopic
gastric mucosa and present with painless
bleeding in the pediatric population.
Pertechnetate is used because it is taken up
by gastric mucosal cells. So you are looking
for tracer uptake in the pelvis (usually RLQ)
around the same time as the stomach.

Only about 10-30% o f Meckels diverticulum
will have eastric mucosa (these are the ones
most likely to bleed).

                                                    Meckel Scan

       Here are the Tricks:

 * You need to do the study when the patient is NOT bleeding (if they are bleeding -
     then do a bleeding scan).

* Pre-Treatment. You can use a bunch of different stuff to make the exam better:
          0 Pentagastrin - enhances uptake o f pertechnetate by gastric mucosa (also
               stimulated GI activity)
          O H2 Blockers (Cimetidine and Ranitidine) block secretion o f the pertechnetate
               out o f the gastric cells m aking it stick around longer.
          O Glucagon - slows gastric motility.

* False Positive: Can occur from bowel irritation (recent scope, laxative use)

* False Negative-. R ecent In vivo labeling o f RBCs , Recent Barium Study
    (attenuated)

                                               533
HIDA Scan:

Function and integrity of the biliary system can be evaluated by using Tc-99m labeled tracers that mimic
bilirubin's uptake, transport, and excretion. All the tracers are basically analogs of this iminodiacetic acid
stuff. Trivia: You need higher doses o f tracer if the patient has hyperbilirubinemia

Prep for the test is diet control. You need to have not eaten within four hours (so your gallbladder is ready
to fill), and have eaten within 24 hours (so your gallbladder isn't so full, it can't let any tracers in). If you
haven't eaten for over 24 hours, then CCK can be given. CCK makes the GB contract.
Normally, the liver will have prompt tracer uptake (within 5 minutes), then you will have excretion into
the ducts, then the bowel - pretty much the same time you see the gallbladder. If the gallbladder is sick
(obstructed), it will still not have filled within 60 min. This is the basic idea.

A. A % 1min                                                            w
                                10 min  20 min
                                                           60 min V ^

A cute C holecystitis: Almost always (95%) patients with acute cholecystitis have an obstructed cystic
duct. If you can't get tracer in the gallbladder within 4 hours, this suggests obstruction.

                                10 min   1

    ....                                20 min

1 min

Rim Sign                                                   Cystic Duct Sign:

A curved area of increased activity along the gallbladder  This sign is seen with acute
fossa (hot rim, or pericholecystic hepatic activity sign)  cholecystitis. The sign describes a nub
suggests a more angry gallbladder - (supposedly seen in    of activity in the cystic duct, with the
20% of gangrenous cholecystitis).                          remaining duct obstructed.

Mechanism of the Rim Sign: The mechanism is the
result o f inflammation causing regional hepatic
hyperemia, with more radiopharmaceutical being
delivered to this area o f hepatic parenchyma

                                        534
Chronic Cholecystitis: This can be shown two ways; (1) delayed fiUing o f the GB (not
seen at 1 hour, but seen at 4 hours), or (2) with a low EF (< 30%) with CCK stimulation. A
reduced EF can also be seen in acute acalculous cholecystitis.

               Testable Trivia

A - The Dose o f CCK: 0.02 m icrogram/kg over 60 mins
                  - The Dose o f Morphine 0.02-0.04 mg/kg over 30-60 mins

Biliary Obstruction: The classic w ay to show this is a lack o f visualization o f the
biliary tree - sometimes call a "L/ver Scan S ig n " It's caused by back pressure in an
obstructed CBD.

1 min  10 min  2 0 min                                                            60 min

       Prompt Uptake - With Delayed Excretion (Medication)
       Cholestatic jaundice can be drug induced. The classic offenders:

       Chlorpromazine, Erythromycin, Birth Control (Estrogens), Anabolic
       Steroids, and sometimes Statins. This can mimic biliary obstruction.

THIS vs THAT: Biliary Atresia VS Neonatal Hepatitis

If you see a hepatobiliary scan (HID A) in a kid, for sure this is the indication. Apparently,
these two things are hard to tell apart clinically. I f you see tracer in the bowel it's hepatitis,
but just remember that it might be slow so you need super delays (24 hours if necessary). If
you don't see it in the bowel, you m ight still need to repeat the study if you did n 't charge up
those hepatocytes with some phenobarb (up regulates the cytochrome system). In other
words, a lot o f places pre-medicate with phenobarbital to increase the utility o f the test. If
you operate early (Kasai procedure) they do a lot better, so it's im portant not to screw this up.

Trivia: Dose o f Phenobarb to prime the liver = 5 mg/kg x 5 days                  Technically it's 2.5 mg/kg
                                               "5 fo r 5 keeps the liver alive "  twice a day - but that
                                                                                  doesn't rhyme

               535
Bile Leak                                 r f -r

You can use HIDA tracer after
trauma or surgery to look for bile
leak. The trick is that you need
delayed images, and look in the right
paracolic gutter / pelvis. You can get
tracer in the gallbladder fossa,
mimicking a gallbladder.

Reappearing Liver Sign - Labeled
bile may track superiorly into the
peri-hepatic space and coat the
surface o f the liver. This can give the
appearance of paradoxically
increasing activity in tlie liver after
an initial decrease in activity from
liver emptying into the bowel.

                            HIDA Scan - Rapid Path Summary:

       No Bowel Activity, Persistent Blood Pool = Hepatocyte Dysfunction (Hepatitis)
     No Bowel Activity, Blood Pool Goes Away Normally = Common Duct Obstruction

       No Gallbladder Activity x 4 hours (or 1 hour + morphine) = Acute Cholecystitis
                    Abnormal GB emptying (EF < 30%) = Chronic Cholecystitis

                                                  Narcotics

Most people will say something like - "hold the morphine for at least 6 hours -- or 3 half lives -
prior to the HIDA scan." Having said that narcotics alone should not prevent you from seeing the
gallbladder. What narcotics can do is delay bowel visualization by triggering the sphincter of oddi
to contract. This can mimic a biliary obstruction.
Don't get it twisted - morphine is not the devil - it is a tool. Remember you will give morphine to
help promote visualization of the gallbladder in the scenario where there is dumping of the tracer
into the small bowel, but no GB activity seen.
Never inject CCK and morphine within 30 minutes of one another. Why Not ? It would be bad.
Try to imagine all life as you know it stopping instantaneously and every molecule in your
body exploding at the speed of light-- Total protonic reversal.

                                            Elevated Bilirubin
Elevated bilirubin (total > 5mg/dl) will increase the number of non-diagnostic/inconclusive and
false negative exams.
Gamesmanship: Increased renal activity can suggest elevated bilirubin
Next Step: Alternative agents DISIDA and BROMIDA are preferred over HIDA in the setting of
high levels o f bilirubin

                                                               536
Sulfur Colloid Liver Scan

Not frequently done because of the modem invention of CT. Sulfur Colloid tagged with Tc is quickly
eaten by the liver's reticuloendothelial system. It can be used to see "hot" and "cold" areas in the liver.

Classically, the multiple choice question is Focal Nodular Hyperplasia is Hot on sulfur colloid
(although in reality it's only hot 30-40% of the time).

Hepatic Adenoma       Sulfur Colloid Liver Scan
FNH                                           COLD
Cavernous Hemangioma                          40% HOT, 30% COLD, 30% Neutral
HCC                                           COLD (RBC Scan HOT)
Cholangiocarcinoma                            COLD (Gallium HOT)
Mets                                          COLD
Abscess                                       COLD
Focal Fat                                     COLD (Gallium HOT)
                                              CO Uy(XeH O T)

Particle size is worth discussing briefly. Particles for this scan need to be 0.1 - 1.0 micrometers. This
is the right size for the liver to eat them. If they are too big the spleen will eat them, and if they are too
small the bone marrow will eat them. Also, realize that if they were too big they would get stuck in the
lungs like a VQ on the first pass through.

Colloid Shift - In a normal sulfur colloid scan, 85% of the colloid is taken up by the liver (10%
spleen, 5% bone marrow). In the setting of diffuse hepatic dysfunction, portal hypertension,
hypersplenism, or bone marrow activation you can see change in uptake - shift to the spleen and bone
marrow. The most specific causes of colloid shift are cirrhosis, diffuse liver mets, diabetes, and blunt
trauma to the spleen.

Diffuse Pulmonary Activity - This is not normal localization of sulfur colloid. This is non-specific
and can be seen with a ton of things (most commonly diffuse liver disease), but the first thing you
should think (on multiple choice) is excess aluminum in the colloid. It can also be seen in primary
pulmonary issues (reflecting phagocytosis by pulmonary macrophages).

Renal Activity on Sulfur Colloid = The most common cause is CHF {maybe due to decreased renal
bloodflow andfiltration pressure). Alternatively, in the setting of renal transplant - this can
indicate rejection {due to colloid entrapment within thefibrin thrombi o f the microvasculature).
Other more rare causes include coxsackie B viral infection, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy,
and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.

                      537
Hemangioma Scan

You can "prove" a liver lesion is a hem angiom a with a Tc Labeled RBC scan.

Why would you do that instead o f using M R l or C T 7 W ell... lots o f reasons.

(1) Maybe you got sucked into an interdimensional vortex and landed in an alternate reality
     where Taco Bell makes better French Fries than McDonalds, A dolf Hitler cured cancer,
     MRI and CT were never invented, and only scintigraphy is available for the
     characterization o f hemangiomas.

(2) O r... or., uhhh maybe you uhhh had a stroke and lost access to the part o f your brain that
     remembers how to read M R or CT.

(3) Or., maybe you are trying to win a bet.

So, you can see why it would be reasonable to ask about this on an intermediate level exam.

H ow is this study done ? Using Tc labeled RBCs w ith anterior and posterior projection
images. Delayed blood pool is typically done (30 mins - 3 hours).

What i f it is sm all ? "Small" is actually the most common reason for a false negative exam.
You need the thing to be at least 1.5cm, otherwise your sensitivity really drops o ff (that's
what she said) You could try SPECT but first you seriously need to consider what you are
doing with your life.

What is the classic look ? You w ant to see m arked HOT on delays, with no real hot spot
on immediate flow or immediate pool. Angiosarcoma could be HOT on delays but would
also be hot on flow. A partially fibrosed hem angiom a may be a false negative.

Spleen Scan

You can use Tc Sulfur Colloid or heat dam aged Tc labeled RBCs to localize to the spleen. A
possible indication might be hunting ectopic spleen.

Fatty Changes

A fatty liver can alter the distribution o f several tracer. Examples:

и Reduced uptake in the Liver on Tc Sulfur Colloid - including the possible reversal o f
   normal liver > spleen uptake pattern (Colloid Shift).

и There will be increased uptake in a fatty liver w ith X enon 133.
и Trivia - FDG-PET uptake in the liver is not altered by background steatosis.

                                                                 538
