                                       S E C T IO N 3:
                                      Pulm onary

If 1940 calls and wants to rule out a PE, you'll want to get the angiography room ready. In 2014,
textbooks and papers still frequently lead with the following statement "Pulmonary angiography is
the definitive diagnostic modality and reference standard in the diagnosis o f acute PE. " In reality,
pulmonary angiography is almost never done, and CTPA is the new diagnostic test of choice. V/Q
scan is usually only done if the patient is allergic to contrast or has a very low GFR. The primary
reason V/Q isn't done is that it's often intermediate probability, and the running joke is that if you
don't know how to read one, just say it's intermediate and you'll probably be right.
The idea behind the test is that you give two tracers; one for ventilation and one for perfusion. If you
have areas of ventilated lung that are not being perfused, that may be due to PE. Normally
Ventilation and Perfusion are matched, with a normal gradient (less perfusion to the apex - when
standing).

Tracers:

Perfusion: For perfusion, Te-99m macroaggregated albumin (Tc-99m MAA) is the most common
tracer used. MAA is prepared by heat denaturation of human serum albumin, with the size of the
particles commercially controlled. You give it IV and the tracer should stay in the pulmonary
circulation (vein-> SVC-> right heart -> pulmonary artery -> lung *STOP). The tracer should light up
the entire lung. A normal perfusion study excludes PE. Areas of perfusion abnormality can be from
PE or other things (more on this later). The biologic half life is around 4 hours (they eventually fall
apart, becoming small enough to enter the systemic circulation to eventually be eaten by the
reticuloendothelial system).

Ventilation: There are two ways to do the ventilation; you can use a radioactive gas (Xenon-133) or a
radioactive aerosol (Tc-99m DTPA).

· Xenon 133: The physical half-life is 5.3 days, the biologic lialf-life is 30 seconds (you breath it
     out). Because it has low energy (81 keV) it is essential to do this part of the test first (more on
     this in the physics chapter). Additionally, because the biologic half life is so short, you only can
     do one view (usually posterior) with a single detector (dual detector can do anterior and
     posterior). There are 3 phases to the study: (1) wash in (single max inspiration and breath hold),
     (2) equilibrium (breathing room air and xenon mix), and (3) wash out (breathing normal air).

· Tc-99m DTPA: This one requires patient cooperation because they have to breath through a
     mouth guard with a nose clamp for several minutes. It is also essential to do this part of the test
     first.

Quantitative Perfusion:

You can do quantitative studies typically to evaluate prior to lung resection, or prior to transplant.
You want to make sure that one lung can hold its own if you are going to take the other one out.

Testable Trivia: Quantification is NOT possible if you use Tc-99 DTPA aerosol. You can do it with a
combined Xe + Tc MAA because the Xe will not interfere with the Tc.

                                                              508
             5 Classic Trivia Questions about Tc99m MAA:

(1) They show tracer in the brain: This is a classic w ay o f showing you a shunt (it
     got into the systemic circulation somehow, maybe an ASD, VSD, or Pulmonary
     AVM).

(2) H ow big are the particles? A capillary is about 10 micrometers. You need your
     particles to stay in the lung, so they can't be sm aller than that. You don't w ant
     them to be so big they block arterioles (150 micrometers). So the answer is
     10-100 micrometers.

(3) When do yo u reduce the particle am ount? A few situations. You don't w ant to
     block more than about 0.1% o f the capillaries, so anyone who has fewer
     capillaries (children, people with one lung). Also you don't w ant to block
     capillaries in the brain, so anyone with a right to left shunt. Lastly anyone with
     pulmonary hypertension (or who is pregnant).

(4) Is reduced particle the sam e as reduced dose? Nope. The norm al dose o f Tc can
     be added to fewer particles.

(5) They show yo u multiple fo c a l scattered hot spots: This is the classic w ay o f
     showing "clumped M AA" , which happens if the tech draws blood into the
     syringe prior to injection.

                  Classic Trivia Questions for Xenon 133:

(1) They show you persistent pulm onary activity during washout. This indicates
Air Trapping (COPD)
(2) They show you accumulation o f tracer over the RUQ\ This is fatty
infiltration o f the liver (xenon is fat soluble).

                Classic Trivia Questions for Tc-99m DTPA

                        Xenon                          TC-99m DTPA
Quick Wash Out only one or two views
Activity homogenous in the lungs      Slower Wash Out - multiple projections
                                      "Clumping" common in the mouth,
                                      central airways, and stomach (from
                                      swallowing).

                                      509
                                    -Gamesmanship-

Q: What i f yo u see tracer in the thyroid or stom ach on VQ Scan??
A: You should think 2 things: (1) Free Tc, or (2) R ight - to - Left Shunt
Q: What do you need to call a Right - to - Left Shunt ?
A: Tracer in the Brain
Q: I f you suspect a shunt (or the shunt is known) how do you alter the scan?
A: You reduce the number o f particles. If the normal amount o f particles is around 500K,
you would reduce it to around lOOK.
Q: What i f the p a tient has pulm onary hypertension?
A: Same deal - reduce the particles
Q: Particle reduction is the same as dose reduction?
A: Nope. You keep the dose the same - otherwise the study is non-diagnostic.
Q: What about a neonate ? Do you do anything different?
A: Yes - major particle reduction. Down to lOK- 50K particles (depending on who you
ask). The reason is that kids have less capillaries than adults. An adult number o f
particles (500K) could functionally cause a PE - by blocking the majority o f the
capillaries.
Q: What i f you see a unilateral perfusion defect (o f the whole lung), but no ventilation
defect ?
A: Get a CT or MRI. DDx is gonna be a mass, fibrosing mediastinitis, or Central PE.
Q: O f those which is the M O ST COM M ON?
A: M ost sources will say "central obstructing m ass" i.e. "bronchogenic carcinoma"
Q: How do you grade this unilateral perfusion defect (o f the whole lung), but no
ventilation defect ?
A: It's technically low probability.

                                                              510
               Gallium Scan

The body handles Ga+3 the same w ay it w ould Fe+3 - which as you may rem em ber from
step 1 gets bound (via lactoferrin) and concentrated in areas o f inflammation, infection,
and rapid cell division. Therefore it's a very non-specific w ay to look for infection or
tumor. Back in the stone ages this was the gold-standard for cancer staging (now we use
FDG-PET). I should point out that Gallium can also bind to neutrophil membranes even
after the cells are dead, which gives it some advantages over Indium W BC - especially in
the setting o f chronic infection.

Gallium is produced in a cyclotron via the bom bardm ent
o f Zn*58, at which point it's com plexed with citric acid to
make Gallium Citrate. The h alf life is around 3 days
(78hours). It decays via electron capture, emitting gamma
rays at 4 photopeaks:

93 keV - 40%
184keV -20%
300 keV - 17%
393 keV - 5%

Images are not typically done sooner than 24 hours -           Normal Ga®^
because background is too high. The critical organ is the
colon. Remember "critical organ" = the first organ to be
subjected to radiation in excess o f the maximum allowable
amount.

N orm al localization: Liver {which is the highest uptake), bone m arrow ( "Poor M ans s
bone s c a n ''), spleen, salivary glands, lacrimal glands, breasts (especially if lactating, or
pregnancy). Kidneys and bladder can be seen in the first 24 (faintly up to 72 hours). Faint
uptake in the lungs can be seen in < 24 hours. After 24 hours you will see some bowel. In
children the growth plates and thymus.

"Poor M a n 's Bone Scan " - Uptake is in both cortex (like regular bone scan) and marrow.
Degenerative change, fractures, growth plates, all are hot - just like bone scan.

Gallium uptake is nonspecific and can be seen with a variety o f things including infection,
but also CHF, atelectasis, and ARDS.

                                                              511
Sarcoidosis:

The utility o f Gallium in Sarcoidosis patients is to help look for active disease. Increased
uptake in the lungs is 90% sensitive for active disease (scans are negative in inactive
disease). Additionally, Gallium can be used to help guide biopsy and lavage - if looking to
prove the diagnosis. The degree o f uptake is graded relative to surrounding tissue (greater
than lung is positive, less than soft tissue is negative).
Classic Signs:

     * Lambda Sign - The nuke equivalent to the " 1-2-3 Sign" on Chest x-ray. You have
          increased uptake in the bilateral hila, and right paratracheal lym ph node.

     · Panda Sign - Prominent uptake in the nasopharyngeal region, parotid salivary gland,
          and lacrimal glands. This can also been seen in Sjogrens and Treated Lymphoma.

                                                r

                                          Lacrimal Gland
                                          Nasopharynx

                                                Parotid

              Ga 67 - Panda Sign

Other Noninfectious Things
     * Gallium can be used to show early drug reaction from chemotherapy (Bleomycin) or
          other drugs (Amiodarone).
     * Gallium is elevated in IPF (idiopathic pulm onary fibrosis) and can be used to monitor
          response to therapy.

                                                              512
Immunosuppressed Patients

* PCP - Gallium Hot, Characteristic Gallium Pattern is Diffuse Bilateral Pulmonary
     Uptake

* Kaposi Sarcoma - Gallium Negative, Thallium Positive
* Bacterial Pneum onia - Intense lobar configuration without parotid or nodal uptake.

                                   Galium 6^ - Pneumonia
                                 - Lung Uptake at 72 Hours

Misc Infections That Gallium Can Pick Up:
· Abdom inal and Pelvic Infections - In-111 W BC is superior to Gallium

  (Gallium has some normal GI uptake).
· Malignant Otitis M edia - Will be both Gallium and Bone Scan (Temporal Bone) Hot.
· Spinal Osteomyelitis - Gallium is superior to Indium W BC for spinal infections.

                                                              513
