                   SECTION 6:

                      CNS

The goal o f brain imaging in nuclear medicine is to evaluate function (more than anatomy).
Typically you are dealing with SPECT brain (seizures, ischemia), FDG Brain (dementia), and
Cistemograms / shunt studies.

This is the general idea:

PLANAR IMAGING     O N LY FO R BRAIN DEATH
SPECT IMAGING
                                LIPO PH ILIC P E R FU S IO N A G E N TS
                        ^ PR O P O R TIO N A L TO BLOOD FLO W

PET IMAGING        PR O P O R TIO N A L TO M ETABO LISM

I want to start out talking about 3 o f the agents that are commonly used in CNS Nukes;
HMPAO, ECD, and DTPA. The focus o f course is on how questions can be asked about
these tracers. First let's group them:

          Extracted (Can be used for Parenchymal Imaging)
                    HMPAO
                    ECD

          NOT Extracted (Not used for Parenchymal Imaging - i.e. no SPECT)
                    DTPA

HMPAO and ECD are very similar, and any time you have similar things, someone will be
scheming about how to ask a question about the one or two ways they are slightly different.

General Mechanic of Localization - HMPAO I ECD:

Agents (HMPAO &    Lipophilic Agents  Distribution is        Unstable Lipophilic
ECD) are           cross the blood    proportional to        forms convert to a
administered in a  brain barrier on   regional blood flow    Hydrophilic State --
lipophilic state   the first pass.    in the brain (usually  Trapping Agents
                                      highest in the gray
                                      matter).

On the next page I 'm going to com pare and contrast these agents - and their potential uses.
                                                             522
Tc HMPAO (hexam ethylpropyleneam ine oxime) and Tc ECD (ethyl cysteinate dimer).
HMPAO and ECD can be used in both dementia imaging and for seizure focus locahzation.

These studies are typically performed with SPECT. The idea behind brain SPECT is that you
can look at brain blood flow, which should mimic metabolism. These two agents are neutral
and lipophilic, which lets them cross the blood brain barrier and accumulate in the brain.
Where and how much they accumulate should follow flow (and metabolism).

As I mentioned previously, the two tracers have similarities and differences, and the contrast
between them lends well to multiple choice tests.

                         HMPAO                                             ECD
Neutral and Lipophilic                         Neutral and Lipophilic
Accumulate in the cortex proportional to       Accumulate in the cortex proportional to
blood flow (Gray M atter > White Matter)       blood flow (Gray Matter > White Matter)
                                               Better Blood Clearance
                                               (better brain to background ratio)

                                               Preferred in Stroke Imaging

Best im aged 15 min - 2 hour post injection Best im aged 15-30 mins post injection

Uptake favors the frontal lobe, thalamus, and  Uptake favors the parietal and occipital lobes
cerebellum                                     * Makes comparison between HMPAO and
                                               ECD difficult

Key points:
 Both agents pass blood brain barrier and stick to gray matter proportional to CBF
 HMPAO washes out faster
 ECD washout is slower, has better background clearance, and does not demonstrate

     intracerebral redistribution.

T h e O th e r Guy - Tc- DTPA

Unlike HMPAO or ECD, this agent is lipoPHOBIC (hydrophilic) - and is best thought o f as
an "angiographic tracer" because it stays in the blood (or CSF if you put it there).

Key Points:
 DTPA does NOT cross the blood brain barrier and therefore cannot be used for brain

     parenchymal imaging. *You can NOT do SPECT
 Has the advantage over HMPAO and ECD in that it can be repeated without delay
 DTPAs main utility is fo r shunt studies, NPH, and Brain Death.

                                               523
Seizure Focus:                           ICTAL  INTER-ICTAL

The goal of nuclear imaging regarding
seizures is to attempt to localize a
seizure focus (sometimes they do ok if
they cut it out).

The idea is that a seizure focus will
be hot (hypermetabolic and
hyperperfiising) during the seizure
"ictal." Then cold between seizures
"interictal." You need to inject tracer
(HMPAO or ECD) within 30 seconds
o f the seizure to get a good study.
PET can be used, but is less practical.

                                    Thallium 201

Thallium is produced in a cyclotron, decays via electron capture, and has a half life o f
around 3 days (73 hours). The m ajor emissions are via the characteristic x-rays o f its
daughter product M ercury 201 - at 69 keV and 81 keV. The tracer is norm ally given as a
chloride and will therefore rapidly be removed from the blood

Thallium behaves like potassium, crossing the cell membrane by active transport (Na+/
K pump). Tumors and inflammatory conditions will increase the uptake o f this tracer.
The higher the grade o f tumor, the more uptake you get. As Thallium requires active
transport, it can be thought o f as a viability m arker - you need a living cell to transport it.

Normal Distribution: Thyroid, salivary glands, lungs, heart, skeletal muscle, liver, spleen,
bowel, kidneys, and bladder. Any muscle twitching will turn hot.

If you are going to use it with Gallium, you must use the Thallium first as the Gallium
will scatter all over the Thallium peaks.

High Yield Generalizations / Uses:
      Toxoplasma Infection is Thallium Negative
          Lymphoma is Thallium Positive
      Kaposi Sarcoma is Thallium Positive (Gallium Negative)
          Tumor is Thallium Positive
      Necrosis is Thallium N egative

                                                               524
Tumor vs Necrosis:                                                        Tumor vs Necrosis
                                                                      Thallium Hot, Tumor
The tracers used for SPECT tumor studies are different than           HMPAO Cold
those used for dementia or seizures. The tumor tracers are            Thallium Cold,
20ITI (more common) and 99017^ Sestam ibi (less common).
2쳃TI is a potassium analog, that enters the cell via the N a/K                              Necrosis
pump. Inflammatory conditions will increase the uptake o f this       HMPAO Cold
tracer, but not as much as tumors. The higher the tumor grade,
the more intense the uptake. Thallium can be thought o f as a
marker o f viability, as it will localize in living tumor cells, and
not necrosis. The control is the scalp (abnormalities will have
greater uptake than the scalp). You can use Thallium in
combination with perfusion tracers (HMPAO).

CNS Lymphoma vs Toxoplasmosis:                  Typically CNS lymphoma, toxoplasmosis,
                                                bacterial abscess, cryptococcus infection,
As discussed in the neuro chapter CNS lymphoma  and tuberculosis are all positive on Ga-67
vs CNS Toxoplasmosis can be a diagnostic        scintigraphy.
dilemma. Thallium has a role in helping to
distinguish the two (Toxo Cold, Lymphoma        CNS lymphoma will be positive on T1-',201
Hot). Please refer to the neuro chapterfo r
additional discussion.

Brain Death

You are looking for the absence o f intracerebral perfusion to confirm brain death. So that
you don't keep G randm a around as a piece o f broccoli, you need to have a tourniquet on the
scalp - otherwise you m ight think scalp perfusion is brain perftision and say she's still alive.
You have to identify tracer in the com m on carotid - otherw ise the study m ust be
repeated. In the setting of brain death, tracer should stop at the skull base. The hot
nose sign, is seen secondary to perfusion through the external carotid to the m axillary
branches. As a point o f trivia - the hot nose sign cannot be used to call brain death , it is a
"Secondary Sign." Some institutions will say you have to image the kidneys (to prove
adequate systemic circulation / perfusion) and the injection site (to prove the tracer didn't
extravasate).

                                                                      Brain
                                                                      Death -
                                                                      Hot Nose
                                                                      Sign

525
stroke                                                           Luxury Perfusion

There is no reason, ever, under any circumstances known to   This is a paradoxical finding
man, women, or beast to ever, ever use SPECT to diagnose     that describes the vascular
stroke. Having said that, you can look at stroke with SPECT  dilation / excessive blood
and will therefore likely be asked questions about it.       flow observed
                                                             within in the relatively
The big take home points are this;                           avascular infarcted area of
 Acute Stroke is Cold                                       the brain.
 Subacute Stroke can be warm -fr o m luxury perfusion
                                                             Typically you seen this 48-72
  (bloodflow is more than dead cells need)                   hrs after an ischemic stroke.
 Chronic Stroke is Cold                                     So, it is a finding associated
                                                             with "sub-acute" stroke.

Ischem ia (TIAs)

You can evaluate for cerebrovascular reserve by first giving acetazolamide (Diamox) - which
is a vasodilator, followed by a perfusion tracer. Normally you should get a 3-4x increase in
perfusion. However, in areas which have already maxed out their auto regulatory
vasodilation (those at risk for ischemia) you will see them as relatively hypointense. These
areas o f worsening tracer uptake may benefit from some revascularization therapy.

PRE-DIAMOX  POST-DIAMOX

            Worsening Uptake = Ischemia

            This might benefit from
            revascularization. Next Step = Angio

Bottom Line = Ischemic Tissue Looks WORSE (relatively) compared to surrounding tissue,
after vasodilation (Diamox / Acetazolamide)

Gamesmanship = Diamox = A cetazolam ide... don't just remember one.
You don't know which one they will use.

                                                                526
FDG-PET                                            FDG-PET General Perfusion Patterns

PET can assess perfusion ( '5O-H2O) but      Higher Grade Tumor = Higher SUV
typically it uses >^FDG to assess            Radiation Necrosis = No Uptake (COLD)
metabolism (which is analogous to            Stroke / Infarct = No Uptake (COLD)
perfiision). Renal clearance of '^FDG is     Interictal PET= Decreased Uptake at Seizure Focus
excellent, giving good target to background
pictures. Resolution of PET is superior to
SPECT

It's important to remember external factors can affect the results; bright lights stimulating the
occipital lobes, high glucose (>200) causes more competition for the tracer and therefore less uptake.

The most common indication for FDG Brain PET is dementia imaging. Because blood flow mimics
metabolism HMPAO, and ECD can also be used for dementia imaging and the patterns of pathology
are the same.

PET Technique For Dementia Workup:

 NO TALKING GRAMPS ! Patient should rest in a dimly lit room (without talking) after the
  injection for around 30-45mins. This allows for optimal distribution.

 WAKE UP GRAMPS ! No sleeping during the PET -- this increases variability in uptake.
 SIR! PLEASE STOP MASTURBATING! If sedation is needed wait till after the uptake period.

Dementia is discussed in detail in the neuroradiology chapter. Please refer to the masterpiece that is
the neuro chapter in volume 2 for a complete discussion -- the below chart is for rapid review
purposes (and because I know how annoying it is to have to go grab another book).

                  FDG PET - Brain Dementia Patterns

Normal            Alzheimers                 Multi Infarct  Dementia with             Picks /
                                                             Lewy Bodies       Frontotemporal

"Things look      Low posterior       Scattered areas of    Low in lateral     Low frontal lobe
symmetric"        temporoparietal     decreased activity    occipital cortex
Basal Ganglia is  cortical activity
= to 15%                                                    Preservation of
GREATER than      -Identical to                             the mid posterior
cortex.           Parkinson                                 cingulate gyrus
Cerebellum is     Dementia                                  (Cingulate
15% LOWER         -Posterior                                Island Sign)
than cortex.      Cingulate gyrus is
Thalamus          the first area
should be equal   abnormal
to cortex.

                                             527
CSF Imaging

The principle involved in imaging the CSF consists o f intrathecal administration that will

safely follow CSF and remains in the CSF compartment until it is absorbed through the

conventional pathways. The most common tracer used is  - labeled DTPA. So, you

have to do an LP on the dude (it's intrathecal).

Normal Examination
     * Time Zero - You do the LP
     * 2-4 hours it ascends and reaches the basal cisterns
      4 hours - 24 hours it flows around the sylvian fissures and interhemispheric cistern
      At 24 hours it should clear from the basilar cisterns and be over the cerebral
          convexities

1 Hr         5 Hr                                      24 Hr

Abnormal Examination (general principles)
     * Tracer in the lateral ventricles
     * Failure to clear from the cisterns and localize over the convexities by 24 hours

1 Hr         5 Hr                                      24 Hr

                                                  528
Communicating Hydrocephalus:

Normal pressure hydrocephalus is wet, wacky, and wobbly (incontinent, confused, and ataxic)
clinically, and demonstrates "ventricular enlargement out of proportion to atrophy" on CT.

On scintigraphy you are looking for:
      Early entry (4-6 hours) o f tracer into the lateral ventricles
      Persistence o f tracer in the lateral ventricle > 24 hours
      Delay in Assent to the parasagittal region > 24 hours

                                                                                                        NPH-
                                                                                                        Persistent
                                                                                                        Tracer in the
                                                                                                        Ventricles
                                                                                                        > 24 Hours

Since radiotracer shouldn't normally enter the ventricles, a radionuclide cistemogram cannot be used
to distinguish communicating from noncommunicating hydrocephalus. Historically (1930s) you could
tell by injecting the material directly into the lateral ventricles.

TH IS V5' THAT: NPH vs Non Obstructive (Communicating) Hydrocephalus.
                      NPH will have a normal opening pressure on LP.

CSF Leak:

You can use CSF tracers to localize a leak. The most common sites of CSF leak (fistulas) are between
the cribriform plate and ethmoid sinuses, from the sella turcica into the sphenoid sinus and from the
ridge of the sphenoid to the ear. The study is like a bleeding scan, in that the leak must be active
during the test for you to pick it up.

How is it done? You image around the time the CSF is at the basilar cisterns (1-3 hours) and also
image pledgets (jammed up the nose prior to the exam). You compare tracer in the pledgets to serum
(ratio greater than 1.5 is positive).

Shunt Patency:
There are a bunch of ways to do this. Most commonly, Tc labeled DTPA is used (>"In - labeled DTPA
could also be used). Usually, the tracer is injected straight into the tubing.

 Normal Test will show tracer in the peritoneum - shows distal end is patent.
 You can manually occlude the distal limb to force tracer into the ventricles - shows proximal end

     is patent.
     If the tracer fails to reflux into the ventricles, or it does but then doesn't clear, you can think
     proximal obstruction
 If there is delayed tracer flow into the peritoneum (> 10 minutes = delayed), this can mean partial
     distal obstruction.

                                                                529
