                                 SECTION 8:

                              GU NUKES

Imaging of GU system in nuclear medicine can evaluate function (primary role), or it can
evaluate structure.

Function (Dynamic):

Normal kidney function is 80% secretion and 20% filtration. Tracer choice is based on which
o f these param eters you w ant to look at.

Tc-DTPA: Almost all filtered and therefore a great agent for determining GFR. A piece o f
trivia is that since a small (5%) portion o f DTPA is protein bound (and not filtered) you are
slightly underestimating GFR. Critical organ is the bladder.

Tc-MAG 3: This agent is alm ost exclusively secreted and therefore estimates effective renal
plasma flow (ERPF). It is cleared by the proximal tubules. Critical organ is the bladder.

Tc-GH (glucoheptonate): This agent can be used for structural imaging (discussed later in this
section), or functional imaging as it is filtered. Cridcal organ is the bladder.

              Tc DTPA                      Tc MAG 3                           TcGH

Filtered (GFR)                Secreted (ERPF)                 Filtered
Good For Native Kidneys with  Concentrated better by kidneys  Good for dynamic and cortical
Normal Renal Function         with poor renal function        imaging.
Critical Organ Bladder        Critical Organ Bladder          Critical Organ Bladder

There are essendally 5 indications for dynamic (functional) scanning: (1) Differendal
Funcdon (2) Suspected Obstruction, (3) Suspected Renal Artery Stenosis, (4) Suspected
Complicadon from Rental Transplant, (5) Suspected Urine Leak.

Some basics:

Images are obtained posteriorly (anterior if patient has a transplant or horseshoe).
Typically dynamic exams have 3 phases: blood flow phase, cortical phase, and clearance
phase.

                                                                 539
Differential Function

This is a basic exam with the standard flow, cortical, and clearance phases.

Flow: Begins w ithin 20 seconds o f injection. Flow will first be seen in the aorta. Then as it
reaches the renal arteries, the kidneys should enhance symmetrically and about equal to the
aorta (at that time).

Decreased (symmetric)   Flow
Decreased (asymmetric)   Technical Error - poor bolus
Increased (asymmetric)
                          Renal Artery Thrombosis
                          Renal Vein Thrombosis
                         Chronic High Grade Obstruction
                         Acute Rejection
                         Acute Pyelonephritis

                          Renal Artery Aneurysm

An important piece o f trivia is that ATN, Interstitial Nephritis, and Cyclosporin toxicity
will all have normal perfusion/flow.

Cortical (parenchymal): This is the m ost im portant portion o f the exam (with regard to
differential function). An area o f interest is drawn around the kidneys and a background area
o f interest is also drawn (to correct for the background). This can be screwed up by drawing
your background against the liver or spleen (which is not true background since they will take
up some tracer). You want to measure this at a time when the kidney is really drinking that
contrast, but not so late that it is putting it in the collecting system. M ost places use around 1
min. A steep slope is good.

Clearance (excretory): Radiotracer will begin to enter the renal pelvis, collecting system, and
bladder. In a normal patient, you will be down to half peak counts at around 7-10 mins. If
you wanted to quantify retention o f tracer you could look at a 20/3 or 20/peak ratio.

20/3 or 20/peak ratio: This is a method o f quantifying retention o f radiotracer by comparing
the peak count at 20 minutes with the peak count at 3 mins (normal < 0.8) or the peak count
(normal 0.3).

                        540
Suspected Obstruction ("The Lasix Renogram")

The exam is perform ed the same as a standard dynam ic exam (blood flow, cortical, and
clearance), with a 30 minute wait after clearance. If there is still activity in the collecting
system, a challenge is performed with Lasix. The idea is that a true obstruction will NOT
respond to Lasix, whereas a dilated system will empty when overloaded by Lasix. The study
can be done with MAG-3 or DTPA. MAG-3 does better with patients with poor renal
function, and thus is used m ore commonly.

The exam is interpreted as follows:
     * No obstruction = tracer clears from
          collecting system without need for
          Lasix
      No obstruction = Washout of 50% of
          the tracer w ithin 10 m inutes o f Lasix
          adm inistration
      Indeterminate = Washout o f 50% of
          the tracer within 10-20 minutes of
          Lasix administration
               o The most common cause for
                    this indeterminate result is a
                    very dilated pelvis and
                    subsequent "reservoir effect."
     * Obstructed = Washout taking longer
          than 20 mins after Lasix administration

Source o f False Positive for Obstruction:
      Poor response to Lasix - secondary to bad renal function, or dehydration at baseline
      "Reservoir Effect" - very dilated renal pelvis, delaying transit time
      Back Pressure Effects - Full or Neurogenic Bladder can generate back pressure and
          not let the kidneys empty (can be resolved with a foley catheter).

                                                                541
Suspected Renal Artery Stenosis

The study can be performed in one           O
of two ways (both using MAG 3
as the typical tracer). The first is     Norm al Exam - N o Difference Between Pre and Post
a standard dynamic study,
followed by ACE inhibitor. The
second is a baseline study with 'A
dose, followed by a full dose o f
ACE inhibitor. A "normal
study" will occur if there is no
difference between the baseline
and the captopril studies.

The appearance o f RAS will vary depending on the tracer given:

 DTPA - Remember
    this is a GFR tracer. A
     sick kidney will have
     decreased uptake
     and flow, because of
     loss o f perfusion
     pressure.

                                                                 POST-

MAG 3 - Remember                                                        T'
this is a Secreted tracer.
                                                                         Sick
marked tracer
retention, with a curve               i  1          r" ...--    r--- --1 r - _ ~ i r-- -- i
similar to obstruction.                 (
                                                  *0 0           II 0 10 1

                                         o-            #         o     m

                                         M A G 3 - The S ick K id n e y (Holds onto the Tracer

I f it's bilateral up or bilateral down, it's not RAS. I f the baseline study has asym m etrically
poor function, that isn 't positive for RAS, you need to see it w orsen (> 10%).

Trivia related to A C E inhibitor administration: they need to stop their ACE inhibitor prior to
the renal study (3-5 days if captopril). They should be NPO for 6 hours prior to the test (for
PO ACE inhibitors).

                                             542
Suspected Complication from Renal Transplant

ATN vs Rejection: The most common indication for nuclear medicine in the setting o f renal

transplant is to differentiate rejection from ATN. ATN is usually in the first w eek after

transplant, and is more common in cadaveric donors. There will be preserved renal perfusion

with delayed excretion in the renal parenchyma (elevated 20/3 ratio, delayed time to peak).

ATN usually gets better. There is an exception to this rule, but it will confuse the issue with

respect to multiple choice, so I'm not going to m ention it. Cyclosporin toxicity can also look

like ATN (normal perfusion, with retained tracer) but will NOT be seen in the immediate post

op period. Rejection will have poor perfusion, and delayed excretion. A chronically rejected

kidney w on't really take up

the tracer.                   ATN          Immediate Post Perfusion     Excretion
                                           OP (3-4 days Normal          Delayed
In a Normal DMSA or ATN       Cyclosporin  post op)
(with M AG 3 tracer), the     Toxicity     Long Standing Perfusion      Excretion
nephrographic appearance                                                Delayed
                                                                Normal

is the same. Tracer in the    Acute        Immediate Post Poor          Excretion
cortex, and th a t's it.      Rejection                                 Delayed
                                           OP  Perfusion

I                                                \ '"1

9 W                                                m V#
                                                                       
        0 0 m0
                                                                                      I 
               ATN
                                                                     I
                                                             Rejection

                                                                  (flow sucks)

                                           543
Suspected Com plication from Renal Transplant Cont...

Fluid Collections: Fluid collections seen after a transplant include urinomas, hematomas,
and lymphoceles. All 3 can cause photopenic areas on blood pool imaging.

      Urinoma: Usually found in the first 2 weeks post op. Delayed imaging will show
          tracer between the bladder and transplanted kidney. The primary differential in this
          time period is the hematoma. A hem atom a is not going to have tracer in it.

               O Urinoma = Hot with Tracer
               0 Hematoma = No Tracer

     * Lymphocele: Usually found 4-8 weeks after surgery. The cause is a disruption o f
          normal lymphatic channels during perivascular dissection. Most are incidental and
          don't need intervention. I f they get huge, they can cause mass effect. This will look
          like a photopenic area on the scan.

Timing              Hematoma            Urinoma         Lymphocele
Blood Pool  Early (< Month)   Early (< Month)    Late (> Month)
Delay       COLD - No Tracer  COLD - No Tracer   COLD - No Tracer
            COLD - No Tracer  HOT with Tracer    COLD - No Tracer

Vascular Complications: Both arterial and venous thrombosis will result in no flow or
function. If you suspect renal artery stenosis (most common at the anastomosis), you can do
a captopril study, with results sim ilar to RAS if there is a stricture.

                              544
structure

If you want to look at the renal cortex, you will want to use an agent that binds to the renal
cortex (via a sulfhydryl group). You have two main options with regard to tracer.

     톂c-DMSA: This is the more com monly used tracer. It binds to the renal cortex and is
     cleared very slowly. C ritic a l o rg an is th e kid n ey (notice other renal tracers have the
     bladder as their critical organ).
     톂c G H (glucoheptonate): This is less com m only used and although it binds to the
     cortex, it is also filtered and therefore can be used to assess renal flow, the collecting
     system, and the bladder. Critical organ is the bladder.
DMSA is the preferred cortical imaging agent in pediatrics, because it has a lower dose to the
gonads (even though its renal dose is higher than TcGH).
Indications for the exam:

          A cute Pyelonephritis: Can appear as (a) fo c a l ill-defined area o f decreased uptake,
          (b) m ultifocal areas o f decreased uptake, (c) diffuse decreased uptake - in an
          otherwise normal kidney.

               o Scarring and Masses can also appear as fo ca l areas o f decreased uptake --
                    although scarring usually has volume loss.

     * Column o f Bertin vs Mass: Simply put, the mass will be cold. The Column o f Bertin
          (normal tissue) will be take up tracer.

 The trick on DM SA is ju st like reading CX R or Chest CT - you need to know if it is acute
 or chronic. The clinical history changes your DDx.

       Defects on DMSA with acute renal problems = pyelo.
       Defects on DM SA with chronic renal problems = scar (or mass).

                                                                545
                         Testicular

This hasn't been done in the United States since 1968, therefore it is very likely to be on the
test. The study is basically a blood flow study. The prim ary clinical question is testicular
torsion ys other causes o f pain (epididymitis). The tracer used is sodium pertechnetate
(Na99mTc04). Oh, don't forget to tape the penis out o f the w ay - tape it up, not down like is
required for the male residents on mammography rotations.

     * Normal - Symmetric low level flow to the testicles.
     * Acute (early) Torsion - Focal absence o f flow to the affected side ("nubbin sign").
     * Delayed (late) Torsion - Sometimes called a m issed torsion. The appearance is a

          halo of increased activity, with central photopenia.
     * Testicular Abscess - Identical to delayed torsion - halo o f increased activity, with

          central photopenia.
     * Acute Epididymitis- Increased flow and blood pool to the affected side.

                                                                 546
