                                   SECTION 5:
                              P a r a t h y r o id

What Causes Hyperparathyroidism ?
      Most common cause is a hyperfunctional adenoma (85%).
      Second most common cause is multiple gland hyperplasia (12%).
      Third most common cause is cancer (3%).

Nuclear medicine can offer two techniques to localize these lesions; dual phase, and dual tracer.

Dual Phase Technique
In dual phase technique, a single tracer (Tc^^.Sestamibi) is administered, and both early (10
mins) and delayed (3 hours) imaging is performed. The idea is that sestamibi likes things with
lots o f blood flow, and lots of mitochondria. Parathyroid pathology tends to have both of
these things, so the tracer will be more avid early, and stick around longer (after the tracer
washes out o f normal tissue). SPECT can give you more precise localization.

W                       w

Initial Phase           Delayed Phase

-Both Thyroid and       -Uptal<e R e m a in s in
Parathyroid             Abnorm al Parathyroid
                        (H y p e rp la s ia in this c a s e )

Trivia: Sestamibi parathyroid imaging depends on mitochondrial density and blood flow

False Positives: Caused by things other than parathyroid pathology that like to drink Sestamibi.
      Thyroid Nodules
      Head and Neck Cancers
      Lymphadenopathy

                   520
Dual Tracer Technique

In dual tracer technique two different agents are used and then subtraction is done. The first
agent is chosen because it goes to both thyroid and parathyroid (options are either Tc^^-
Sestamibi or 201- Thallium Chloride). The second agent is chosen because it only goes to the
thyroid (options are either 1-123 or Pertechnetate). When subtraction is done, anything left hot
could be a parathyroid adenoma.

Problems:
      Mo Tracers, Mo Problems
      Motion: subtraction imaging can't tolerate much motion
      Stuff Messing with the Thyroid Tracers: recent iodinated contrast, e tc ...

Tc - Sestam ibi  1-123  Subtraction  Ultrasound Correlation

                 Parathyroid A denom a - Show n on Dual Tracer Method

The parathyroid gland can be surgically implanted into the forearm - typically done with hyperplasia
surgery where they carve out 3 1/2 glands.

Successful surgical treatment of hyperparathyroidism is often defined as intra-operative reduction of
PTH by 50%.

False Positives: Thyroid adenoma (most common), thyroid cancer, parathyroid cancer.

False Negative: Small sized adenoma (most common), 4 gland hyperplasia. A negative study in the
setting of abnormal / suspicious labs should raise concern for these things (multiple gland
hyperplasia or a small adenoma).

                         Gamesmanship - MIBl - Lymph Nodes

On any study, parathyroid or a heart, if the tracer is M IBI then you should NOT see lymph
nodes. If you see lymph nodes they are suspicious (maybe cancer). Next step would be
ultrasound to further evaluate them.
Oh, and don't forget about focal breast uptake (also cancer), - Breast Specific Gamma
Imaging (BSGI) uses MIBI for a reason.

                                                               521
