                               S E C T IO N 2:
                                S keleton

Tc-MDP: The w orkhorse o f skeletal imaging is methylene diphosphonate (M DP) - which is
tagged with Tc-99m.

Mechanism: MDP is a phosphate analog that binds with the crystalline hydroxyapatite in

bone via a process called chemisorption. Chem isorption can also be described as

"physicochemical adsorption" on multiple choice exams - for the purpose o f fucking with
you. Distribution is based on osteoblastic activity and to a lesser extent blood flow.

      Osteoclasts

                                                This (arrow) is
                                                where the MDP
                                                goes - at the
                                                mineralization front
                                                of bone (osteoid)
                                                near the osteoblasts.
                                                NOT near the
                                                osteoclasts

This is prim arily bone cortex
In the growing skeleton (peds), tracer/M DP deposition is also seen at epiphyseal growth
plates and osteochondral junctions. Hot growth plates are normal on MDP bone scan.

          G amesmanship - M DP and HDP are both bone agents so don't get confused if they
           say HDP to purposefully confuse you.

 MDP Uptake Depends On:        Normal MDP Uptake / Localization Occurs At:

· OsteoBLASTIC activity        Bone (duh), but also the Epiphyses in kids
  (why pure lytic lesions can  Kidney (not seen *or very faint = Super Scan) , Bladder
  be cold)                     Breasts (especially in young women)
                               Soft tissues - low levels
» Blood Flow

There is a preparation process (which I 'll discuss on the next page w hen I talk about
labeling). A fter preparation o f the tracer (15-25m Ci) it is injected into the patient. Then
you wait 2-4 hours to let the tracer clear from the soft tissues (so you can see them bones).
Renal function is critical for this soft tissue clearing.

                                                             496
Dude... Are You Fucking This Up ?

There are 3 primary ways the standard bone scan gets flicked up. You as the resident / fellow
will be blamed for all three, unless you can find a way to deflect culpability upon a more
junior resident or perhaps a non-English speaking medical observer.

3 Ways to Fuck it Up:

(1) Bad Renal Function -- If you can't clear the tracer from the soft tissue, cuz your
kidneys are shit (all those donuts & cigarettes finally caught up with you) you w on't be able
to visualize the bones. Too much noise (soft tissue signal), not enough signal (from bones).

The Fix: You may be able to prevent the problem by encouraging oral hydration during the
2-6 hours between injection and image acquisition. You can also try a 24 hours delay --
some people call this a "4th phase." A potential problem with this is the h a lf life o f Tc99m
(6 hours). This means at 24 hours you only have ~ 6% o f the tracer left to give you signal.

(2) Shitty Labeling - The scan is prepared from a kit             m
which has MDP and stannous ion. You add free
pertechnetate and the stannous ion reduces it so it will                     Uplate Jn Bone Scan
bind to the MDP. I f you don't have enough stannous ion        'incidental note of sternal met
{or you get air into the vial or syringe --that can cause
oxidation) you m ight get fr e e Tc (salivary gland, thyroid,         breast CA

stomach uptake).

Gamesmanship: Bone scan with tracer in the stomach,
thyroid, or salivary glands = Free Tc

The Fix: D on't leave air in the syringe you fucking crayon chewer

(3) The Flare Phenom enon - This is a scenario specific to bone mets that have been
treated with chemotherapy. The "flare" typically occurs around 2 weeks to 3 months post
treatment (some sources say up to 6 months), and manifests as an increase in both the
number and size o f the lesions. In this way, a potentially good response (bone turnover from
metastatic lesions healing) could mimic a bad response (more / larger lesions). Some people
call this "pseudo-progression."

H ow can you tell i t 's fla re and not actually cancer getting worse?
* On plain film lesions should get more sclerotic
* After 3 months they should improve - confirming a response to therapy.

                       497
                    Abnormal Distribution

Increased focal uptake is very nonspecific, and basically is just showing you bone turn over. So a
metastatic deposit can do that (and this is the classic indication). But, you can also see it with
arthritis (classically shoulder) and healing fractures (most commonly shown with segmental ribs).
Let's look at some potentially testable scenarios.

Sneaky Situations:

· Skull Sutures: It's normal to see some persistent visualization of the  Asymmetric Breast
     skull sutures, BUT when this is marked you may be thinking about         Tissue Uptal<e
     renal osteodystrophy.
                                                                          (Primary Breast CA)
· Breast Uptake: Some mild diffuse breast uptake is normal (especially
    in younger women), BUT focal uptake can be cancer.

· Renal CORTEX activity: You are supposed to have renal activity (not
    seeing kidneys can make you think super scan), BUT when the renal
    cortex is hotter than the adjacent lumber spine you should think
    about hemochromatosis.

Diffuse Renal Uptake: This often occurs in the setting of
chemotherapy (especially if the study is looking for bone mets). This
also can be seen with urinary obstruction.

Liver Uptake: This can be several things, but the main ones to think
about are (1) Too Much Al+3 contamination in the Tc, (2) Cancer -
either primary hepatoma or mets, (3) Amyloidosis, (4) Liver
Necrosis

Spleen Uptake: This is a common trick to show an auto-infarcted           Diffuse Renal Uptal<e
spleen - common in sickle cell patients. These same patients are             (Ciiemotlierapy)
going to have scattered hot and cold areas from multiple bone
infarcts.

Lung Uptake: In most cases this is some type of heterotopic calcification (dystrophic or mets).
The classic MDP hot lung met would be an osteosarcoma. Ultimately, it's not specific and can be
seen in a ton of other random situations (fibrothorax, primarily tung tumors, radiation changes,
sarcoid, berylliosis, alveolar microlithiasis, Wegener's, etc...).

Muscle - Yes... MDP is for bones, but it will also localize to injured skeletal muscle. The classic
way to show this is very hot quads, calfs, shoulders in a marathon runner (or military recruit) - as
a way to show rhabdomyolysis.

Diffusely Decreased skeletal uptake: This can be seen with:
(1) free Tc, or (2) Bisphosphonate therapy.

                    498
Abnormal Distiibution - Part2- MOP'SRevenge

Sacral Insufficiency Fracture:                            i

This is a hot geographic area, confined to the            H)
sacrum, often with a characteristic butterfly or                                   "Honda Sign"
"H" shaped (Honda sign).

Osteoporosis is the most common cause, but it
can also occur in a patient who has had radiation.

Fractures in the Elderly (including elder
abuse): In older populations, bone scans may be
negative for several days. A bone scan obtained
at 1 week will exclude a fracture.

Special Topic - Hypertrophic Osteoarthopathy:

This is a "Tramline" along the periosteum of long bones, which is
associated with conditions of chronic hypoxia (CF, Cyanotic Heart
Disease, Mesothelioma, Pneumoconiosis). However, when you see
this - you need to think lung cancer.

The classic look is a non-uniform, broken up, linear line of increased
uptake along the long bones of the legs (and sometimes arms) -
resembling a "tram-line."

Apparently it's actually seen in 10% of patients
with lung cancer.

Next Step? CXR, Chest CT etc...to look for the lung cancer - or other   i I "Tramline
cause of chronic hypoxia.                                                      Sign"

Special Topic - AVN:

AVN, as discussed in the MSK chapter, can occur from a variety of causes (EtOH, Steroids, Trauma,
Sickle Cell, Gauchers). It is also classic after a renal transplant (although less common now with
modem drugs / less steroid use).

MRI is first line for AVN. Bone scan is actually second line (better sensitivity that plain film). In
addition to a contraindication to MRI, it might be a good choice in situations where multiple bones
need to be imaged at once

Gamesmanship:                                                         ---
· The appearance on bone scan will change depending on the
                                                                   "Donut Sign" of Femoral AVN
  timing. Early on it might be normal or even "cold" - related to
  interrupted blood supply. Later in the disease (once you start
  seeing sclerosis on the plain film) it will become hot.
· The classic look is the "donuf' sign - hot on the outside and
  cool in the center.

                                                    499
Abnormal Distribution - Part 3 - Dream Warriors

Primary Bone Tumors: Both benign and malignant bone tumors can be HOT on bone scan.
Remember, bones are stupid, the only thing they know how to do is make bone. When something is
happening in a bone... the bone makes bone -- regardless if that is a benign or malignant process.

· Fibrous Dysplasia  HOT Lesions           · Aneurysmal Bone Cyst
· Giant Cell Tumor    · Osteoblastoma    *donut sign (centrally cold)
                      · Osteoid Osteoma

"Donut Sign" - 1 mentioned this earlier with AVN in the hip. This is
not a specific sign. It just describes the hot circle with the cold center
(like a donut).

You see it mostly with "cystic" bone lesions; aneurysmal bone cyst,
simple bone cyst, giant cell tumor, and the bad boy telangiectatic
osteosarcoma.

IVlets: The overwhelming majority of bone scans performed in the real       PSA <10 ng/ml nearly
world are done for patients with known malignancy (breast, lung, and        excludes bone mets,
prostate) looking for bone mets.                                            PSA> 100 ng/ml is
                                                                            highly predictive
Classic: Hot, multiple, randomly scattered, and different sizes / shapes.   of bone mets

Diffuse: This is the "super scan" where all the tracer is in those thirsty cancer laden bones and almost
no activity is seen in the kidneys or soft tissues.

Arthritis vs Mets: Arthritis tends to involve both sides of the joint --    Most common single
cancer doesn't do that (usually).                                           metastatic lesion is in
                                                                            the spine
The Single Lesion: When you see a single hot lesion, the false positive
rate for attributing the finding to a met is high. Only about 15% to 20%    Most "classic" single
of patients with proven mets have a single lesion (most commonly in the     lesion is a breast
spine). In other words, 80% of the time it's benign. A classic exception    cancer met to the
is a single sternal lesion in a patient with breast cancer. This is due     sternum.
to breast CA 80% of the time.

Vertebral Body Fracture (Benign V5' Malignant): A horizontal linear
pattem of tracer uptake is the classic look for an osteoporotic fracture
(especially if they are multiple and of varying intensity). If the tracer extends
from the vertebral body into the posterior elements or just involves the pedicles
then you should think cancer. Lastly, followup of the osteoporotic fracture
should show tracer activity decreasing (cancer isn't gonna do that).

Rib Lesions (Benign V5 Malignant): Multiple ribs in a vertical linear pattem           Multiple Contiguous
should make you think fractures (think about any trauma scan you've ever seen         Lesions (Rib Fractures)
with rib fractures - they tend to line up). Now, if the hot spots are multiple (3 or
more) and are jumping around, bilaterally, etc... you should think mets. The
big thing is that when cancer goes to bones it rarely just goes to the ribs. So
lesions only in the ribs are more likely to be benign - but when you have lesions
in the ribs and other spots then you are likely dealing with mets.

                     500
Abnormal Distribution - Part 4- Tbe Dream Master

Specific Cancers - Specific Trivia:                        BAD BONES!
  · Prostate Cancer Loves Bone Mets

(85% o f dying patients have it)                           Any bone uptake on:

· Prostate Cancer bone mets are uncommon                                    MIBG,
  with a PSA less than 10 mg/ml                                             M 3 1 , or
                                                                        Octreotide
· Lung Cancer bone mets tend to be
  in the appendicular skeleton                             is abnormal. & concerning for mets.

· Lung Cancer can have

hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (10%)

· Breast Cancer bone mets are most common to the spine,

but the solitary sternal lesion is more specific

· Neuroblastoma frequently mets to the bones (metaphysis o f long bones)

· 1-123 and 131 M IBG are superior for detection o f neuroblastom a bone mets

Bone Island vs Prostate Met:

  · Both are sclerotic on plain film / CT
  · The Prostate Met should be very HOT on Bone Scan
  · The Bone Island should be cold, or faintly warm
  · Osteopoikilosis should be cold - clustered around joints, and for the most part spares the

     spine & skull

Bone Scan vs Skeletal Survey (Trivia):                         Equivocal Lesion

· Bone Scan is way better (more sensitive) than skeletal           Next Step ?
  survey for blastic mets
                                                           If a bone scan "equivocal lesion"
· Skeletal Survey is superior (more sensitive)             is found the next step is a plain
  for Ivtic mets                                           film. If the plain film shows no
                                                           corresponding lesion this is
· Skeletal survey is the preferred evaluation for osseous  MORE suspicious for mets. Next
  involvement in myeloma                                   step at that point would be a MRI.

Post Treatment:

Chemotherapy -- I mentioned the "flare" phenomenon that occurs post chemotherapy earlier in the
chapter. Remember, that imaging around 3 months post treatment is key to avoiding this pitfall.

Radiation - Similar to chemotherapy, the acute (early) phase of radiation osteitis will typically be warm
(-20% above baseline) within the radiation port - peaking around 2-3 months. Late phase changes are
typically cold. As a general rule - if it is cold at 6 months, it is probably staying cold permanently (it
won't go back to baseline). So, if it was cold at month 7 and now it is hot -- that is recurrent disease.

                                          501
Abnormal Dlstiibuaon - Pan 5 - The Dream Child

Super Scans:                                                             That s my secret,
                                                                         I 'm always angry.
This is a com mon trick, where the scan shows no abnormal focal uptake,
but you can't see the kidneys. That is the secret, everything is hot.

This occurs in two
flavors:

· Diffuse Mets: Diffuse
  skeletal metastatic
  activity
  (breast and prostate
  are the common
  culprits).

· Metabolic: From

metabolic bone           *

pathology; including

hyperparathyroid,

renal osteodystrophy,

Pagets, or severe

thyrotoxicosis.

                         Diffuse Prostate Mets  Hyper PTH (hot skull)

How can you tell them apart?

 (1) The skull will be asymmetrically HOT on the metaboHc super scan.
 (2) Besides the hot skull, metabolic scans tend to have a more "uniform" look with tracer

   uptake extending more distal into the arms / legs (appendicular skeleton).
D on Vg et it tw isted - A com mon sneaky m ove is to show you a bone scan, with no renals. But
it's because there is a horseshoe kidney in the pelvis. Could be phrased as a next step question,
with the answer being look at prior CT to confirm normal anatomy.

                                                              502
         Abnormal Distribution - Part 6 - Tbe Hnai Nightmaro

^ Back to Primary Bone Lesions:

Both Osteosarcoma and Ewings will be hot.               Osteosarcoma             Osteoid Osteoma
Primary utility o f the bone scan is to see extent o f                           -Double Density
disease. With regard to benign bone tumors the
only ones worth knowing are the HOT ones and
the COLD ones. Osteoid Osteoma is worth
knowing a few extra things about (because they
lend themselves easily to multiple choice
questions).

Osteoid Osteoma: The lesion will be focal and three phase hot. A central hot nidus is often
seen (double density or hotter spot within hot area). A normal bone scan excludes this
entity.

Fibrous Dysplasia: Be aware that in case books / case conference this is sometimes shown
as a super hot mandible. Could also be shown as a leg that looks similar to Paget.

Pagets:

Seen prim arily in older patients (8% at 80), it's classically shown five ways:

1. Super Hot Enlarged Femur                             Im
2. Super Hot Enlarged Pelvis
3. Super H ot Skull                                                 Pagets
4. Expanded hot "entire" vertebral body
5. M etabolic Superscan - from w idespread

     Pagets. Although, as a point of
     gamesmanship if they show you a
     metabolic superscan the answ er is
     probably hyper PTH.

A Pagets Spine - Classically involves BOTH the vertebral body and posterior elements.

                                            503
Abnormal Dlstribuaon - Part 7 - Wes Craven's New Nightmare

"HO"

Normally when we think about the consequences of              Cold Lesions
"HO" we typically think about nasty things like
herpes, crabs, and gonorrhea - but on multiple        Late Radiation Therapy Changes /
choice HO can refer to something totally different -  Osteitis (usually segmental)
heterotopic ossification. This describes bone         Early Osteonecrosis (AVN)
(hence the term "ossification") growing in soft       Infarction (very early or late)
tissues. Typically you see this acquired after a      Anaplastic Tumor (Renal, Thyroid,
muscular trauma. As discussed in the MSK chapter      Neuroblastoma, Myeloma)
the pattern is typically outside to in, with the      Artifact from prosthesis, pacemaker,
eventual development of mature cortical bone. In      spine stimulator, etc....
some cases this abnormal bone proliferation can       Hemangioma ** variable
reduce joint motility and cause pain. Therefore, in   Bone Cyst (without fracture)
some cases surgical resection is performed to         Mature Heterotopic Ossification
preserve the function of the joint.

Enter the MDP Bone Scan.

The main reason you image this is to see if it's "mature." Serial exams are used to evaluate if the
process is active or not (not = "mature"). If it's still active it has a higher rate of recurrence after it's
resected. The idea is you can follow it with imaging until it's mature (cold), then you can hack it out
(if someone bothers to do that).

                    '^F Sodium Fluoride PET vs Tc-MDP Bone Scan

We have talked a lot about Tc-MDP scans, but you can actually do bone scans with several
different tracers - the main two are 18F Sodium Fluoride and Tc-MDP. If you were trying to
differentiate the two (perhaps in the plane crash scenario I discussed on the first page o f the
chapter), the primary take home point is F-18 NaF PET is way way way cleaner looking than
Tc-MDP. By "cleaner" I mean that the image quality and sensitivity o f FI 8 NaF is multiple
orders o f magnitude better than Tc-MDP. It also has a shorter examination time. So, why do
you never see NaF? Because it costs more, and insurances w on't pay etc... Politics and
Finance are the reasons. Another potentially testable factoid would be which organ gets the
highest dose? The organ receiving the highest dose is Bone with MDP, and Bladder with

    NaF (overall >*F NaF > Tc-MDP) -- probably... honestly you 11 read different things in
different sources.

                                    --Scan on Scan on Scan--
This is a common trick, popular in case books & case conferences - asking you to distinguish
F-18 NaF bone scan vs Tc-MDP bone scan vs PET-FDG with marrow stimulation.

This is how you do it;
·Tc-MDP will have bone and kidney uptake. It will be a blurry fiizzv piece of crap.

·'®FNaF - PET will be beautiful, super high resolution, and look like a MIP PET - but
  WITHOUT the brain uptake.

·'8F FDG -PET with bone stimulation - In patients treated with the granulocyte
  colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) or erythropoietin (EPO) diffuse bone marrow uptake is
  common. The scan will look similar to the F-18, but will have brain uptake. Also, this can show
  increased uptake in the spleen.

                                                            504
                           The Three Phase Scan;

Bone scans can be done in a single delayed phase, or in 3 phases (flow, pool, and delayed). A
lot o f things can be "3 phase hot", including osteomyelitis, fracture, tumor, osteoid osteoma,
charcot joint, and even reflex sympathetic dystrophy.

                                     Cellulitis vs Osteomyelitis:

The benefit o f using 3 phases is to distinguish between cellulitis (which will be hot on flow
and pool, but not delays), and osteomyelitis (which is 3 phase hot). In children, a whole body
bone scan is often performed to evaluate extent. Additionally, because o f subperiosteal pus/
edema you can actually have decreased vascularity to the infected area (cold on initial phases)
but clearly hot on delayed phases.
 Trivia: An extended delay or "4th phase" - can help localization.
 Trivia: A normal perfusion (flow) phase makes infection very unlikely.

In the spine, gallium (combined with bone scan) or MRI are the preferred imaging modalities.
Response:

You can also use a bone scan to evaluate response to treatment. Blood flow and blood pool
tend to stay abnormal for about 2 months, with delayed activity persisting for up to 2 years.
This is especially true w hen dealing with load bearing bones. Gallium*'? and I n d iu m 'W B C
are superior for monitoring response to therapy.

                            Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (RSD):

Sometimes called "complex regional pain syndrome," it can be seen after a stroke, trauma, or
acute illness. The classic description is increased uptake on flow and blood pool, with
periarticular uptake on delayed phase. The uptake often involves the entire extremity.
About one third o f adult patients with documented RSD do not show increased perfusion and
uptake (which probably means they are fa k in g it, a n d need a rheum atology consultfo r
fibromyalgia). In children, sometimes you actually see decreased uptake.

                                                              505
Sulfur Colloid Bone Scan & WBC Imaging:

Tc can be tagged to sulfur colloid with the idea of getting a            In -WBC Scan
normal localization to the bone marrow. You can actually        Normal Distribution ;
perform Tc sulfur colloid studies to map the bone marrow in     · Spleen » Liver > Marrow
patients with sickle cell (with the idea to demonstrate marrow
expansion and bone infarct). However, the major utility is to   No Renal Activity. No GI activity
use it in combination with tagged WBC or Gallium.               Helpful findings: Hot Spleen,
                                                                Relatively low-count study
Both Tc Sulfur Colloid and In WBCs will accumulate in
normal bone marrow, in a spatially congruent way (they          Contrasted to Gallium:
overlap). The principal is that infected bone marrow will       · Liver > Spleen, and
become photopenic on Tc-Sulflir Colloid. Now, this takes        · Can have GI activity
about a week after the onset of infection, so you have to be
careful in the acute setting. WBC, on the other hand, will
obviously still accumulate in an area of infection. Combined
Tc-Sulfur Colloid and WBC study is positive fo r infection if
there is activity on WBC image, without corresponding Tc
Sulfur Colloid activity on the bone marrow image.

Tc-Sulfur Colloid                                               In-WBC

                                                                        i

Less Uptake in      More Uptake in
Infected Bone       Infected Bone

Special Situation >The Spine
When imaging the spine, WBC frequently fails to migrate showing a photopenic area
fWBC = False Negative in the Spine). This is why gallium is better for osteomyelitis of the spine.

                                        /

Tc-Sulfur Colloid   ft*                                           Gallium
                           In-WBC
    Less Uptake in         Less Uptake in                       More Uptake in
    Infected Bone          Infected Bone -                      Infected Bone
                           *Faise Negative

                                    506
Prosthesis Evaluation:
Differentiating infection from aseptic loosening is challenging and the m ost common reason a
nuclear medicine doctor would get involved in the situation. Bone scan findings of
periprosthetic activity is very nonspecific, because you can see increased tracer activity in a
hip up to 1 year after placement (even longer in cementless arthroplasty). Typically, there
would be diffusely increased activity on imaging with Tc-MDP in the case o f infection (more
focal along the stem and lesser trochanter with loosening) - but this isn 't specific either.
Combined Tc-Sulfur Colloid and WBC imaging is needed to tell the difference.

Helpful when negative - A negative bone scan excludes loosening or infection.

Neuropathic Foot:

Most commonly seen in the tarsal and tarsal-metatarsal joints (60%), in diabetics. W hen the
question is infection (w hich diabetics also get), it's difficult to distinguish arthritis changes vs
infection with Tc-MDP. Again, combined marrow + WBC study is the way to go.
An additional pearl that could make a good "next step" question is the need for a fourth phase
in diabetic feet. As these patient's tend to have reduced peripheral blood flow, the addition o f
a 4th phase at 24 hours may help you distinguish between bone and delayed soft tissue
clearance.

                 Instead of In-WBC, What about Tc99 HMPAO WBC ?

  When would you consider Tc99 HMPAO instead o f In-W BC fo r infection ? Two main
 reasons

      (1) Kids - Tc99 will have a lower absorbed dose & shorter imaging time
      (2) Small Parts - Tc99 does better in hands and feet

  Why not use Tc99 HMPAO all the time ? The downsides to Tc99 HMPAO are:
      (1) It has a shorter half life -6 hrs- which limits delayed imaging, and
      (2) It has normal GI and gallbladder activity which obscures activity in those areas.

                                   In-WBC Chem and Pharm

    The vast majority (like 90%) o f the labeled cells are Neutrophils. This allows you to
    "trace" anything that triggers neutrophil migration (inflammation / infection).
    The radiation dose that the Indium deposits on the neutrophil doesn't mess w ith its
    function (supposedly). Lymphocytes on the other hand, tend to be killed by the radiation
    (they don't turn into cancer).
    In the normal situation the critical organ is the spleen.
    If the cells become fragm ented - the Indium binds with transferrin and you see more
    uptake in the liver a n d bone marrow.

                                                              507
