   SECTION 9:

_  PET FOR C a n c e r

As mentioned before, 18-FDG is cyclotron produced and decays via beta positive emission to 18-0.
The positron gets emitted, travels a short distance, then collides with an electron producing two 511
keV photons which go off in opposite directions. The scanner is a ring and when the two photons
land 180 degrees apart at the same time the computer does math (which computers are good at) to
localize the origin.

A CT component is fused over the PET portion. This is done for two reasons:
     (1) Anatomy - so you can see what the hell you are looking at.
     (2) Attenuation Correction - Dense stuff will slow down the photons, and the CT allows for
          correction of that. It also leads to errors, the classic one being a metallic pacemaker looks
          bright hot on the corrected image (the computer overcorrected). This is a classic question.
          The answer is look at the source images (uncorrected).

Some other technical trivia is that FDG enters the cell via a GLUT 1 transporter and is then
phosphorylated by hexokinase to FDG-6-Phosphate. This locks it in the cell. Normal bio distribution
is brain, heart, liver, spleen, GI, blood pool, salivary glands, and testes. The collecting system and
bladder (critical organ) will also be full of it, because that's where it's getting excreted.

When do you image? Following therapy; waiting 2-3 weeks for chemotherapy and 8-12 weeks
for radiation is typical. This avoids "stunning" - false negatives & inflammatory induced false positive.

Who do you image? The main utility is extent of disease, and distal metastatic spread. Local
invasion is tricky with a lot of things. Usually straight up CT or MRI is better for local invasion and
characterization. Doing a PET prior to biopsy (to help you select the best site) is also a good idea.

SUV: This is the standardized uptake value used         I                Concentration at time T
to describe how much FDG something drinks (how                       (Dose / Body W eight)
metabolically active it is). The value is prone to all  j SUV-
kinds of issues -- I talk more about this in the
Radiology Physics War Machine.                                    ~
                                                        i
                                                        I

Values > 2.0 (some people say 2.5) are generally abnormal. This can be cancer or infection /
inflammation. Usually the higher the number the more aggressive the tumor. Lesions smaller than
1cm (some people say 7mm) are often too small to determine an SUV.

Insulin and Blood Glucose:

 High Blood Glucose (> 150-200): The more glucose the patient has, the more competition is
  created for the FDG and you will have artificially low SUVs.

 Insulin: So why not just give the patient some insulin??? It will drive it all into the muscles. This
  is a classic trick. PET with diffuse muscle uptake = Insulin Administration

Variable areas of uptake:

 Muscles (classic forearm muscle uptake in the nervous chair squeezing patient).
 Breast and ovaries in females at certain stages of the menstrual cycle.
 Thymus in younger patients (< 13) - and after chemotherapy "thymic rebound / hyperplasia"
 Lastly, brown fat around the neck, thorax, and adrenals (especially in a cold room).

   547
Brown Fat /Brown Adipose Tissue (BAT):

You may remember from med school physiology that brown fat is something infants have to help
them keep warm. Although you lose most of it as you grow up, people do still have small amounts
( women > m en). The distribution is most common at the base of the neck / shoulders. It can also be
seen in the paraspinal fat along the thoracic spine. Both locations have a classic (testable)
appearance.

Brown Fat is More Common with - cold rooms and anxious patients.

Reducing Uptake From Brown Fat:
(1) Keep the room warm.
(2) Medications like propranolol (beta blocker), or reserpine - are classic. Diazepam is probably less

     effective according to the literature -- some people still give it.
(3) Diet: High fat and very low carb preparation diet the night before and morning of the PET

Hibernoma: This is a benign brown fat tumor - classically found at the shoulders and knees. They
tend to be very hot on PET, but have a characteristic well circumscribed appearance on CT with a
density between fat and muscle. Liposarcoma is the primary differential, so they are typically cut out.

Consequences of being fat:

 Fat people will have HIGHER SUV values, because the fat takes up less glucose
 You leave the house in high heels... and come back home in flip flops
 You go camping., and the bears have to hide their food

Ki67 Proliferation index: This isn't something you see on a scan, but it is something that could be
used in a question stem - so it is good to know what it is. Ki67 is an antigen associated with cellular
proliferation. You've probably heard the pathologist ramble on about it in tumor board (while pointing at
blobs of red and blue dots). More Ki67 = More Aggressive Tumor

Breast Cancer: Inject FDG in the opposite side of the primarv breast cancer. Scan them supine
with their arms up. Screening with FDG is usually not done - it is very non-specific (so many false
positives). The most testable legit indication is probably a patient who needs an MRI for problem
solving - but can't get one because of some contraindication (metal in the eyes, pacemaker, etc..).
Obviously you can (and often do) use it for staging and treatment response.

               Tumors that are PET COLD                        Not Cancer but PET HOT
           BAG (Adeno In Situ) - Lung Cancer                               Infection
Carcinoid / Neuroendocrine (Low/Intermediate Grade)
                                                                        Inflammation
                               RCC                             Ovaries in Follicular Phase
             Peritoneal Bowel/Liver Implants
                                                                           Muscles
                      Anything Mucinous                                   Brown Fat
                             Prostate
                                                                           Thymus
                                                          548
          Special Situations - FDG PET Cancer Trivia

 Focal Thyroid Uptake - Requires Further Workup - might be cancer, might be nothing

 Diffuse Thyroid Uptake - Most often Autoimmune (Hashimoto) Thyroiditis

 RCC are COLD (usually), Oncocytomas are HOT

 COLD Ground Glass Nodule = Cancer, HOT Glass Nodule = Infection

 HCC is often cold (60%) - it has variable glucose-6- phosphatase and can't trap the FDG

 Testicular cancers skip right to the retroperitoneum. The trivia is the seminomatous CA is FDG
  hot, whereas non-seminomatous tends to be FDG COLD (or Luke Warm).

 While it's OK for ovaries to be hot in functional (ovulating) young people. Grandma should
  NOT have FDG up-take in her dried-up raisin ovaries. This is suspicious - next step Ultrasound.

 Metformin is classic for causing false positive bowel uptake. The uptake is typically intense and
  diffuse. It tends to favor the colon (small bowel to a lesser extent). Most people suggest holding
  it for 48 hours.

 Large Bowel: An isolated hot spot in the colon = colonoscopy. Villous adenomas and colon
  cancers > 1cm can be FDG Avid.

 Neuroendocrine Tumors: If you see a neuroendocrine tumor on PET, it tends to be aggressive.

 Medullary Thyroid Cancer: The more aggressive the tumor, the more useful PET CT is. You can
  trend this with calcitonin. If the calcitonin is > 1000 PET is sensitive, < 500 its usually shit.

 Pituitary Adenomas (benign ones) can be very hot on PET. These require a hormonal workup
  (prolactin, etc..) and dedicated MRI.

 Adrenal Glands - mild uptake is normal. In general, an adrenal pathology is typically considered
  malignant if the uptake is higher than the liver (used as an internal control). Although this does
  not really hold up that well in my experience (especially since liver uptake is variable). For
  example. Adrenal Adenomas can have moderate uptake (still usually not super hot). Comparison
  to CT (HU < 10) is the best move to distinguish. Be careful with the lung cancers -- remember
  they like to met to the adrenals.

 Right Ventricle - The RV is not typically seen on PET unless it's enlarged.

 Sarcoid - Mediastinal nodes will take up F-18 FDG in most cases of cardiac sarcoid. These can
  be used for diagnostic biopsy (primary or after a failed endomyocardial biopsy).

 Lymphoma

   Most Lymphoma are Super Hot.

   Thymic Rebound vi'Recurrent Lymphoma: Thymic Hyperplasia (or Rebound) can be "Warm"
     on PET, but recurrent Lymphoma should be HOT. Also, Rebound tends to maintain the normal
     thymus look (it sorta drapes over the heart). Lymphoma is round like a ball. A hot ball of
     death, or a "great ball of fire"

   Extranodal marginal zone lymphomas, including the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
     (MALT) marginal zone lymphoma, have been shown to have LOW Avidity for FDG.

                                                              549
     Special Situations - FDG PET Cancer Trivia
                 Gynecologic and Genitourinary

                                             GYN PET

     False Positives                                     False Negatives

Physiologic FDG in the endometrium.

Two described peaks of FDG                          Necrotic, Mucinous, Cystic, or
                                                    Low-grade Cancers -- you gotta correlate with
(1)  Rag Week / IVIenstruation (first 4 days of     US and/or MRI to avoid looking stupid.

cycle) and (2) Ovulation (~ day 14) and             5 0% of RCC may not be FDG avid

menstruation may mimic disease.

Physiological uptake in the endometrium is
usually diffuse. Cancer is usually more focal.

You w on't see this in postmenopausal women

PhvsioloQic FDG in the ovaries.                     Small-volume peritoneal disease and small
Seen during ovulation                               lymph nodes -- can be missed because they
                                                    are small, can also be missed because the
Typically appears as ovoid or a rim of activity     adjacent bowel (which has physiological uptake)
with a photopenic center.                           masks them

You w on't see this in postmenopausal women

Endometrial or ovarian FDG activity in the
postmenopausal = suspicious (next step
ultrasound)

Benign lesions:
 Uterine Fibroids
 Benign Endometriotic Cysts

Misregistration: Focal uptake in the ureter or the  Perivesical disease - can be missed because of
bladder - if mapped incorrectly can simulate        the high uptake in the adjacent bladder - look
disease.                                            at source images (uncorrected)

Main strategy to reduce this artifact is to
minimize the time between the PET and CT
acquisitions

Vesicovaginal fistulas (common in advanced
disease) -- can falsely elevate SUV values by
spilling urinary FDG excretion

                                                    550
          Special Situations - FDG PET Cancer Trivia
                     Osteosarcoma and Bone iVlisc...

 Remember secondary osteosarcomas (the ones from Pagets. Radiation, Multiple
  Chondromas, etc....) are the bad mother fuckers. They have by far the worst outcome.

 Back in the stone ages - if you got diagnosed with an osteosarcoma they assumed that
   80% of the time you had distal mets. This was prior to effective chemotherapy for
  osteosarcom a... it was basically a death sentence. They do better now (little bit).

 Typically mets go to (a) second bone sites, and (b) the lungs. Remember the classic
  vignette o f a spontaneous pneumothorax in an osteosarcoma patient = lung met.

 With the modem addition o f effective chemo, accurate staging and restaging actually
  m atters - and this is w hy I'm ram bling on about osteosarcom a. PET m ay/could
   actually play a key role in treatment and is therefore testable.

 Average SUV is used at some institutions for describing tumor metabolism. Most
   literature says you should use the SUV M ax for describing osteosarcom a - because it's
   a very heterogenous tumor.

 Multiple papers have shown a correlation between tumor grade and FDG uptake (SUV
  values). Higher SUV Max = Higher Tumor Grade.

 Baseline SUV Max is an independent and significant predictor of overall survival
  (more = bad). H aving said that P E T is not typically usedfo r baseline staging.

 An im portant point is that especially with bone stuff, nukes is highly non-specific.
   Remember earlier in the chapter I said several B9 bones lesions are hot on Tc-MDP?
  Same thing with PET. Giant Cell is the classic example. Lots o f cases o f GCTs have
  higher SUV than sarcomas. Fibrous dysplasia is another classic that can be hot on
  PET.

 There is no cutoff to tell the difference between a B9 bone lesion and a bone sarcoma.
  Same deal with infection. Osteomyelitis can have very high FDG uptake.

 Important point = Because PET is so nonspecific, it is N O T used clinically to avoid
  biopsy.... but can sometimes guide biopsy.

 The most important prognostic factor = response to preoperative (neoadjuvant)
  chemotherapy.

 There is a proven positive correlation o f FDG uptake and viable tum or tissue. In other
  words, F'8-FDG PET can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of neoadjuvant
  chemotherapy.

 Rheumatoid Arthritis - Symmetric periarticular distribution suggests RA

                                                           551
