          SECTION 10:
N o n -p e t for C ancer

In'!11 Octreoscan

>>>In Pentetreotide is the most com m only used agent for som atostatin receptor imaging. The
classic use is for carcinoid tumors, gastrinomas, paragangliomas, merkel cell tumors,
lymphoma, small cell lung cancer, medullary thyroid cancer, and meningiomas.

                                         Indiumin

  Indium is produced in a cyclotron and decays with a 67 hour half life via electron capture.
  It produces tw o p h o to p eak s at 173 keV and 247 keV. Just like Gallium, Inm in a liquid
 will carry a +3 valence and behaves like Fe+s, with the capability o f forming strong bonds
 with transferrin.

  The most common application is to bind it to WBC,
  although it can also be hooked to octreotide, or DTPA
  for CNS imaging (cisternography). Basically, you can
  hook indium to almost anything if you hook it first to
  a strong chelator like DTPA. As a point o f trivia, you
  need to isolate the WBCs prior to labeling because the
  transferrin in the blood binds with greater affinity and
  will out-compete them.

Trivia: Meningiomas take up Octreotide (and Tc MDP).
As a point o f trivia, there are 5 somatostatin receptors but " 'I n Pentetreotide can only bind to
two of them. The scan works because 80% of neuroendocrine tumors express these two
receptors.

Normal uptake is in the thyroid, liver,             %      %
gallbladder, spleen, kidneys, bladder, and
GI tract. Imaging is done in early and                 a.  ».
delayed phase. The advantage o f the early
phase (4 hours) is that the bowel activity is
absent. The delayed is done to clarify that
the abdominal tracer is o f GI origin.

                                               Meningioma - Hot on Octreotide and Tc MDP

                                               552
MIBG

MIBG is an analog o f noradrenalin and is therefore taken up by adrenergic tissue. M IBG is
first line for tumors like pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma, and neuroblastoma. You can
have MIBG with either 1-123 or I -131. 1-123 is better because it has better imaging quahty.
1-131 is cheaper, and the long h alf life allows for delayed imaging.

Blocking the Thyroid Gland: The thyroid gland should be blocked, to prevent unintended
radiation to the gland from unbound 1-123 or 1-131. This is accom plished with Lugol's Iodine
or Perchlorate. Sometimes y o u 'll see ''SSKT' which is 5uper Saturated Potassium /odine

Biodistribution: Normal in liver, spleen, colon, salivary glands. The adrenals may be faintly
visible. Note the kidneys are NOT seen.

Trivia: M IB G is su p erio r to M D P bone scan fo r n eu ro b lasto m a bone m ets. *Ifyou see a
skeleton on MIBG the answer is diffuse bone mets.

Trivia: M IBG is better for Pheo than In-111 Octreotide. M IBG is better than CT or MRI for
the extra-adenral Pheos.

                  Medication interaction with MIBG - High Yield Trivia

 Certain medications interfere with the workings of MIBG and must be held.
 Medications include calcium-channel blockers, labetalol (other beta-blockers have no
 effect), reserpine, tricychc antidepressants and sympathomimetics.

                                        TH IS V5THAT: MIBG Scans

                                                                                                           W h a t's D ifferen t B etw e en
                                                                                                           P atien t "A " and "B" - w ho
                                                                                                           both recen tly got IVIIBG
                                                                                                           Scans?

                                                                                       Patient B - Forgot to take
                                                                                       her Lugol's !

                                                                                                           So, she just cooked her
                                                                                                           thyroid.

                                               B

                                                             553
        Gamesmanship - MIBG

Brown Fat = Just like you can see it on FDG PET (around the shoulders / traps) you can also
see it with MIBG. In fact, it's the M OST COM M ON variant in I>23 M IBG bio distribution.
Mechanism? Apparently brown fat has sympathetic innervation.
Utility: The classic use for M IBG is Neuroblastom a. B u t.... if someone w anted to get sneaky
they could also show you a pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma, or carcinoid on MIBG.
Essentially any catecholamine producing tumor. See the chart on the next page for specifics.

        Gamesmanship - Octreotide:

Octreotide Meclianistn Nitty Gritty: Octreotide works as an analog to somatostatin and will
bind to the same receptors as somastostain. W ell... sorta. Technically, there are 5 subtypes of
somatostatin receptors and Octreotide will only bind to 2 o f them. As you can imagine, the
sensitivity o f the agent is going to depend on which receptors are expressed by the tumor.
Fortunately, most tumors express those 2 receptors.
Suspected Insulinoma: Some sources will say that Octreotide can trigger hypoglycemia in
the setting of an insulinoma. W hat to do about this seems to vary a lot on who you ask and
what you read. Some places will say to give them some IV solution with glucose before and
during the administration o f Octreotide. Other places will just say have D50 ready just in case.
What should you do if both o f those options are choices on the exam? Simply read the mind of
the person who wrote the question and choose the correct answer.
Already on Octreotide Therapy: You will need to stop the treatment for 3 days prior to
giving the labeled agent.

                                                              554
                  M IBG                  Octreotide

Carcinoid         inferior               Superior                 Octreotide and MIBG are
Insulinoma        (Sensitivity 50-70% )  (Sensitivity 80-90% )    similar for detection of Liver
                                                                  Mets
                                         SHIT
                                         (Sensitivity ~ 30%)      Insulinoma is usually B9

Gastrinoma                               Good                     Gastrinoma is usually
                                         (Sensitivity ~ 85%)      Malignant

Non-Functional    Crap                   Crap                     FDG PET is the test of choice.
Islet Cell Tumor  (No Function,          (No Function,
                  No Receptors)          No Receptors)

Pheo              Superior For Non-      Superior For Malignant   FDG is also good - but
                  iVlaiignant (Adrenal)  (Extra-Adrenal) Types    Octreotide is cheaper - so
                  Types (which is lil<e  (which is a minority of  people go that route first when
                  90% of them)           them 10%)                malignancy is suspected

Paraganglioma     Less Sensitive and     Superior
                  Less Specific (*on!y   (Sensitivity ~ 95% )
                  concentrates in the
                  functional subtypes)

Medullary         Inferior               Superior -               Octreotide is still the first line
Thyroid CA        (Sensitivity 30 %)     (Sensitivity 50-80% )    as a nukes agent. If it's
                                                                  negative (in the setting of
                                                                  rising calcitonin) the next step
                                                                  is F D G -P E T

Neuroblastoma     Superior               Inferior
                  (Sensitivity ~ 95% )   (Sensitivity ~ 64% )

                                         555
Gallium

Gallium can be used for tumors. Remember, it's very nonspecific with regards to infection,
inflammation, or tumor.

Trivia: During the Cretaceous Period (when many o f your attendings trained); Gallium was
used to differentiate residual tum or vs fibrosis, scarring, necrosis e tc ... in patients with
H odgkin's disease and M alignant Lymphoma

Trivia: If you are going to use Gallium for treatm ent m onitoring it's im portant to have a pre­
treatment exam (to ensure that the tum or site is actually Gallium - avid).

ProstaScint

  'In can be labeled to the antibody Capromab Pendetide (ProstaScint). Capromab is a
monoclonal antibody which recognizes PSA membrane antigen "PSM A" - which is slightly
different that PSA. Pendetide is the chelating agent. In my opinion, the exam is shit and
doesn't w ork well.

When do you do the test? If you have a rising PSA and negative bone scan. The purpose o f the
study is to look for mets outside the prostate bed (soft tissue mets). If they do not have distal
mets, they can be offered salvage therapy (radiation to the surgical bed). It's im portant to not
obsess over the surgical bed, the real question is distal mets. Having said that, the prostate bed
is best seen on the lateral between the bladder and penis.

Testable Trivia: ProstaScint will localize to soft tissue mets, NOT bone mets.

Testable Trivia: ProstaScint's critical organ is the LIVER.

This confuses some people. Avoid this trap: Indium = WBC. It's slang to say "Indium Scan"
and people in Nukes just think tagged WBC with Indium. B u t.... Not all Indium is WBC.
Remember that Octreotide is actually labeled with Indium, and so is a bunch o f other stuff.

Bottom Line: For Critical Organ Trivia
          Indium ProstaScint = Liver
          Indium WBC = Spleen
          Indium Octreotide = Spleen

                                                                 556
Sentinel Node Detection

A sentinel node is the node which receives afferent drainage directly from a prim ary cancer.
Surgeons want to know where these are at; especially with melanoma and breast cancer. The
agent used for lymphoscintigraphy is 10-50 nm Tc99m su lfu r colloid.

Melanoma: Sentinel node mapping is done when you have a lesion between 1 mm-4 mm deep.
Less than 1 mm you are typically safe. More than 4 mm you are totally screwed and it makes
no difference. The utility o f the test is to go after the ones in that middle zone (between
1-4 mm). Intradermal injection in 4 spots around the lesion / excision scar and im aging is done.

Breast Cancer: Cancer drains to the internal mammary chain nodes about 3% o f the time.
Knowing this, and which axillary node to go for first, can help avoid aggressive lymph node
dissection. Injections can be done superficial or deep (into the pectoral muscle).

                                               Size Matters
Does particle size matterfo r sentinel node detection? Yes and No.

The idea is that particles have to be small enough to travel through the lymphatics. A
particle that is 500 nm will not go anywhere. So any answ er choice with 500 nm or larger
for a lymph node study is universally incorrect. Now this is where you will read different
stuff (and send me nasty emails). Some sources say < 200 nm. This will probably work,
but you will be waiting all day for the study. The larger the particles the slower the study.
More sources will say < 100 nm. This will work, but again slow study. There is at least
one paper out that advocates for using a 0.22 mm filter (available in most hospital
pharm acies because it is com monly used for sterilization o f hyperalim entation solutions).
If you do that you end up with particles that are 10-100 nm. If you use this 0.22 mm filter
method you can routinely visualize lymphatic channels and sentinel nodes within 30 mins
after administration.

Gamesmanship - How do you know what the question writer does at his/her institution?
If it was me - 1 w ould pick a choice less than 100 nm. I f forced to choose between 100 and
5 0 - 1 would pick 50, and there is literature to back you up (not that y o u 'd have a chance to
defend yourself), but practically most places do filter the particles and use small ones.

            Test                        Particle Size
Lymphoscintigraphy  < 0.2 microns (< 200 nm)
VQ                  10-100 microns (10,000 - 100,000 nm)
Liver Spleen        "Unfiltered" - so all sizes big and small

                    557
Breast Specific Gamma Imaging

Tc99 Sestamibi will concentrate in a breast cancer 6 times more than normal background
breast tissue. It does pretty well, with the sensitivity supposedly near 90%. The technique is
to give 20-30 mCi o f Tc99 Sestamibi in the contralateral arm then image 20 mins later. A
foot injection is often done if you are going to image both breasts. You are supposed to use a
dedicated gamma camera that can mimic a mammogram and provide compression.

Does Breast Density Affect Uptake / Distribution ?
Nope. The distribution is homogeneous regardless of density. Having said that, hormonal fluctuation
can increase the background uptake.

When will background activity be lowest?
Around mid-cycle in premenopausal women.

What are some causes o ffalse positive studies ?
Fibroadenoma, fibrocystic change, or inflammation can give a false positive

What are some causes o ffalse negative studies?
Lesions that are small (< 1 cm), or deep. Lesions located in the medial breast, and/or those
overlapping with heart activity.
What about lymph nodes?
You see lymph nodes on a "M IBI" scan - this is NOT normal, it is concerning for mets.

                                                                 558
