                              SECTION 12:
                                Therapy

Treatment for Bone Pain:

There are currently three approved agents for bone pain associated with metastatic disease
from breast and prostate cancer: (1) Sr^^.chloride, (2) Sm'53 EDTMP, and (3) Ra223-dichloride.

Why does cancer cause bone pain / bone problems?

Metastatic disease leads to a tumor derived factor that increases osteolytic activity. You end up
with increased fracture risk, osteopenia, and hypercalcemia o f malignancy.

Can the patient get external radiation treatment with the therapy?

Yes, External radiation is not a contraindication and can be used with the therapy.

Absolute contraindications (for Sr and Sm) include: Pregnancy, Breastfeeding, and renal
Failure (GFR < 30). Patients with extensive bony mets (superscan) maybe sh o u ld n 't be treated
either * controversial - and therefore not likely tested.

Strontium - (Metastron): It works by complexing with the hydroxyapatite in areas where
bone turnover is the highest. It's the oldest, and w orst o f the three agents. It is a pure beta
emitter. It has a high myelotoxicitiy, relative to new er agents and therefore isn't really used.

Samarium - Smis3 (Quadram et): This is probably the second best o f the three agents;
"Samarium is a g o o d Samaritan. " It works by com plexing w ith the hydroxyapatite in areas
where bone turnover is the highest. It is a beta decayer. The prim ary m ethod o f excretion is
renal. Unhke Sr89, about 28% o f the decay is via gam m a rays (103 kev) which can be used for
imaging. Does have some transient bone marrow suppression (mainly thrombocytopenia and
leukopenia), but recovers faster than Sr.

           Sr89 (Metastron):                    Sm i53 (Quadramet)

15-30% drops in platelet and WBC from pre­ 40-50%) drops in platelet and W BC from pre­

injection                            injection

8-12 weeks needed for full recovery  6-8 weeks needed for full recovery

                                     565
Radium - Ra^23 (Xofigo): This is the m ost recent o f the three agents, and probably the best.
The idea is that Ra223 behaves in a sim ilar w ay to calcium. It is absorbed into the bone matrix
at the sites o f active bone mineralization. Its prim ary m echanism is the emission o f 4 alpha
particles, causing some serious double stranded DNA breaks.

Why is it the best?

     (1) It's an alpha em itter with a range shorter than Sr and Sm. This means less hem atologic
          toxicity.

     (2) At least one trial actually showed a survival benefit in prostate CA.

     (3) It has a long half life (11.4 days), allowing for easy shipping.

What are the side effects?

Non-hematologic toxicities are generally more common than hematologic ones; diarrhea,
fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and bone pain make the list.

Trivia: The general population is safe, as the gam m a effects are low. Soiled clothing and
bodily fluids should be handled with gloves, and clothes should be laundered separately. A 6
month period o f contraception is recommended although none o f this is evidence based (as per
usual).

Sr89                       Smi53                      Ra 223

Pure Beta Emitter          Beta Emitter, with some    Alpha Emitter
                           imageable gamma rays

Most Bone Marrow Toxicity  Less Bone Marrow Toxicity  Least Bone Marrow Toxicity
(longest recovery).

Renal excretion            Renal excretion            GI excretion

                                                      Improves Survival (prostate
                                                      mets)

                           566
Yttrium-90

This can be used as a radioembolization method for unresectable liver tumors. This is a pure Beta
emitter that spares most of the adjacent normal liver parenchyma (as the maximum tissue penetration is
about 10 mm).

Prior to treatment with Y-90 the standard is to do a 99mTc MAA hepatic arterial injection. The primary
purpose of this injection is to look for a lung shunt fraction. This fraction needs to be < 10% under
ideal circumstances. You can still use Y-90 for 10-20% shunts but you need to decrease the dose.
Above 20% the risk of radiation pneumonitis is too large.

Particle Size: The optimal particle size is between 20-40 um, as this allows particles to trap in the
tumor nodules, but large enough to get stuck without totally obstructing. If you create a true
embolization the process actually doesn't work as well because you need blood flow as a free radical
generation source.

Radiation Dose: The dose is typically 100-1000 Gy delivered. The current thinking is that lesions
require at least 70 Gy for monotherapy success.

Imaging: There are 175 Kev and 185 keV emissions you can use to image.

Trivia: The average half life is 2.67 days.

Radioimmune Therapy (RIT):

Monoclonal antibodies can be used with Indium"' , such as ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin) for
refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment or as a first line treatment.

The idea is that you can give the antibody labeled with Indium'" for diagnostic evaluation of the tumor
burden and then if the biodistribution is ok you can give the antibody labeled with Y-90 for treatment.

Trivia: The antibody binds to the CD-20 receptors on B-cells.

What is considered altered distribution?

(1) Uptake in the lungs is more intense than the heart day one, or more intense than liver on day 2 & 3.

(2) Uptake in the kidneys more than the liver on day 3.

(3) Uptake in the bowel that is fixed, and/or more than the liver

(4) Uptake in the bone marrow > 25%

Trivia: Don't give to patients with platelets less than lOOK

Most Common Side Effect? Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia (about 90% of cases).

Can you send them home post treatment? Dose to caretakers or persons near the patient is low, and they
can be released to the general population after treatment. Although some things like sleeping apart, no
kissing, etc... for about a week are still usually handed out.

Protocol: You need to first give rituximab to block the CD20 receptors on the circulating B cells and
those in the spleen to optimize biodistribution. Then you can give the In "' labeled antibody to assess for
altered biodistribution. If you suspect altered distribution you should get delayed full body imaging at
90-120 hours. If altered you shouldn't treat. If ok, then blast'em.

                                                                567
