S E C T IO N 1 1:
   C a r d ia c

Myocardial Perfusion I SPECT:

Tc Sestamibi and Tc Tetrofosmin are the m ost com mon tracers. They w ork by crossing the cell
membrane and localizing in m itochondria (passive diffusion). They don't redistribute (like
Thallium), giving better flexibility.

Sestamibi vi' Tetrofosmin - Tetrofosmin is cleared from the liver m ore rapidly and decreases the
chance of a hepatic uptake artifact.

Thallium - This is historical with regard to cardiac imaging. It mimics potassium and crosses
the cell membrane first by distribution related to blood flow - second by delayed redistribution
(washout). Washout is delayed in areas with poor perfusion.

Imaging Timing:

Tc studies (sestamibi and tetrofosm in) are done 30-90 mins after injection - allowing for
clearance from background

                        Thallium                    Sestamibi and Tetrofosmin
Old                                     Newer
Crosses cell via Na/K pump
                                        Crosses cell via passive diffusion (localizes
Redistributes                           in mitochondria)
Imaging must be done immediately after  Does NOT redistribute
injection                               Imaging typically done 30-90 mins after
                                        injection to allow for background to clear

Lung/ H eart Ratio: Only done with Thallium. If there is more uptake in the lungs, this
correlates with multi-vessel disease or high grade LAD or LCX lesions.

General Principal: You will see less perfusion distal to an area o f vascular obstruction
(compared to normal myocardium). To improve sensitivity, the heart is stressed. Under stress
you need about 50% stenosis to see a defect (it needs to be like 90% without stress).

                                        559
Preparation: Patient shouldn't eat for 4 hours prior to imaging (decreases GI blood flow). Patients
should (ideally) stop beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and long-acting nitrates for 24 hours
prior to the exam - as these meds mess with the sensitivity of the stress portion. There are reasons to
keep people on these meds (they might be getting risk stratification on medical therapy) - but I'd say
for the purpose o f multiple choice just know that those medication classes mess with stress imaging
sensitivity.

Protocols: There are multiple ways to skin this particular cat. People will do two day exams; rest then
stress. People will do one day exam stress then rest. The advantage to doing stress first is that you can
stop if it's normal. Typically the dosing is low for the rest and high for the stress.

Chemical Stress: If you can't exercise, the modem trend is to give you Regadenoson (coronary
vasodilator) - which is a specific adenosine receptor agonist. It's specific to a certain receptor having
less bronchospasm than conventional adenosine or dipyridamole. If they get bronchospasm anyway you
need to give them albuterol.

Known Left Bundle Branch Block: A known LBBB will make ECG stress testing non-diagnostic. So
diagnostic imaging (radionuclide myocardial perfusion) is typically the way to go. The important trivia
is:

LBBB Classic Artifact = False Positive Reversible Perfusion Defect at the Septum (anteroseptal
region). Supposedly this has something to do with the septum not relaxing correctly during diastolic
coronary filling (because the rhythm is not totally coordinated with the left sided block).

Pharmaceutic Choice = Adenosine or Dipyridamole is supposedly better for LBBB patients than
Dobutamine. The reason is Dobutamine increases the HR more, and the more rapid the HR, the worse
the septal relaxation stuff is. Dobutamine = More False Positives.

Findings:                                       Scar (prior infarct)
Fixed Defect (seen on stress and rest)          Ischemia
Reversible Defect (seen on stress, better on
rest)                                           Infarct with peri-infarct ischemia
Fixed Defect with Reversible Defect around it   From diffuse subendocardial hypoperfusion
Transient Ischemic Dilation                     producing an apparent cavity dilation.
(LV cavity is larger on stress)                 Correlated with high risk disease (left main
                                                or 3 vessel).
Fixed Cavity Dilation                           Dilated cardiomyopathy
Right Ventricular Activity on Rest              If has intensity similar to LV then think
                                                right ventricular hypertrophy
Lots o f splanchnic (liver and bowel) activity  M eans you aren't exercising hard enough -
                                                not shifting enough blood out o f the gut.

                                                560
THIS vs THAT: Stunned vs Hibernating Myocardium:

Stunned: This is the result of ischemia and reperfusion injury. It is an acute situation. The perfusion
will be normal, but contractility will be crap. It will get better after a few weeks.

Hibernating: This is a more chronic process, and the result of severe CAD causing chronic
hypoperfusion. You will have areas of decreased perfusion and decreased contractility even when
resting (just like scar). Don't get it twisted, this is not an infarct. This tissue will take up FDG more
intensely than normal myocardium, and will also demonstrate redistribution of thallium. Perhaps
the easiest way to think about this is to imagine that the heart is trapped in another dimension and
possessed by a shadow demon - existing in a state of trans-dimensional living death.

                                 Rapid Review

Ischemia = Will take up less tracer (relative to other areas) on stress, and the same amount of tracer
(relative to other areas) on rest. It's not normal heart so it won't contract well.

Scar = Won't take up tracer on rest or stress (it's dead Jim). It's scar not muscle, so it won't
contract normally either.

Stunned = The perfusion will be normal on both stress and rest, but the contractility is not normal.

Hibernating = Won't take up tracer on rest or stress (it's not dead, just asleep - like a bad soap
opera plot). The difference between hibernating muscle and scar is that the hibernating muscle will
take up FDG and redistribute thallium. The defect at rest will resolve / "redistribute" on delayed
thallium imaging. Remember thallium works with the Na/K pump - so cells need to be alive to
pump it in. A truly dead cell won't have a functioning Na/K pump and therefore won't be able to
redistribute / resolve the defect.

iVIUGA (Multigated Acquisition Scan):

This is an equilibrium radionucleotide angiogram with cardiac pool images taken after the tracer has
equilibrated to the intravascular space. Drugs like Adriamycin and Doxorubicin can be cardiac toxic.
Oncologists will alter treatment protocols when the LVEF drops (usually by 10%).

Huh? - It's an angiogram using tagged RBCs. You time (gate) the exam to get pictures that can be used
to estimate the Ejection Fraction (and evaluate motion etc...)

These studies requires gating (the "G" in MUGA). The study is done using Tc 99 labeled RBCs, and
the objective is to calculate an EF (MUGA is more accurate than myocardial perfusion for LVEF).
Photopenic halo around the cardiac blood pool is a classic look for pericardial effusion. Regional wall
motion abnormality on a resting MUGA is usually infarct (could be stunned or hibernating as well).

The easiest way to ask a question about MUGA is also probably the most important practical pearl

(wow... I can't believe I said that):                             _____________

False Low EF: Screwed up LAO view can cause overlap of LV         Left Anterior Oblique
with LA or RV or even great vessels - causing a false low EF.     (LAO) is the "best septal
Inclusion of the Left Atrium (which happens when it is enlarged)  view" - and the one usually
the result of LA inclusion is inclusion of the LA counts -- this  used to measure the LVEF.
falsely lowers the EF.                                            A basic internal QA step
                                                                  when reading these studies
False High EF: Wrong background ROI (over the spleen), will       is to confirm a good
cause over subtraction of background and elevate the EF.          photopenic septum.

                                       561
Misc Trivia:

R ubidium 82: This is a potassium analog (mechanism is N a/K pump). This is sim ilar to TI-201,
and can be used as a sim ilar agent. You can use it for PET myocardial perfusion, although it's
not used in m ost places because o f cost limitations. Also, because o f the very short h alf life ( 75
seconds) it tends to give a dirtier image com pared to PET o f NH3.
I s a y m ade with a g e n e ra to r, y o u say Tc99 a n d R ubidium . *Rubidium is the only PET agent
made like this, so that instantly makes it a testable fact.

Short Axis A natom y Review -1 always fo u n d this confusing:

                               "Anterior"

                                                                             "Lateral"

"Septal"
                             "Inferior"

                                                                        562
                           A rtifa c ts

Breast Tissue              Decreased activity in           Check for ECG changes and
"Soft Tissue Attenuation"  anterior wall (may also         wall motion. If normal, then
                           affect septal and lateral -     call it artifact. If not sure
                           depending on body habitus)      can repeat in prone position.

Left Hemidiaphragm         Decreased activity in           Check for ECG changes and
"Soft Tissue Attenuation"  inferior wall                   wall motion. If normal, then
                                                           call it artifact.

Subdiaphragmatic           Increased activity in inferior  Liver Excretes Tc, so you
Radiotracer Activity       wall, can mask true defect.     see it in the liver and bowel.
                           Can also mess with              Little bit o f exercise can be
                           "normalization" o f the         used to reduce GI blood
                           ventricle and make the rest     flow.
                           o f the LV look low.

Patient Motion             Causes all kinds o f problems   You can repeat because
(usually respiration)                                      tracer is fixed for around 2
                                                           hours

M isregistration           Causes all kinds o f problems

Left Bundle Branch Block   Reversible or Fixed Septal      Seen more in exercise or
                           Defects , sparing the apex      dobutamine stress compared
                                                           to vasodilators

Normal Apical Thinning Normal variant                      Look for matching stress
                                                           and rest perfusion patterns
                                                           with preserved wall function
                                                           to show you this is normal
                                                           (and not infarct)

                           563
Medication Trivia:

                    Mechanism                     Trivia

Dipyridamole        Inhibits the breakdown of     No caffeine
                    adenosine - which builds up.
                    Adenosine is a potent
                    vasodilator.

Adenosine           Vasodilator                   No caffeine
Regadenoson
Dobutamine                                        Side effects are worse than
A m in op hyllin e                                with dipyridamole. Rare
                                                  side effect is AV block -
                                                  which will get better when
                                                  adenosine short half life
                                                  runs out.

                    Selective A2A- causes fewer   No caffeine
                    side effects

                                                  Patient Can NOT be on a
                                                  beta blocker.

                    Beta 1 agonist - acts like    Best used in patients who
                    exercise by increasing heart  cannot have Adenosine or
                    rate and myocardial           Dipyridamole. Better in
                    contraction.                  patients with COPD or
                                                  Asthma, or who have taken
                                                  caffeine in the last 12 hours.

                                                  Avoid with LBBB

                    Antidote for Adenosine        H alf life is shorter than
                                                  Dipyridamole - so must
                                                  continue to monitor.

                                 564
