                                       S E C T IO N 7:
                          SOFT T is s u e Ma s s e s

Studying / learning M SK soft tissues masses / tum ors tends to create tons o f anxiety. This is
because Academic Radiology tends to overcomplicate the issue.

Here is the simple part - only about 20-30% o f them can be accurately diagnosed on M Rl. T hat's
because they are almost all T2 bright and enhance. This is actually good news for the purpose o f
multiple choice, because you only need to learn the ones that don't behave like that - or are
overwhelming likely due to epidemiological stats (which has to be provided for you - either
directly "the patient is 65" or with clues - "arthritis = old" , "no arthritis = not old").

Here is the list I would know:

· MFH -- Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma aka - Pleomorphic Undifferentiated Sarcoma
· Synovial Sarcoma
· Lipoma, Atypical Lipoma, Liposarcoma
· Hemangioma
· Myxoma

M align ant Fibrous H istio c yto m a (IVIFH)

Yes - they changed the name to Pleom orphic U ndifferentiated Sarcoma "PUS." However, I want
you to continue to think o f this as MFH because it will help you remember some o f the imaging
features.

First, the generalizations -- This is very common. It's seen in old people. It's seen in a ce n tra l
location (proximal arms and legs). The thigh is most common.

Features - About h alf the time it's d a r k to in term ed iate on T2 (rem em ber m ost soft tissue
tumors are T2 bright). The way I remember this is the word "fibrous" - makes me think scar
(which is dark).

Gamesmanship - These things are often associated with spontaneous hemorrhage - they outgrow
their blood supply. The history is often "old lady, stood up from a chair" - has a big proxim al
muscular hematoma -- under that hematoma is the MFH.

Trivia: Bone infarcts can turn into M FH - "sarcomatous transformation o f infarct "
Trivia: Radiation is a risk factor.

                                                        104
Synovial Sarcom a:

Generalization - Seen most commonly in the p erip h e ral lower extremities o f patients aged

20-40.

                                                                    Baicer's Cyst Fuckery

Gamesmanship - They occur close to the joint (but not in the        Baker's Cyst MUST be
joint). To confuse the issue they may have secondary                located between the medial
invasion into the joint (10%), however for the purpose of           head of the gastrocnemius
multiple choice tests they "never involve the jo in t." A           and the semimembranosus.

common trick is to show an ultrasound o f the leg w hich looks      If it's NOT - you should
like a B aker's cyst - but the m other fucker is too com plex - or  think Synovial Sarcoma -
has flow in it. *Not everything in the popliteal fossa is a         and "next step" MRI.
B aker's cyst - especially on multiple choice.

Besides the "not-a-B aker's c y s f' trick - there are 3 other ways to show this. (1) as the "trip le
sign", which is high, medium, and low signal all in the same mass (probably in the knee) on
T2, (2) as the "bow l o f g ra p e s" w hich is a bunch o f fluid -flu id levels in a mass (probably in
the knee), or (3) as a plain x-ray with a soft tissue component and calcifications - this would
be the least likely way to show it.

Synovial Sarcoma Trivia:
     D M ost sarcomas d o n 't attack bones; Synovial Sarcom a Can

   D Most sarcomas present as painless mass; Synovial Sarcomas Hurt
   D Soft tissue calcifications + Bone Erosions are highly suggestive
   D They are slow growing and small in size, often leading to people thinking they are B9.
   D 90% have a translocation o f X -18.
   D Most common malignancy in teens/young adults o f the foot, ankle, and lower

          extremity

When 1 say ``Ball-like tum or" in the extremity o f a yo u n g adult, yo u say Synovial Sarcoma.
When I say "Soft Tissue Tumor in the F o o t" o f a yo u n g adult, yo u say Synovial Sarcoma.

        MFH (PUS)                              Synovial Sarcoma

        OLD                                                         YOUNG

        Central (Upper Thigh, Upper Arm)                      Peripheral (Foot, Knee)

        T2 - Variable (Sometime Darl<)                              T2 - "Triple Sign"

                                                                    jr

                                          105
Lipom a vs A ty p ic a l Lipom a vs L iposarcom a

These exist on a spectrum, with Lipoma being totally benign, and Liposarcoma being a bad
bad boy. A pearl is that, histologically, Atypical Lipoma behaves and looks just like a low
grade Liposarcoma. It would be total horse-shit to ask you to tell those apart. It's m ore likely
the distinction will be either Lipoma vs Liposarcoma.

Think about them like this:

               Lipoma              Atypical Lipoma / Low Grade        High Grade Liposarcoma
                                             Liposarcoma             "The One That Fucks You Up"
Signal Intensity parallels fat on
all sequences.                     May have parts that are slightly  May not even have fat (for the
                                   darker (or brighter) than fat on  exam it will have some -
Will Fat Sat Out                   11.                               otherwise you can't even tell for
No Sepations (or thin ones)                                          sure that it is a Liposarcoma)

                                   May incompletely fat sat          May incompletely fat sat (or not
                                                                     fat sat at all)

                                   Thick Chunky Septations           Thick Nodular Complex Stuff

                                                                     Enhancing Components

Pearls:
·Liposarcomas tend to be DEEP (retroperitoneum)
·Liposarcomas tend to be BIG
·Lipomas tend to be Superficial

Trivia: M yxoid Liposarcoma is the m ost com m on liposarcom a in patients < 20. They can be
T2 Bright (expected), but T1 dark (confusing) - don't call it a cyst. Also, don't call it a
com eback (I've been here for years). T hey'll need gad+

                                   106
H em an g io m a

These are common.                                                 Mazabraud Syndrome

Here are the tricks:                              It's a total zebra syndrome - which
· T2 bright (like most tumors)                    makes it totally appropriate for an
· Flow voids. They have to show you flow voids    "intermediate level exam." It has 3 main
                                                  findings:
  (buncha dark holes).
· Hemangiomas don't respect fascial boundaries    (1) Polyostotic Fibrous D ysplasia-
                                                       which makes you ugly
  - they will infiltrate into stuff (this is a
  somewhat unique feature).                       (2) Multiple Soft Tissue Myxomas
· Enhances Intensely - Duh - they are a vascular  (3) Difficulty finding a date to the prom
  tumor
· They can contain fat - and likely will on            -- *see finding " 1"
  multiple choice.

Next Step: A great next step question would be to ask for a plain film. Why a plain film?
phleboliths my friend -- If they show you soft tissue plileboliths then hemangioma is the answer.

Myxoma

If this shows up on the exam, it is almost certainly going to be shown in the setting o f
Mazabraud Syndrome.

What do Myxomas Look Like? They are T2 bright (like every tumor), but tend to be lower signal
than muscle on T1 - which makes them sorta unique.

What does Marsellus Wallace Look Like ?    ·=Hint - Don't say "what?'

                CT vs MRI                        Treatment Higii Yield Trivia:
  for Lesion Characterization:
                                           ·Osteosarcoma: Chemo first (to kill micro
CT is Good for:                            m ets), followed by wide excision
-Occult Bone Destruction                   ·Ewings: Both Chemo and Radiation,
-Matrix and Mineralization -- Example,     followed by wide excision.
better look at the lucent nidus of an      ·Chondrosarcoma: Usually just wide
osteoid osteoma.                           excision (they are usually low grade, and
                                           main concern is local recurrence).
MR is Good for:                            ·Giant Cell Tumor: Because it extends to
-Staging -- specifically local extent and  the articular surface it usually requires
tumor spread.                              arthroplasty.
-Follow up - to assess response to
therapy.

                                           107
                       other Soft Tissue Masses (and related conditions]

Pigmented Villonodular Synovitis (PVNS):

PVNS is an uncommon benign neoplastic process that may involve the synovium of the joint diffusely
or focally. It can also affect the tendon sheath.

Intra-Articular Disease : Basically, it's Synovial Proliferation + Hemosiderin Deposition. The knee
is by far the most common joint affected (65-80%). On plain film, features you will probably see are a
joint effusion with or without marginal erosions. Osseous erosions with preservation o f the joint space
and normal minerahzation is typical. It is not possible to distinguish PVNS from synovial
chondromatosis (see below) on plain film, MRI will be obvious with blooming on gradient echo, and
this is the most likely way they will show this. Treatment is with complete synovectomy, although
recurrence rate is 20-50%.

Trivia: Unusual in kids, but when present is typically polyarticular.

Giant Cell Tumor o f the Tendon Sheath (PVNS o f the tendon): Typically found in the hand (palmar
tendons). Can cause erosions on the underlying bone. Will be soft tissue density, and be T1 and T2
dark (contrasted to a glomus tumor which is T1 dark, T2 bright, and will enhance uniformly).

Primary Synovial Chondromatosis:

There are both primary and secondary types; secondary being the result of degenerative changes in the
joint. The primary type is an extremely high yield topic. It is a metaplastic / true neoplastic process
(not inflammatory) that results in the formation of multiple cartilaginous nodules in the synovium of
joints, tendon sheaths, and bursae. These nodules will eventually progress to loose bodies. It usually
affects one joint, and that one joint is usually the knee (70%). Usually a person in their 40's or 50's.

Joint bodies (which are usually multiple and uniform in size) may demonstrate the ring and arc
calcification characteristic of chondroid calcification. Treatment involves removal of the loose bodies
with or without synovectomy.

                          PVNS              Synovial Chondrom atosis
Benign Neoplasia                Benign Neoplasia
Associated with Hemarthrosis    NOT Associated with Hemarthrosis
Never Calcifies                 May Calcify

Secondary Synovial Chondromatosis:

A lower yield topic than the primary type. This is secondary to degenerative change, and typically
seen in an older patient. There will be extensive degenerative changes, and the fragments are usually
fewer and larger when compared to the primary subtype.

Diabetic Myonecrosis:

This is basically infarction of the muscle seen in poorly controlled type 1 diabetics. It almost always
involves the thigh (80%), or calf (20%). MRI will show marked edema with enhancement and
irregular regions of muscle necrosis. You should NOT biopsy this: it delays recovery time and has a
high complication rate.

                                108
(B*ym Lipom a A rborescens:

This is a zebra that affects the synovial lining o f the joints and bursa.

The buzzw ord is "frond-like" deposition
o f fatty tissue.

It's seen in late adulthood (5 0 's-70's), with
the most common location being the
suprapatellar bursa o f the knee. Although
it can develop in a norm al knee, it's
often associated with OA, Chronic RA,
or prior trauma. It's usually unilateral.
On MRI it's going to behave like fat - T1
and T2 bright with response to fat
saturation.

A sneaky trick is to show this on gradient  Lipoma Arborescens
- and have you pick up the chemical shift
artifact at the fat-fluid interface.

Could also be shown on ultrasound with a "frond-like hyperechoic m ass" and joint effusion.

Tumoral                 Big Lobular / Cystic Calcium Near a Joint
Calcinosis              Laying Fluid-Calcium levels can be seen on CT
                        No erosion or destruction of the joint
                        Hip, Elbow, and Shoulder are the most common
                        joints ('knee is rare~)
                        Greater Trochanteric Bursa is most common site
                        Hereditary Phosphate Metabolism Problem -
                        (calcium levels are normal, phosphate usually isn't)

Primary Synovial        Multiple, Small, Uniformly Sized, Ossified
                        (peripherally mineralized) Nodules Near a Joint
Chondromatosis          Intra-Articular Location*
(it is "secondary" if   Knee is the most common joint - by far (-70% ),
there are degenerative  the opposite of Tumoral Calcinosis.
changes)

M e ta s ta tic         Fine and DiiTuse Soft Tissue Calcifications
Calcification           Also see Renal and Lung Calcifications
                        Seen in People with Renal Failure (or Hyperparathyroidism)
                        -- people with Hypercalcemia
                        Can look similar to Tumor Calcinosis - although the labs are different (this has
                        elevated Calcium) and Tumoral Calcinosis can have Fluid-Calcium Levels.

                                                    109
               "Don't Touch Lesions"

   Characteristically Benign Lesions that look Aggressive but are NOT
- and should NOT be biopsied because o f possibly misleading pathology.

Myositis Ossificans      Circumferential                  Can look scary on MRI if
                         calcifications with a lucent     imaged early because of
                         center                           edema, and avid enhancement

Avulsion Injury          Typical location near the        Can have an aggressive
                         pelvis                           periosteal reaction

Cortical Desmoid         Characteristic location on       Can be hot on bone scan.
                         the posterior medial
Synovial Herniation Pit  epicondyle o f the distal        NOT a desmoid (despite the
"Pitt's Pit"             femur.                           name). It's actually a tug
                         Bilateral 30% o f the time.      lesion from the medial
                                                          gastrocnemius and ADDuctor
                         rCharacteristic location in the  magnus.

                         anterosuperior femoral neck.     Lytic appearing lesion

                             Bone Biopsy                  Associated with femoral
                                                          acetabular impingement
                                                          syndrome (probably).

The route o f biopsy should be discussed with the orthopedic surgeon, to avoid
contaminating compartments not involved by the tumor (or not going to be used in the
resection process).

Special considerations:
          Pelvis: Avoid crossing gluteal muscles (may be needed for reconstruction).
          Knee: Avoid the joint space via crossing suprapatellar bursa or other
          com municating bursae. Avoid crossing the quadriceps tendon unless it is
          involved.

     · Shoulder: Avoid the posterior 2I3>^^ (axillary nerve courses post -> anterior,
          therefore a posterior resection will denervate the anterior 1/3).

                         110
