                           S E C T IO N 9:

                           Ma r r o w

This is a confusing topic and there are entire books on the subject. I 'm going to attem pt to
hit the main points, and simplify the subject.

Bone marrow consists o f three components: (1) Trabecular Bone - the support structure, (2)
Red Marrow - for making blood, and (3) Yellow Marrow -fa t for a purpose unknown at this
time.

M arrow Conversion: The basic rules are that          Red Marrow Coverts to Yellow Marrow from
yellow marrow increases with age, in a predictable    Distal to Proximal
and progressive way. This is usually completed by
the mid 20s. You are bom with all red marrow, and
the conversion of red to yellow occurs from the
extremities to the axial skeleton (feet and hands
first). Within each long bone the progression occurs
epiphyses / apophyses first -> diaphysis -> followed
by the distal metaphysis , and finally the proximal
metaphysis. Red marrow can be found in the
humeral heads and femoral heads as a normal
variant in adults.

      Yellow                                                 As a child, you have
      Marrow                                                 diffuse red marrow
      Expands                                                except for ossified
      out from the                                           epiphyses and
      Middle                                                 apophyses.

                                                             As adults, you have
                                                             yellow marrow
                                                             everywhere except in the
                                                             axial skeleton, and
                                                             proximal metaphyses of

Baby                Child  Teenager                   Adult

                           121
                                    Few Pearls on Marrow:

Yellow marrow increases with age (as trabecular bone decreases with osteoporosis, yellow
marrow replaces it).
T1 is your money sequence: Yellow is bright. Red is darker than yellow (near iso-intense
to muscle).
Red marrow should never be darker than a norm al disk or muscle on T1 (think about
muscle as your internal control).
Red marrow increases if there is a need for more hematopoiesis (reconversion - occurs in
exact reverse order o f normal conversion)
Marrow turns yellow with stress / degenerative change in the spine

                         T h ree m ost classic m arrow questions:

( I Q ) What is the norm al pattern o f conversion ?

(A) The epiphyses convert to fatty marrow almost immediately after ossification. Distal then
proceeds medial / proximal (diaphysis first, then metaphysis).

(2 Q) What is the normal pattern o f REconversion ?                       Spine

(A) The pattern o f reconversion: This occurs in the reverse           Flat Bones
order of normal marrow conversion, beginning in the axial
skeleton and heading peripheral. The last to go are the more              I
distal long bones. Typically, the epiphyses are spared unless
the hem atopoietic dem and is very high.                       Long Bone Metaphysis

                                                               I Long Bone Diapliysis

                                                                          I

                                                               Long Bone Epiphyses

(3 Q) What areas are spared/ normal variants?
(A) Patchy areas o f red marrow may be seen in the proximal femoral metaphysis of

     teenagers. Distal femoral sparing is seen in teenagers and menstruating women.

                                                        122
L eu kem ia:
Proliferation o f leukemic cells results in replacement o f red marrow. Marrow will look
darker than muscle (and normal disks) on T l. On STIR, marrow may be brighter than
muscle because o f the increased w ater content. T2 is variable, often looking like diffuse red
marrow.

           They can show leukemia in two main ways:

(1) Lucent metaphyseal bands in a kid

(2) Tl-weighted MRl showing marrow darker than
     adjacent disks and muscle. Remember that Red
     M arrow is still 40% fat and should be brighter than
     muscle on T l.

Most infiltrative conditions affect the marrow diffusely.
The exceptions are multiple myeloma, which has a
predilection fo r fo ca l "speckled" deposits, and
Waldenstrom's macroglohulinemia, which causes infarcts.

                                                           T1 Sag - Marrow is Darker
                                                           than Disk --

Chloroma (G ranulocytic Sarcom a)

                                                                /

Just say "destructive mass in a bone o f a leukemia        / /W / /

patient. " It's some kind o f colloid tumor.

                                                           \ \
                                                             X \
                                                              \ 'v.

                                                     eg. skull

                                              123
