                   Site-Specific Entitles - Shoulder

Dislocation:

   D Anterior inferior (subcoracoid) are by far the most common (like 90%).

o                                                    Hill-Sachs is on the Humerus.

o           Hill-Sachs is on the posterior lateral humerus, and best seen on internal

   rotation view.

O Bankart - anterior inferior labrum

O Greater tuberosity avulsion fracture occurs in 10-15% o f anterior dislocations

               in patient's over 40.

D Posterior Dislocation: uncommon - probably from seizure or electrocution

O Rim Sign - no overlap glenoid and humeral head

O Trough Sign - reverse Hill Sachs, impaction on anterior humerus

O           "Light Bulb Sign " - Arm m ay be locked in internal rotation on all views

D Inferior Dislocation (luxatio erecta humeri) - this is an uncommon form, where the

arm is sticking straight over the head. The thing to know is 60%> get neurologic

injury (usually the axillary nerve).

Hill-Sachs  Posterolateral humeral head                                 Memory Tool
            impaction fracture (anterior
            dislocation)                             1 remember that hip dislocations are
                                                     posterior - from the straight leg
Bankart     Anterior Glenoid Rim                     dashboard mechanism.
            (anterior dislocation)
                                                     Then 1just remember that shoulders
                   Anterior humeral head impaction   are the opposite of that (the other
Trough Sign                                          one, is the other one).

                   fracture (posterior dislocation)  Shoulder = Usually Anterior

Reverse     Posterior Glenoid Rim
Bankart     (posterior dislocation)

Internal Rotation  Internal Rotation                 Axial Slice - at the level of the
(Normal)           (Hill-Sachs)                      coracoid process typically shows
                                                     the impaction defect
                                                     (Hill-Sachs) - Black Arrow

                   Trivia: Below the level of coracoid the humeral head will have
                   a normal flat spot (this is called the "pseudo-hill sachs")

                             30
Proximal Hum erus Fracture:

This is usually in an old lady falling on an out stretched arm. Orthopods use the Neer
classifications (how many parts the humerus is in ?). Three or four part fractures tend to do
worse. The modem trend is to treat acute 3 and 4 part fractures with a reverse total shoulder
arthroplasty.

                         The Post Op Shoulder (Prosthesis)

There are 4 Main Types: Humeral Head Resurfacing, Hemi-Arthroplasty, Total Shoulder
Arthroplasty, and the Reverse Total Shoulder Arthroplasty.

W hat is this "reverse total shoulder" ?
A conventional total shoulder mimics normal
anatomy. A reverse total shoulder is the bizarro
version; with a plastic cup on the humeral head
and metallic sphere on the glenoid.

                                                  Conventional  Reverse

Who gets what? -                                                Cuff- Trashed

The surgical choice      L Gtenold                Resurfacing   Hemi or
depends on two main                                  or Hemi    Reverse
factors:
                         Glenoid                       Total    Reverse
(1) Is the Cuff Intact?  Deficient                  Shoulder
(2) Is the Glenoid                                Arthroplasty
Trashed ?

Complications / Trivia:

-- Total Shoulder M ost Common Complication = Loosening o f the Glenoid Component
-- Total Shoulder CompHcation - '''Anterior Escape " - This describes anterior migration o f
the humeral head after subscapularis failure.

-- Reverse Total Shoulder Does NOT require an intact rotator cuff - patient will rely
heavily on the deltoid. It does require an intact deltoid.
-- Reverse Total Shoulder is the m odern trend for 3 and 4 part acute proxim al humerus
fractures.
-- Reverse Shoulder Complication - Posterior Acrom ion Fracture - from excessive
deltoid tugging -- rem em ber the deltoid is basically all the they have left (no intact cuff).

                         31
Impingement I Rotator Cuff Tears:

This is a high yield / confusing subject that is worth talking about in a little more detail. In
general, rotator cuff pathology is the result o f overuse activity (sports) or impingement
mechanisms. There are two types o f impingement with two major sub-divisions within those
types. Like many things in Radiology, if you get the vocabulary down, the pathology is easy to
understand.

External: This refers to impingement o f the rotator cuff overlying the bursal surfaces
(superficial surfaces) that are adjacent to the coracoacromial arch. As a reminder, the arch is
made up of the coracoid process, acromion, and coracoacromial ligament.

Primary External Causes (Abnormal Coracoacromial Arch) :

 The hooked acromion (type III Bigliani) is more associated with external impingement
     than the curved or flat types.

 Subacromial osteophyte formation or thickening of the coracoacromial ligament can
          impinge on the supraspinatus tendon

 Subcoracoid impingement: Impingement o f the subscapularis between the coracoid
     process and lesser tuberosity (on axial look for a reduced coracohumeral distance). This
     can be secondary to congenital configuration, or a configuration developed post
     traumatically after fracture of the coracoid or lesser tuberosity.

Secondary External Causes (Normal Coracoacromial Arch):

 "Multidirectional Glenohumeral Instability" - resulting in micro-subluxation o f the
     humeral head in the glenoid, resulting in repeated micro-trauma. The important thing to
     know is this is typically seen in patients with generalizedjo in t laxity, often involving both
     shoulders.

Internal: This refers to impingement o f the rotator cuff on the undersurface (deep surface)
along the glenoid labrum and humeral head.

 Posterior Superior: This is a type o f impingement that occurs when the posterior superior
     rotator cuff (junction o f the supra and infraspinatus tendons) comes into contact with the
     posterior superior glenoid. Best seen in the ABER position, where these tendons get
     pinched between the labrum and greater tuberosity. This is seen in athletes who make
     overhead movements (throwers, tennis, swimming).

 Anterior Superior: This is internal impingement that occurs when the arm is in horizontal
     adduction and internal rotation. In this position, the undersurface o f the biceps and
     subscapularis tendon may impinge against the anterior superior glenoid rim.

                                                    32
Im pingem ent Continued...                                     Subacromial
                                  Primary                      *F's With Supra S
                                *Abnormal Coracoacromial Arch
                                -- Hook Shaped (B3)            Subcoracoid
                                 -- Osteophytes                *F's With Sub S
                                --Post Traumatic
                                --Thickened Ligaments

External

                                 Secondary
                               ` Multidirectional Instability
                                -- Labrum Often Normal
                                --" Increased Glenohumeral
                                Volume" - with injection

Internal  Posterior Superior <-------------------------------  If the exam writers
          *Throwers                                            just say "Internal
          --F's with Infraspinatus (and posterior Supra)       Impingement" -
           --Posterior Superior Labrum Torn                    this is the one
           --Cystic Change in Greater Tuberosity               they are talking
                                                               about
          Anterior Superior
          --Associated with Sub Scapular damage
          (Maybe the cause rather than the result)
          --Anterior Superior Labrum Torn

          High Yield Trivia Points on Impingement

Subacromial Impingement - most common      Damages Supraspinatus Tendon.
form, resulting from attrition of the
coracoacromial arch.

Subcoracoid Impingement - Lesser           Damages Subscapularis (remember the
tuberosity and coracoid do the pinching.   coracoid is anterior - and so is the
                                           subscapularis).

Posterior Superior "Internal" Imninsement  Damages Infraspinatus (and posterior
-A thletes who make overhead movements.    fibers of the supraspinatus).
Greater tuberosity and posterior superior
labrum do the pinching.

                                           33
Rotator Cuff Tears:

People talk about these tears as
either "Bursal Sided" (meaning the
top part), or "Articular
Sided" (meaning the undersurface).

A tear o f the articular surface is   m KKKm
more common (3x more) than the
bursal surface. The underlying
mechanism is usually degenerative,
although trauma can certainly play a
role.

The most common of the four muscles to tear is the Supraspinatus - with most tears
occurring at the "c ritica lzo n e" - 1-2 cm from the tendon footprint. This relatively
avascular "critical zone" is also the most com m on location for Calcium Hydroxyapatite
(HADD) - or "calcific tendinitis." The Teres M inor is the least com mon to tear.

A partial tear that is > 50% often results in a surgical intervention.

"Massive rotator c u ff tear" - refers to at least 2 out of the 4 rotator cuff muscles.

A final general piece o f trivia is that a tear o f the fibrous rotator cuff interval (junction
between anterior fibers o f the Supraspinatus and superior fibers o f the subscapularis), is still
considered a rotator cuff tear.

How do yo u know i t 's a fu ll thickness tear? You will have high T2 signal in the expected
location o f the tendon. On T1 you will have Gad in the bursa.

                                                                        Full
                                                                        Thickness
                                                                        Tear

                                                                        - With Gad
                                                                        crossing over
                                                                        the cuff into
                                                                        the bursa.
               Adhesive Capsulitis "Frozen Shoulder"

An inflammatory condition characterized by a global decrease in motion. You can have
primary types, but a multiple choice key would be a history o f trauma or surgery.
It m ost com m only affects the rotator cufi' interval - and that is the m ost Hkely spot they
will show it. The classic look is a T1 (or non-fat sat T2) in the sagittal plane showing loss
o f fat in the rotator cuf f interval (the spot w ith the biceps tendon - between the Supra S,
and the Sub Scap). There may also be thickening o f the axillary fold.

                Grey Smudgy Shit Instead o f Clean Fat in the Rotator C uff Interval
                       "D ecreased Glenohum eral Volume " - with injection

                    ** Rem em ber in M ulti-Directional Instability the volum e was increased.
                         "Thickened Inferior and Posterior Capsule "

                     "Enhancem ent o f the Rotator C u ffInterval " - Post gad

                                                   35
Injury to the Labrum:

SLAP: Labral tears favor the superior margin and track anterior to posterior. As this tear
involves the labrum at the insertion o f the long head o f the biceps , injury to this tendon is
associated and part o f the grading system (type 4).
Things to know about SLAP tears:

      When the SLAP extends into the biceps anchor (type 4), the surgical management
          changes from a debridement to a debridement + biceps tenodesis.

      The mechanism is usually an over-head movement (classic = swimmer)
          People over 40 usually have associated Rotator C uff Tears

     NOT associated with Instability (usually)

SLAP M imic - The Sublabral Recess. This is essentially a normal variant where you have
incomplete attachm ent o f the labrum at 12 o'clock. The 12 o'clock position on the labrum
has the shittiest blood flow - that's why you see injury there and all these developmental
variants.

Follows Contourof Glenoid   Extends Laterally
SMOOTH Margin               RaDy Margin
Located at Biceps Anchor   Located at Biceps Anchor & Posteriorly
Less than 3 mm             Can be more than 3 mm

                           36
Labral Tear Mimic - The Sublabral Foramen
- This is an unattached (but present) portion o f
the labrum - located at the anterior-superior
labrum (1 o'clock to 3 o 'clock).
As a rule it should NOT extend below the
equator (3 o'clock position).

Labral Tear Mimic - The Buford Complex - A commonly tested (and not infrequently
seen) variant is the Buford Complex. It's present in about 1% o f the general population. This
consists o f an absent anterior/superior labrum (1 o'clock to 3 o 'clock), along with a
thickened middle glenohumeral ligament.

                                                  Buford Complex:

                                                               - Thick Middle GH Ligament
                                                               - Absent Anterior Superior Labrum

                                                     37
Bankart Lesions:     The bottom h a lf o f the glenoid is what gets fu c k e d in a dislocation 
                     that s the p a rt the humerus rests on.

There is an alphabet soup o f Bankart (anterior dislocation) related injuries.

                                                   /

GLAD                 Perthes  ALPSA                   Bankart       Bankart

                                                   (Cartilaginous)  (Osseous)

GLAD = Glenolabral A rticular Disruption. It's the m ost m ild version, and it's basically a
superficial anterior inferior labral tear with associated articular cartilage damage
("im paction injury with cartilage defect"). N ot typically seen in patients with underlying
laxity. It's com mon in sports. No instability (aren 'ty o u GLAD there is no instability)

Perthes = Detachment of the anteroinferior labrum     A6>                          Memory Aid:
(3-6 o'clock) with medially stripped                                   6>          -The detached
but intact periosteum.                                                        .S'  labrum sorta
                                                                                   looks like a

ALPSA = Anterior Labral Periosteal Sleeve Avulsion. Medially displaced labroligamentous
complex with absence o f the labrum on the glenoid rim. Intact periosteum. It scars down to
glenoid.

True Bankart: Can be cartilaginous or osseous. The periosteum is disrupted. There is
often an associated Hill Sach's fracture.

          CLAD y              Pirflics               AI PSA             True Kankart I
Superficial partial                         Similar to perthes but
labral injury with   Avulsed anterior       with "bunched up"       Tom labrum
cartilage defeet     labrum (only           medially displaced
                     minimally displaced).  inferior GH complex     Periosteum Disrupted
No instability
                     Inferior GH complex    Intact Periosteum
                     still attached to
                     periosteum             38

                     Intact Periosteum
                     (lifted up)
Posterior Glenohum eral Instability

As I mentioned previously, anterior shoulder dislocations are way more common than posterior
shoulder dislocations. Therefore the Bankart, ALPS A, Perthes, e tc ... are the ones you typically
think o f as the stigmata o f prior dislocation.

However, all that shit can happen in reverse with a posterior dislocation.

Reverse Osseous Bankart:                                         POLPSA:

A fracture o f the                         This is the bizarro
                                           version o f the
posterior inferior                         ALPSA, where the
                                           posterior labrum and
rim o f the         1 _                    the posterior
                                           scapular periosteum
glenoid.                                   (still intact) are
                                           stripped from the
              " Bennett Lesion"            glenoid resulting in
                                           a recess that
An extra-articular curvilinear             communicates with
calcification - associated with posterior  the joint space.
labral tears (maybe the POLPSA).
                                                              `K im 's Lesion'
It's related to injury o f the posterior
band o f the inferior glenohumeral         An incompletely
ligament.                                  avulsed / flattened /
                                           mashed posterior-
                                           inferior labrum.

                                           A key (testable)
                                           point is the glenoid
                                           cartilage and
                                           posterior labrum
                                           relationship is
                                           preserved.

                                           39
HAGL:

A non-Bankart lesion that is frequently tested is the HAGL (Humeral avulsion
glenohumeral ligament). This is an avulsion of the inferior glenohumeral ligament, and
is most often the result o f an anterior shoulder dislocation (just like all the above bankarts).
The "J Sign" occurs when the normal U-shaped inferior glenohumeral recess is retracted
away from the humerus, appearing as a J.

                                                                  Axial MR - Showing the IGHL
                                                                  Tom at its Humeral Attachment

Subluxation of th e Biceps Tendon: The subscapularis attaches to the lesser
tuberosity. It sends a few fibers across the bicipital groove to the greater tuberosity , which
is called the "transverse ligament". A tear o f the subscapularis opens these fibers up and
allows the biceps to dislocate (usually medial). Subscapularis Tear = Medial Dislocation
of the Long Head of the Biceps Tendon.

                                        Biceps
                                        Tendon

Sub Scap Tendon - Forming        Subiuxation of the Biceps Tendon
portions of the "Transverse      Occurs with a Tear of the Subscapularis
Ligament" \hat holds the biceps
tendon in the groove                   40
                     Nerve Entrapment: High Yield Trivia:

S uprascapular N otch vs Spinoglenoid Notch: A cyst at the level o f the
suprascapular notch will affect the supraspinatus and the infraspinatus. At the level o f the
spinoglenoid notch, it will only affect the infraspinatus.

             Suprascapular^^^
                    Notch

                                  t ^ Spinoglenoid

                                                        Notch

                                Cyst in the spinoglenoid notch causing
                                fatty atrophy of the Infraspinatous

***Dotted Line = Suprascapular

Q uadrilateral S p ace Syndrom e: Compression o f the Axillary Nerve in the
Quadrilateral Space (usually from fibrotic bands). They will likely show this with atrophy
of the teres minor. Another classic question is to name the borders o f the quadrilateral
space: Teres Minor Above, Teres M ajor Below, Humeral neck lateral, and Triceps medial.

Humerus

                                                                   Quadrilateral Space Syndrome
                                                                   -Atrophy of Teres Minor
P ars o n a g e -T u rn e r Syndrom e: This is an idiopathic involvem ent o f the brachial
plexus. Think about this when you see muscles affected by pathology in two or more nerve
distributions (suprascapular and axillary etc..).

                                                    41
