                Site-Specific Entities - Knee / Tibia / Fiiiuia

Segond Fracture:

This is a fracture o f the Lateral Tibial Plateau
{common distractor is medial tibia). The thing to
know is that it is associated with ACL tear (75%),
and occurs with internal rotation.

Reverse Segond Fracture:

This is a fracture o f the Medial Tibial Plateau. The

thing to know is that it is associated with a PCL                                                                  Arcuate
                                                                                                                   -PCL
tear, and occurs with external rotation. There is               L

also an associated medial meniscus injury.                  Reverse Segond

                                                            Fx

A rcuate Sign:

                                                                                                               !l
This is an avulsion o f proximal fibula (insertion of

arcuate ligament complex). The thing to know is

that 90% are associated with cruciate ligament

injury (usually PCL)

Deep Intercondylar Notch Sign:                                  Deep Lateral
                                                                Femoral Notch
This is a depression of the lateral femoral condyle             - ACL Insufficiency
(terminal sulcus) that occurs secondary to an impaction         - Acute ACL Tear
injury. This is associated with ACL tears.

Anatom y Blitz:                                                 ACL & PCL are extrasynovial and intra-
                                                                articular. The synovium folds around the
Ligaments:                                                      ligaments. This is why a torn ACL won't
                                                                heal on its own (usually).
 ACL: Composed of two bundles (anteromedial &
  posterolateral). The tibial attachment is thicker than        The ligament can be tom even if the
  the femoral attachment. Both the ACL and PCL are              synovium is intact - this is why the
  intra-articular and extrasynovial.                            "taunf' angle of the ligament is a key
                                                                feature of integrity - more on that later
 PCL: The strongest ligament in the knee (you don't
  want a posterior dislocation o f your knee resulting in   IT Band                                                Biceps
  dissection of your popliteal artery).                     inserting                                              Femoris
                                                            on Gerdy's
 MCL: The MCL fibers are laced into the joint capsule      Tubercle
  at the level of the joint, with connection to the medial
  meniscus. Unlike the ACL and PCL, the MCL is an
  extra-articular structure.

 Conjoint Tendon: Formed by the biceps femoris
  tendon and the LCL.

                                                   49
                                    M agic Angle Phenomenon

The PCL and Patellar tendon may have foci o f intermediate signal intensity on sagittal
images with short echo time (TE) sequences where the tendon forms an angle o f 55 degrees
with the main magnetic field {magic angle phenomenon).

This will NOT be seen on T2 sequences (with long TE). This phenomenon is reduced at
higher field strengths due to greater shortening o f T2 relaxation times.

Magic Angle: You see it on short TE sequences (T l, PD, GRE). It goes away on T2

ACL T ear: ACL tears happen all the time, usually in
people who are stopping and pivoting.

 Associated with Segond Fracturc (lateral tibial plateau)             ACL Tear
    and tibial spine avulsion                               -Kissing Contusion Pattern

 ACL Angle lesser than Blumensaat's Line
 O'donoghue's Unhappy Triad: ACL Tear, MCL Tear,

     Medial Meniscal Tear
 Classic Kissing Contusion Pattern: The lateral femoral

  condyle (sulcus terminals) bangs into the posterior
  lateral tibial plateau. This is 95% specific in adults.
 The association of an osteochondral injury at the
  impaction site is highly testable
 Anterior Drawer Sign = Ortho Physical Exam
  Finding suggesting ACL Tear.

ACL Mucoid Degeneration:

This can mimic acute or chronic partial    Mucoid Degeneration of the ACL
tear of the ACL. There will be no                - "Drumstick / Celery Stick"
secondary signs o f injury (contusion
etc..). It predisposes to ACL ganglion   50
cysts, and they are usually seen
together. The T2/STIR buzzword is
"celery stalk" because o f the striated
look. The T l buzzword is
"drumstick" because it looks like a
drum stick.
ACL Repair:

ACL can be repaired with two primary methods. Method 1: Using the middle one-third of the
patellar tendon, with the patella bone plug attached to one end and tibial bone plug attached at the
other. Method 2: Using a graft made of the semitendinosus or gracilis tendon, or both. The graft is
then attached with all sorts of screws, bolts, etc... There is a lower reported morbidity related to
harvest site using this method.

Graft Evaluation:

There are two tunnels (tibial and femoral) between which the graft
runs. Here are the testable pearls:

Tibial Tunnel: Should parallel the roof o f the femoral intercondylar  Normal     ABnormal
notch. Too Steep = Impinged by femur on extension. Too Flat = Lax
& won't provide stability. Too Far Anterior ("Intersection with        Tibial Tunnel Steep & Anterior to B
Blumensaat line") = Can lead to pinching at the anterior inferior
intercondylar roof Buzzword "Roof Impingement."                                   Line (both are bad)

Femoral Tunnel: Supposedly the primary factor for maintaining length and tension during range of
motion. This is referred to as "maintained isometry."

Femoral Tunnel = Maintains Isometry. Tibial Tunnel = Roof Impingement.

"Arthrofibrosis" Can be focal or diffuse
(focal is more common). The focal form
is the so called "Cyclops" lesion - so
named because of its arthroscopic
appearance. It's gonna be a low signal
mass-like scar in Hoffa's fat pad. It's bad
because it limits extension.

Buzzword "palpable audible clunk"

Seen around 16 weeks - it obviously          Cyclops Lesion - Scar Associated with Ventral Graft
won't occur immediately post op because
you have to build up your scar.

"Graft Tear" - Usually Ortho can just pull on his fucking leg
to see if the graft is trashed (anterior drawer sign). For
imaging, the simple way to understand this: "flat angle = tear.'
The ACL should parallel the roof of the intercondylar notch.
If the angle becomes flat, a tear is likely.

Trivia: The graft is most susceptible to tear in the remodeling     Normal Angle
process (4-8 months post op).

Trivia: Other signs of graft tear: grossly high T2 signal (some is ok), fiber discontinuity, uncovering
of the posterior horn of the lateral meniscus (secondaiy sign), anterior tibial translation (secondary
sign).

                                             51
Posterior Lateral Corner (PLC): The most complicated anatomy in the entire body. My
God this posterior lateral comer! Just think about the LCL, the IT band, the biceps femoris, and the
popliteus tendon. The most likely way to show this on a single image (multiple choice style) is
edema in the fibular head.

Who cares? Missed PLC injury is a very common cause of ACL reconstruction failure.

PCL Tear: The posterior cruciate ligament is                            Gamesmanship;
the strongest ligament in the knee. A tear is
actually uncommon (unless you just won't tap        Any kind of history that suggests posterior knee
to that knee bar), it's more likely to stretch and  dislocation should prompt an angiogram to
appear thickened ( > 7 mm). PCL tears should        studv the popliteal artery. Some classic
make you think about posterior dislocation as       scenarios that can be described:
the mechanism of injury.
                                                     Chased by a jealous husband after seducing
Next Step /Association = If you see a PCL Tear        his large breasted South American wife ,
- look at the popliteal flow void. If the knee        jumped olf something - landed on feet -
dislocated posterior, a dreaded consequence is        sudden severe knee pain
vascular compromise. Depending on the
wording of the question they might need a CTA        Chased by a jealous husband after seducing
-run-off (watch your back).                           his large breasted South American wife , got
                                                      tackled in a way that hyperextended the knee
                                                      - sudden severe knee pain

Meniscal Anatomy:                                       Transverse Ugament

 The meniscus is "C shaped", thick
 along the periphery and thin
 centrally.

Medial meniscus is thicker
posteriorly.

Lateral meniscus has equal
thickness between anterior and
posterior portion.

                                                        W H ITK

Meniscal Healing

The Peripheral "Red Zone" is vascular and
might heal.

The Central "white zone" is avascular and will
not heal. The blood supply comes from the
geniculate arteries (which enter peripherally).

                                                    52
Meniscal Tears:

As stated, the peripheral meniscus (red zone) has better vasculature than the inner 2/3s (white zone) and
might heal on its own. In general, you can group tears based on their general direction (as seen on a
sagittal section MRI - i.e. the triangles and bowties) - as either vertical (top-to-bottom) or horizontal
(front-to-back). You can then sub-group them depending how they look on subsequent sections.

                           Radial Tear;                                       Radial Tearing
                           - Bad because they                                 Cuts the Circular
                                                                              Hoop Fibers that
                              cause "loss of hoop                             Hold the Meniscus
                              strength."                                      Together
                           - Can lead to extrusion,
                              early OA etc..

                                              Flap Tear (Parrot Beak):
                                              - Radial Tear that Changes

                                                 Direction into the
                                                 longitudinal direction

                                              Longitudinal Tear:
                                              - Can be vertical or

                                                 horizontal (or mixed
                                                 oblique patterns)
                                              - Defined by a long
                                                 extension in the axial
                                                 direction
                                              - Vertical Types can flip
                                                 (bucket- handle)

                                              Horizontal Cleavage Tear:
                                              - Pure cleavage tears extend to

                                                 the apex
                                              - Associated with Meniscal Cysts
                                              - Most common In posterior horn

                                                 of the medial meniscus

Radial Tears: There are 3 classic Signs - two o f which are usually present.

                    1__ !II

Truncated Triangle     Cleft - Most Reliable  `Ghost" or Absent Triangle

                                     53
                Discoid Meniscus:                                    Bucket Handle Tear:

 This is a nomial variant of the lateral meniscus         This is a tom meniscus (usually medial -
 that is prone to tear. It's not C-shapcd, but instead    80%) vertical longitudinal sub-type, that flips
 shaped like a disc. In other words, it's too big (too    medially to lie anterior to the PCL.
 many bowties!).
                                                          Gamesmanship - Most likely shown as the
i Gamesmanship - "Pediatric Patient with Meniscal         classic Aunt Minnie appearance of a "double
 Tear".                                                   PCL "

 Trivia - There are three types, with the most rare
 and most prone to injury i^eing the Wrisberg
 Variant.

 Gamesmanship "Bow Ties " If shown on sagittal
 they have to show you 3 or more "bow ties" /
 double triangles.

                                                                          Buckle Hand Tear
                                                                          -Double PCL Sign

                                                          Gamesmanship - Can also be shown as "not
                                                          enough bowties," the opposite of the "too
                                                          many bowties" look of a discoid meniscus.

          >-<1                                                                                         Only 1
                                                                                                        bowtie -
Normal Meniscus will have 2 bowtie shapes in the                                                        instead o f
sagittal plane - assuming 3mm slices with 1mm                                                           the
gap-                                                                                                    normal 2.

Discoid Meniscus will have 3 or more bowties                                                            The
                                                                                                        middle o f
Gamesmanship: If                                                                                        the second
shown on coronal they                                                                                   bowtie is
need to show you a                                                                                     flipped
meniscus stretching                                                                                     medially.
into the notch.
(Transverse length                                        Trivia: The appearance of a double PCL can
> 15 mm on midline                                        only occur in the setting of an intact ACL,
coronal = diagnostic).                                    otherwise it won't flip that way. Just know it
                                                          sorta indirectly proves the ACL is intact (I can
                                  Discoid Meniscus        just see some knucklehead asking that).
                               -Extending into Notch

                                                      54
Meniscal Cysts:                                     Bakers Cyst:

Most often seen near the                Occurs between the
lateral meniscus and are                semimeinbranosus (Sm) and the
often associated with                   m e d ia l head of the gastroc (Mg)
horizontal cleavage tears.

Meniscal Ossicle:

This is a focal ossification of
the posterior horn of the
medial meniscus, that can be
secondary to trauma or
simply developmental. They
are often associated with
radial root tears.

They tend to have a smooth cortex.

Meniscocapsular Separation:

This is a rare (in real life - maybe not on exams) injury. The idea is                           H?' J
that the deepest layer of the M CL complex (capsular ligament) is                  MC Seperation
relatively weak and is the first to tear. This deep tearing may result in
the separation of the meniscus and the MCL. I've never seen it occur
in isolation (theoretically it can). The important things to remember
are probably (1) it happens more with proximal MCL tears, and (2) this
is a serious injury -- requires immobilization or surgery.

Meniscofemoral Ligaments:                                                  Normal

There are 2 (Wrisberg, Humphry) which
can be mimics of meniscal tears.
They both originate from the
posterior horn of the lateral meniscus
and cross around the PCL. The one .- I
that crosses anterior is Humphrey
(white arrow). The one that crosses
posterior is Wrisberg (black aiTow).

Wrisberg is in the back ( "humping Humphry ") You could also remember that "H" comes before
"W" in the alphabet.

Meniscal Flounce:

This an uncommon finding of a "ruffled" appearance of the meniscus
that mimics a tear. It's NOT associated with an increased incidence of
tear - but can look like one, if you don't have any idea what one looks
like.

                                    55
Patella Dislocation:                                                     Patellar Dislocation
                                                                      Classic Contusion Pattern
Dislocation o f the patella is usually lateral because o f the
shape o f the patella and femur. The contusion pattern is                                    Bipartite
classic.                                                                                     - Upper
                                                                                             Lateral
 It's Lateral                                                                               Comer
 Associated tear of the MPFL

   (medial patellar femoral ligament)
 Associated with "Trochlear Dysplasia "

   - the trochlea is too fiat.

Tibial tuberosity transfer is done to treat
patellar instability. If you see screws in the
proximal tibia - that is what happen
(probably).

Bipartite Patella vs Fracture:

This is an anatomy variant where the patella doesn't totally fuse.
Normally the thing fuses by age 12 - so don't call this in an 8 year
old. The trick is the location -- upper lateral corner. For the
purpose of multiple choice - upper lateral comer fragments are
bipartite.

Patella A lta / Baja:

The patella will move up or down in certain traumatic                           %  Patella
situations. If the quadricep tendon tears you will get                              Baja
unopposed pull from the patellar tendon resulting in a                'A
low patella (Baja). If the patella tendon tears you will
get unopposed quadriceps tendon pull resulting in a                   Patella
high patella (Alta).                                                    Alta

The "classic" association with patellar tendon tear
(Alta) is SLE, (also can see in elderly, trauma,
athletics, renal failure or RA).

"Bilateralpatellar tendon rupture " is a buzzword for chronic steroids.

Normal
Comparison

            Prepatellar        Fat Impingement                                     Jumpers Knee
            Bursitis           Syndrome
                                                                                   High T2 Signal +
            Fluid superficial  High T2 Signal in Hoffa's                           Thickening of the
            to the Patella     Fat Inferior to the Patella                         Inferior Patella

                                  56
Tibial Plateau Fracture: This injury most commonly occurs from axial loading (falling and
landing on a straight leg). The lateral plateau is way more common than the medial. If you see
medial, it's usually with lateral. Some dude named Schatzker managed to get the classification
system named after him, o f which type 2 is the most common (split and depressed
lateral plateau).

Pilon Fracture (Tibial plafond fracture): This injury also most
commonly occurs from axial loading, with the talus being driven into the tibial
plafond. The fracture is characterized by comminution and articular impaction.
About 75% o f the time you are going to have fracture o f the distal fibula.

T ib ial S h aft F ractu re: This is the most common long bone fracture. It was also listed
as the m ost highly tested subject in orthopedic O ITE exam (with regard to trauma), over the
last 8 years. Apparently there are a bunch o f ways to put a nail or plate in it. It doesn't seem
like it could be that high yield for the CORE compared to other fractures with French or Latin
sounding names. I will point out that the tibia is one o f the slow est healing bones in the body
(10 weeks).

T iliau x Fractures: This a Salter-Harris 3,
through the anterolateral aspect o f the distal tibial
epiphysis.

Trivia: This pattern requires an open physis along the
lateral distal tibia. This is why you see this fracture
pattern in the window between the start o f medial

i physis fusion and the complete fusion o f the lateral

physis (lateral physis typically closes around 12-15).

Trivia: The distal tibial growth plate closes from
medial to lateral (medial first).

T rip la n e F ra c tu re : This is a Salter-Harris

4, with a vertical component through the

I epiphysis, horizontal component through the
physis, and oblique through the metaphysis.          a

*The addition o f the fracture plane in the

posterior distal tibial metaphysis (coronal plane)

distinguishes this from the Tiliaux.

                                             57
Maisonneuve Fracture:
This is an unstable fracture involving the medial tibial malleolus and/or disruption o f tlie
distal tibiofibular syndesmosis.

              The m ost com mon way to show this is to first show you the ankle with the
               widened mortis, and "next step? " get you to ask for the proxim al fibula - which
              will show the fracture of the proximal fibular shaft.
This fracture pattern is unique as the forces begin distally in the tibiotalar jo in t and then ride
up the syndesmosis to the proximal fibula.

             Trivia; The fracture does not extend into the hindfoot

          i

                                                                                              f

                                             I

Wide Medial Malleolus               Proximal Fibula Fracture

(+/- M edial Malleolus Fracture)    -- From upward force extension
-- Distal Tibiofibular syndesmosis  ("th e rippin and the tearin ") via the syndesm osis
+/- D eltoid Lig Injury'

                                    58
