                    S E C T IO N 6:

R a n d o m A s s C o l l e c t io n o f T rivia

Liposclerosing Myxofibroma:

Very characteristic location - at the intertrochanteric region o f the femur.
Looks like a geographic lytic lesion with a sclerotic margin. Despite non-
aggressive appearance, 10% undergo malignant degeneration so they need to
be followed.

Osteochondroma:                                                                                 /
                                                                                 *Awayfrom Joint
Some people think o f this as more o f a developmental anomaly (although
they still always make the tumor chapter). Actually, it's usually listed as the
most common benign tumor ("exostosis"). They can be radiation induced,
making them the only benign skeletal tumor associated with radiation.

They have a very small risk o f malignant transformation (which supposedly
can be estimated based on size of cartilage cap).
Supposedly a cap > 1.5 cm is concerning.

Key Points:
 They point away from the joint (different than Trevor / DEH)
 The bone marrow flows freely into the lesion - seen best on T1 MRI
 They can classically poke the popliteal artery and cause a pseudo aneurysm

Multiple Hereditary Exostosis:

AD condition with multiple osteochondromas. They can be sessile or pedunculated.
They have an increased risk of malignant transformation.

Trevor Disease (Dysplasia Epiphysealis Hem im elica - DEH):

This is a disease characterized by the development o f osteochondromas at the epiphysis which
result in significant joint deformity (most common in ankle and knee) -- making you terrible
at tennis and soccer. Instead o f pointing away from the joint (like a normal osteochondroma)
these assholes point into the ioint -- this is why you have so many joint issues. You see this in
young children. The osteochondroma looks more like an irregular mass. They tend to be treated
with surgical excision.

Supracondylar Spur (Avian Spur):                               Avian Spur

This is an Aunt Minnie, and normal variant. This is an   Ligament o f
osseous process, that usually does nothing, but can      Struthers
compress the median nerve if the Ligament of
Struthers smashes it.                                     Supracondylar
                                                          Canal
Notice this thing points towards the joint, that is how
you know it is not an osteochondroma. Also - it is not
a Trevor Disease thing - because of
(1) the characteristic location and
(2) it is not originated from the epiphysis.

95
Periosteal Chondroma (Juxta-Cortical
Chondroma): When you see a lesion in the finger of
a kid think this. It's a rare entity, o f cartilaginous origin.
"Saucerization" o f the adjacent cortex with sclerotic
periosteal reaction can be seen.

O steofibrous Dysplasia: This is a benign lesion found exclusively in the tibia or
fibula in children (10 and under - usually). It looks like an NOF , but is centered in the
anterior tibia, and has associated anterior tibial bowing. It can occur with Adamantinoma,
and the two cannot be differentiated with imaging.

When 1 say looks like NO F in the anterior tibia with anterior bowing, you say Osteofibrous
Dysplasia.

Distal Fem oral M etaphyseal Irregu larity (C ortical Desmoid):

This is a lucency seen along the back o f the
posteriomedial aspect o f the distal femoral
metaphysis. If they show you a lateral knee x-
ray, and there is an irregularity or lucency on the
back o f the femur this is it. It's often bilateral.

Buzzwords include "Scoop like defect" with an
"irregular but intact cortex."

This is a total incidental finding and is a don't
touch lesion. D on't biopsy it, D on 't M RI it.

Just leave it alone. If you really want to know,       Cc 't'<M [>:;; noid - Scoop Like Defect
it's probably a chronic tug lesion from the
adductor magnus.

                                                   96
C alcium H yd ro xyap atite: M ost pathologic calcification in the body is calcium
hydroxyapatite, which is also the m ost abundant form o f calcium in bone.

Calcium hydroxyapatite deposition disease = calcific tendinitis.

The calcium is deposited in tendons around the joint. The m ost com mon location for
hydroxyapatite deposition is the shoulder. Specifically, the supraspinatus tendon is the
most frequent site of calcification, usually at its insertion near the greater tuberosity. The
longus colli muscle (the muscle anterior to atlas -> T3) is also a fa vo rite location fo r multiple
choice test writers. It may be primary (idiopathic) or secondary. Secondary causes worth
knowing are: chronic renal disease, collagen-vascular disease, tumoral calcinosis and
hypervitaminosis D.

O steo p o ikilo sis: It's ju st a bunch o f bone islands. Usually in epiphyses (different from
blastic mets or osteosarcoma mets). It can be inherited or sporadic but if you are forced to
pick a pattern - I 'd go with autosom al dominant.

Mets Osteopoikilosis - Osteopoikilosis tends to be joint centered (clustered around
centered). Sclerotic mets will be all over the place. Sclerotic mets believe in nothing
Lebowski.

Trivia - Osteopoikilosis patients tend to be keloid formers.

O steopathia S triata: Linear, parallel, and longitudinal lines in
m etaphysis o f long bones. D oesn't mean shit (usually - but can in some
situations cause pain).

   E n geim ann's D isease: This is also know n as progressive diaphyseal

%  dysplasia or PDD. What you see isfusiform bony enlargement with sclerosis of

   the long bones (diaphyses). This is a total zebra that begins in childhood.

Things to know:

   D I t 's Bilateral a nd Symmetric
   D It likes the long hones - usually shown in the tibia
   D I t 's hot on bone scan
   D It can involve the skull - and can cause optic nerve compression

   97
T h alassem ia: This is a defect in the hemoglobin chain           T h alassem ia  Sickle Cell
(can be alpha or beta - major or minor). From the MSK
Radiologist prospective, we are talking about "hair-on-end"       Will Obliterate   Will Not
skulls, expansion o f the facial bones, "rodent faces,"                Sinuses     O bliterate
expanded ribs "jail-bars" . It is frequently associated with
extramedullary hematopoiesis.                                                        Sinuses

AVN of the Hip:

Variety o f causes including Perthes in kids, sickle cell, G aucher's, steroid use e tc .... It can
also be traumatic with femoral neck fractures (degree o f risk is related to degree o f
displacement / disruption o f the retinacular vessels). AVN o f the hip typically involves the
superior articular surface, beginning more anteriorly.

            Double Line                    Rim Sign:                       Crescent Sign:

             Sign:        Best seen on T2; high T2 signal line    Seen on X-ray (optimally frog
                          sandwiched between two low signal       leg); Refers to a subchondral
Best seen on T2; inner    lines. This represents^j//J betM'een    lucency seen most frequently in
bright line (granulation  sclerotic borders o f an osteochondral  the anterolateral aspect of the
tissue), with outer dark  fragment, and implies instability.      proximal femoral head. It
line (sclerotic bone).    (Stage III).                            indicates imminent collapse.

                         I

Plain Film Stages of Osteonecrosis
(there are MR stages also - presum ed to he beyond the scope o f this exam):
o Zero = Normal
o One = Normal x-ray, edema on MR
o Two = Mixed Lytic / Sclerotic
o Three = Crescent Sign, Articular Collapse, Joint Space Preserved
0 Four = Secondary Osteoarthritis

                          98
Paget Disease (O steitis Deformans):

A relatively common condition that affects 4% o f people at 40, and 8% at 80 (actually 10%,
but easier to remember 8%). M > F. M ost people are asymptomatic. The pathophysiology o f
Paget is not well understood.

                                                            Lytic    Usually Asymptomatic

The bones go through three phases which                     M ixed   Elevated Alkaline
progress from lytic to mixed to sclerotic (the
latent inactive phase). The phrase "W ide Bones             (reparative) Phosphate. Fractures

with Thick Trabecula" make you immediately say Sclerotic Elevated Hydroxyproline.

Pagets (nothing else really does that).                     (latent  More fractures. Sarcomas

                                                            inactive) may develop.

Comes in two flavors: (1) Monostotic and

(2) Polyostotic - with the poly subtype being much more common (80-90%).

Buzzwords / Signs

DS/ac/e o f Grass Sign: Lucent leading edge in a long bone                     Hyper PTH         Pagets

[Osteoporosis Circumscripta: Blade of Grass in the Skull                       (Tops & Bottoms)  All 4 Sides

[picture Frame Vertebra: Cortex is thickened on all sides                                          m

(Rugger Jersey - seen with hyper PTH is only superior and inferior endplates)                      m

DCo//o Wool Bone: Thick disorganized trabeculae

[Banana Fracture: Insufficiency fracture of a bowed soft bone (femur or tibia).

DZam O 'Shanter Sign: Thick Skull - with the frontal aspect "falling over the facial bones"

[Saber Shin: Bowing of the tibia

[ivory Vertebra: This is a differential finding, including mets. Pagets tends to be expansile.

Complications: Deafness is the most common                  Classic Look:
complication. Spinal stenosis from cortical thickening
is very characteristic. Additional complications include       Expanded
cortical stress fracture, cranial nerves paresis, CHF             Bone
(high output), secondary hyperparathyroidism (10%),
Secondary development of osteosarcoma (1%) -                   Coarse or
which is often highly resistant to treatment. As a                Thick
piece o f ridiculous trivia - giant cell tumor can arise
from Paget.                                                   Trabecular
                                                                 Pattern
Trivia: O f all the tumors to which Paget may devolve
to. Osteosarcoma is the Most Common.

Total Trivia: Paget bone is hypervascular and may be 5
degrees hotter than other bone (get your thermometer
ready). Aik Phos will be elevated (up to 20x) in the
reparative phase.

                                                  99
                        Skull:                                 Long Bones
Large Areas of Osteolysis                      Advancing margin of
in the Frontal and Occipital                   lucency from one end to
Bones "Osteoporosis                            the other is the so-called
Circumscripta", in the lytic 4 %               "blade o f grass" or
phase.                                         "flame." Will often spare
                                               the fibula, even in diffuse
The skull will look                            disease.
"cotton wool" in the
mixed phase.                                   Tibia Bowing "saber
                                               shin" is also classic.
Thickened sclerotic
appearance is a good chronic look. Involves                         Pelvis:
BOTH inner and outer table (Fibrous Dysplasia
favors the outer table)                        Most common bone involved. "Always'
                                               involves the iliopectineal line on the
                                               pelvic brim.

                                               Can cause advanced arthritis and
                                               acetabular protrusio.

                                               Has a classic look
                                               on bone scan.

Tam O 'Shanter Sign: Skull sorta looks like one
of those stupid hats with the frontal aspect
"falling over the facial bones"

                                                                                      Spine:
                                                                      Cortical Thickening can cause a "picture
                                                                      frame sign" (same as osteopetrosis). Also
                                                                      can give you an ivory vertebral body.
                                                                      Discussed more on the next page

                                                      100
THIS vs THAT Pagets Spine vs Other Spine Changes

Pagets - This is discussed in detail in the M SK chapter, but is such a high yield topic that it's
worth touching on again. The incidence increases w ith age (around 8% at age 80). It's at
increased risk for fracture, and has a 1% risk of sarcoma degeneration (usually high grade).

It's shown two ways in the spine:                                Picture
          (1) An enlarged "ivory vertebrae",               - Frame
          (2) Picture frame vertebrae (sclerotic border)
          -- - with central lysis {mixedphase)

Renal Osteodystrophy - Another high yield topic covered in depth in the M SK chapter. The
way it's shown in the spine is the "Rugger Jersey Spine" - w ith sclerotic bands at the top and
bottom o f the vertebral body. You could also have paraspinal soft tissue calcifications

This V5 That: Rugger Jersey vs "Paget" Picture Frame;

 Rugger Jersey = Top and Bottom Only
 Paget Picture Frame = All 4 margins o f the vertebral body

Osteopetrosis - A nother high yield topic covered in depth in the M SK chapter. This is a
genetic disease with impaired osteoclastic resorption. You have thick cortical bone, with
diminished marrow. On plain film or CT it can look like a Rugger Jersey Spine or Sandwich
vertebra but the sclerotic lines are said to be less smudgy and more well-defined/sharp
(supposedly). On M R you are going to have loss o f the norm al T1 bright m arrow signal, so it
will be T1 and T2 dark.

"H-Shaped Vertebra" - This is usually a buzzword for sickle cell, although it's
only seen in about 10% o f cases. It results from microvascular endplate infarct.
If you see "H -Shaped vertebra," the answ er is sickle cell. If sickle cell isn't a
choice the answ er is Gauchers. A nother tricky w ay to ask this is to say w hich o f
the following causes "widening of the disc space." W idened disc space is
another way o f describing a "H Shape" without saying that.

101
Paget on O th er Im aging M odalities:

M RI: There are three marrow patterns      Lytic / Early        Heterogenous T2; T1 is
that closely (but not exactly) follow the  M ixed               isointense to muscle, with a
phases on x-ray.                                                "speckled appearance"
                                           Late Mixed           Maintained fatty high T1 and
                                                                T2 signals
                                           Sclerotic            Low signal on T1 and T2

This vs That: M alignant Transformation vs Active Disease:
 Both are T2 Bright and Will Enhance
 M alignant Transform ation will lose the Normal T1 signal (just like a cancer would)
 Best Sequence fo r D istinguishing the two? T1 Pre Con

N uclear M edicine: The prim ary utility o f a bone scan is in
defining the extent o f disease and to help assess response
to treatment. The characteristic look for Paget is "W hole
Bone Involvement."

For example, the entire vertebral body including the
posterior elements, or the entire pelvis. The classic
teaching is that Paget is hot on all three phases (although
often decreased or normal in the sclerotic phase).

                                                                                      m

                                           102
                         Tib ia l B o w in g

Most likely shown as an Aunt Minnie: NF-1 anterior with a fibular pseudoarthrosis, Rickets
with wide growth plates, or Blounts tibia vara. Pagets can also cause this.

The m ost likely pure trivia question is that physiologic bowing is smooth, lateral, a n d occurs
from 18 months - 2 years.

NF-1                     Anterior Lateral - Unilateral       May be unilateral. May
                                                             have hypoplastic fibula with
                                                             pseudoarthrosis.

                                       ' -- 

                                      Lateral       Frontal

Foot Deformities         Posterior
Physiologic Bowing
H yp ophosphatasia       Lateral - Bilateral Symmetric S elf lim iting between 18
Rickets                                                              months and 2 years.

Blount                   Lateral                             "Rickets in a newborn"

Osteogenesis Imperfecta  Lateral                             Fraying o f the metaphyses
Dwarfs                                                       and widening o f the growth
                                                             plates.

                         Tibial Vara - Often                 Seen best in "fast growing
                                                             bones" - knee, wrist
                         asym m etric               \
                                                             Early walking, Fat, black
                                                             kid.

                                                                     Proximal tibia posteromedial
                                                                     physeal growth disturbance
                                                                     resulting in deformity

                                                    > /

                         Involves all long bones
                         Short Limbs

                                               103
