               Site-Specific Entifles - Hip / Femur / Sacrum

Femoral Shaft Fractures:

   D On the inside (medial) is the classic

          stress fracture location

   D On the outside (lateral) is the classic

          bisphosphonate related fx location.
          As shown in the image, you see cortical
          thickening (white arrow) along the lateral
          femur, eventually progressing into a
          fracture.

Hip Fracture / Dislocation:
You see these with dash board injuries. The
posterior dislocation (almost always associated
with a fracture as it's driven backwards) is much
more common than the anterior dislocation.

 BUZIWORD:
                        "Foot in internal rotation'

     SB

Anterior Column vi'Posterior Column - the
acetabulum is supported by two columns o f bone
that merge together to fonn an "inverted Y"
Iliopectineal Line = Anterior
Ilioischial Line = Posterior (remember you sit on your ischium)
The both column fracture by definition divides the ilium proximal to the hip joint, so you have no
articular surface o f the hip attached to the axial skeleton (that's a problem).

Corona Mortis: The anastomosis of the inferior epigastric and obturator vessels sometimes rides
on the superior pubic ramus. During a lateral dissection - sometimes used to repair a hip fracture
- this can be injured. 1 talk about this more in the vascular chapter.

Hip Fracture Leading to A VN: The location o f the fracture may predispose to AVN. It's
important to remember that, since the femoral head gets vascular flow from the circumflex
femorals, a displaced intracapsular fracture could disrupt this blood supply - leading to
AVN. Testable Point: Degree o f fracture displacement corresponds with risk o f AVN.

                                                    42
Avulsion Injury:

This is seen more in kids than adults. A duh bones are stronger than their tendons. In kids it's the
other way around. One pearl is that if you see an isolated "avulsion" o f the lesser trochanter
in a seem ingly mild traum a / injury in an adult - query a pathologic fracture. Now, to
discuss w hat I believe to be one o f the highest yield topics in M SK, "where d id the avulsion
comefrom ?"

The easiest way to show this is a plain film pelvis (or MRI) with a tug/avulsion injury to one o f
the m uscular attachm ent sites. The question will m ost likely be ``w hat attaches there? " or
"which muscle g o t avulsed? "

                                                                                    Iliac Crest
                                                                                            Abdominal Muscles

                                       ASIS
                                       Sartorius
                                       Tensor Fascia Lata

                                       Alls

                                       Rectus Femoris

                                       Greater Trochanter
                                       Gluteal Muscles

Symphysis
ADDuctor Group

Ischial Tuberosity                     Isolated "avulsion" of
Hamstrings                             the lesser trochanter in a
                                       seemingly mild trauma /
                    Lesser Trochanter  injury in an adult - think
                                       pathologic fracture.
                    lllioDsoas
                                       Think Cancer

                    43
Unstable Pelvis Fracture Patterns:

For w hatever reason, the described force patterns that result in unstable pelvic fractures seems
to be high yield. As such, I made a few diagrams;

Anterior- Posterior                            0             Lateral Compression

Compression                          Vertical Sheer   The following isolated fractures
*Note the diastasis of        *Note the upward shift  are considered "Stable" :
the pubic symphysis
                                                       Acetabular fracture
Trivia: Pelvic and Sacral Fractures can result in      Pubic ramus fracture
arterial injury. If the history suggests hemodynamic   Iliac wing fracture
instability or enlarging hematoma - think angiogram    Avulsion fractures (ASIS, iliac
next.
                                                        crest, ischial tuberosity, etc.., etc...,
                                                        so on and so forth)

Snapping Hip Syndrome:

The clinical sensation of "snapping" or "clicking" with hip flexion and extension. The key point is that
it is clinical - they have to tell you the patient is "snapping" This is the way people work this thing up:

Clinical Eval for the         This is to evaluate               This is to look for the
                                                                "Internal Type"
"External Type"               for the "Intra-                   Look for Dynamic "Snapping"
                                                                of the
(IT band "snapping"     ^     Articular Type"                   Iliopsoas over the Iliopectineal
                                                                eminence or femoral head
over the Greater              Looking for Hip                   *This has to be shown with a
                                                                CINE - because thefinding is
Trochanter)            X-Ray  Degen / Loose        IF NO Degen  a dynamic moving o f a tendon.
                              Bodies, Etc          NEXT STEP =  I f you see a hip ultrasoundfor
                                                                snapping - this is what they
                                                   Ultrasound   are goingfo r

3 Types of Snapping Hip:                                                        IF US Negative
 External (most common) = Ihotibial Band                                      NEXT STEP =
                                                                                MRI Arthrogram
  over Greater Trochanter
 Internal = Iliopsoas over Iliopectineal                       This is to evaluate for the
                                                                "Intra-Articular Type" ...
  eminence or femoral head                                      Again this time looking for
 Intra-Articular = Labral tears / joint bodies                 Labral Tears

                                                44
IT Band Syndrome

This is a repetitive stress syndrome seen most classically in runners.
The key finding is fluid on both sides of tlie IT band, extending
posterior and lateral.

Fluid in the joint does not exclude the diagnosis, but for the purpose of
multiple choice if you see fluid around the band and none in the joint
you can be fairly certain this is the pathology the question writer is
after.

Hip Labrum                                    Coronal View                 Sagittal View

This is complicated and I'm not going to      -Showing the classic anterior superior cleft of a tear
go into depth talking about all the little
bumps and variants. I would just know a
few things:

1: Anterior-Superior Tears (white
arrows) are by far the most common.

2: Paralabral Cysts (black arrow) are
associated with tears and likely a hint that
a tear is present.

3: Just like a shoulder intra-articular
contrast will increase your sensitivity.

Iliopsoas Bursa
 Largest bursa of the entire body.
 Communicates with the joint in 15% of the

  population
 Seen Anterior to the hip
 Gamesmanship: A fluid signal "mass"

  anterior to the femur (adjacent to the psoas
  tendon) at the level of the ischial tuberosity
  is likely Iliopsoas Bursitis
 Bursitis is seen in OA and RA, in the
  setting of a snapping hip, post trauma, and
  after hip arthroplasty.

                 Trivia; The iliopsoas tendon (white arrow)
                           runs anterior to the labrum on axial
                                             and can mimic a tear.

                                              45
F e m o ro a c e ta b u la r Im p in g e m e n t (FAI): This is a syndrome of painful hip movement.
It's based on hip / femoral deformities, and honestly might be total BS. Supposedly it can lead to early
degenerative changes. There are two described subtypes: (A) Cam and (B) Pincer (technically there is a
mixed type - but I anticipate multiple choice to make it more black and white).

CAM Type: This is an osseous "bump" along the femoral head-neck junction.

                                                                                           Memory Aid

                                                                      I remember that the femoral one (cam-type)
                                                                      is more common in men because the femoral
                                                                      head kinda looks like a penis.

                                                                      Be honest, you were thinking that too.

Pincer Type: Whereas the CAM type is a defoiTnity of the femur, the pincer type represents a defomiity of
the acetabulum. Whereas the CAM type is more common in a young athletic male, the pincer is more
common in a middle aged woman (insert sexistjoke here).

The most classic way to show or ask this is the so-called
"cross over sign", where the acetabulum is malformed -
causing the posterior lip to "Cross over" the anterior lip. A
Key point is that the coccyx needs to be centered at the
symphysis pubis to even evaluate this (rotation fucks things
up).

The other associated finding(s) of the pincer subtype worth
knowing are the acetabular over coverage buzzwords
(Coxa Profunda and Protrusio), and the Ischial Spine Sign:

Normal  Coxa Profunda                   Acetabular Protrusion        Prominent
        (Acetabulum projects medial to
        the ilioischial line)           (Femur projects medial to the Ischial Spine

                                        ilioischial line)

Classic FAI Association:  Os Acetabuli

 Os Acetabuli (40%)      This is an unfused secondary
 Labral Tears            ossification center. It's actually normal
 Early Arthritis         in kids (should fuse by adult hood).
                          It has several testable associations
                          including FAI and Labral Tears

                          46
                               Total Hip Arthroplasty

Bone Remodeling / Stress Shielding:          Proximal stress shielding -
                                                        greater trochanter
The stress is transferred through the                      bone resorption
metallic stem, so the bone around it is not
loaded. Orthopods call this "Woltf's Law'                   Calcar
- where the unloaded bone just gets                         Resorption
resorbed.

Happens more with uncemented
arthroplasty. To some degree this is a
normal finding - but when advanced can
predispose to fracture.

     Potentially Asymptomatic                 Distal stress loading; cortical
        Complications of Hip                 thickening & pedestral (around
             Arthroplasty:
                                                                      the bottom)
 Stress Shielding                                                       "Zone 4"
 Aggressive Granulomatosis

Heterotopic Ossifications: This is very common (15-50%). It's usually asymptomatic. The trivia
regarding multiple choice tests is that "hip stiffness" is the most common complaint.
Also in Ank Spon patients, because they are so prone to heterotopic ossifications, they sometimes
give them low dose prophylactic radiation prior to THA.

Aseptic Loosening: This is the most common indication for revision. The criteria on x-ray is > 2
mm at the interface (suggestive). If you see migration of the component, you can call it
(migration includes varus tilting o f thefemoral stem).

Subsidence: Basically an arthroplasty                                        collared
that is sliding downward. This is a                                          stem
described reason for early failure of
THA. You see this most often in
arthroplasty implants without a
collar.

Greater than 1 cm along the            Distance from ihe tip of the greater
femoral component, or                  trochanter to the superolateral
progression after 2 years are          shoulder of the stem is increased
indications of loosening.              relative to baseline.

Wear Patterns: It is normal to have a little bit of thinning in the area of  Wear
weight bearing - this is called "Creep." It is not normal to see wear
along the superior lateral aspect.

 Wear = Pathologic

 Creep = Normal

                                                   47
                                       Total Hip Arthroplasty Continued-

Particle Disease (Aggressive Granulomatosis): Any component of the device that sheds will cause an
inflammatory response. The more wear that occurs the more particles -- wear is the primarv underlying
factor. Macrophages will try and eat the particles and spew enzymes all over the place. This process can
cause progressive lytic focal regions around the replacement and joint effusions.

Things to know about particle disease (in THA):

D Most commonly seen in non-cemented hips
D Tends to occur 1-5 years after surgery

    -- "late complication"

D X-ray shows "smooth" endosteal scalloping

     (distinguishes from infection)
D Aseptic - ESR & CRP will be normal

D Produces no secondary bone response

     -- no sclerosis

D Can be seen around screw holes

     (particles are transmitted around screws)

Wear  Particle Disease  Osteolysis

                                                        Wear = Arrow

Sacrum:

You can get questions on the the sacrum in the setting of trauma - often wanting you to look for
iliac vessel bleeding with an angiogram. I f it is not a traum a case it's going to be either (a) SI
degenerative change - discussed later, (b) unilateral SI infection, (c) a chordoma - discussed
later, (d) sacral agenesis, or (e) an insufficiency fracture. Out o f these 5 things, the
insufficiency fracture is probably the m ost likely.

Sacral Insufficiency Fracture - The most common         /o            ra
cause is postmenopausal osteoporosis. You can also                    "Honda Sign'
see this in patients with renal failure, patients with  f 렁
RA, pelvic radiation, mechanical changes after
hip arthroplasty, or extended steroid use. They are
often (usually) occult on plain films.

They will have to show this either with a bone scan,
or MRl. The classic "Honda Sign" o f a bone scan
dem onstrating the "H " -shaped appearance is
probably the most likely presentation on a multiple
choice test.

                                    48
