                                      S E C T IO N 8:

                       A r th r itis

Arthritis is tricky. Anne Brow er wrote a book called Arthritis in Black a n d White, w hich is
probably the best book on the subject. The problem is that book is 415 pages. So, I 'm going
to try and offer the 10 page version.

Epidemiology
Although there are over 90 different rheumatic diseases recognized by the American College
o f Rheumatology, only a few tend to show up on multiple choice tests (and at the view box).
You can broadly categorize arthritis into 3 categories:

      Degenerative (OA, Neuropathic)
     Q Inflammatory (RA and Variants)
      Metabolic (Gout, CPPD)

D e g e n e ra tiv e :

Osteoarthritis is the most common cause. The pathogenesis is that you have mechanical breakdown
(hard work) which leads to cartilage degeneration (fissures, micro-fractures) and fragmentation of
subchondral bone (sclerosis and subchondral cysts). You get all the classic stuff, joint space
narrowing (NOT svmmetric). subchondral cysts, endplate changes, vacuum phenomenon, etc... The
poster boy is the osteophyte.

Neuropathic Joint. The way the case is classically shown is a bad joint followed by the reason for a
bad joint (syringomyeUa, spinal cord injury, etc...). A way to think about this is "osteoarthritis with a
vengeance." The buzzword is "Surgical Like Margins." Basically nothing else causes this kind of
destruction. I like to describe the joints as a deformity, with debris, and dislocation, having dense
subchondral bone, and destruction of the articular cortex. The classic scenario is a shoulder that looks
like it's been amputated, and then they show you a syrinx.

Charcot Foot - The classic example of a diabetic neuropathic foot with
the deformity, with debris, and dislocation, having dense subchondral
bone, and destruction of the articular cortex - favoring the midfoot
eventually causing a "rocker-bottom deformity" of the foot resuUing
from the collapse of the longitudinal arch.

This vs That - Charcot vs Infection: Diabetics get neuropathic feet and infections - so there can be
overlap. To tell them apart you can look for the presence of an ulcer or sinus tract (that infers infection).
Location is helpful - charcot prefers the midfoot (osteomyelitis prefers the pressure points of the forefoot
metatarsal heads, IP joints - and the posterior plantar aspect of the calcaneus).

                                                                I ll
Inflam m atory:

Erosive Osteoarthritis (Inflammatory
Osteoarthritis). The buzzword is "gull w ing",
which describes the central erosions. It is seen in
postmenopausal women and favors the DIP joints.

                                                                                   Erosive O A - Gullwing

Rheumatoid Arthritis: There is a ton o f trivia related to this disease. It's not a disease o f
bone production. Instead it is characterized by osteoporosis, soft tissue swelling, marginal
erosions and uniform joint space narrow ing. It's often bilateral and symmetric. Classically
spares the DIP joints (opposite o f erosive OA).

Trivia: The 5th M etatarsal head is the first spot in the foot

RA in the H and Pearls - Expect the PIP joints to be involved A FTER the MCP joints. The
First CMC is classically spared (or is the last carpal to be involved). The first CM C should
NOT be first. Obviously OA loves the first CMC so this is helpful in separating them.
Psoriasis, on the other hand, also tends to make the first CM C go last.

     D Felty Syndrome: RA > 10 years + Splenom egaly + N eutropenia

     D Caplan Syndrome: RA + Pneumoconiosis

The distribution o f RA vs OA in the                     1
hip is a classic teaching point:
                                                         fS  Axial

                                                     OA      RA

                                      112
Rheum atoid Variants:

D Psoriatic Arthritis
D R eiter's syndrome (Reactive arthritis)
D Ankylosing Spondylitis
D Inflammatory Bowel Disease

P so riatic A rth ritis : This is seen in 30% o f patients with psoriasis. In alm ost all cases
(90%) the skin findings come first, then you get the arthritis. As a point o f trivia, there is a
strong correlation between involvement o f the nail and involvement o f the DIP joint. The
classic description is "erosive change with bone proliferation (IP joints > M CP joints).
The erosions start in the margins o f the joint and progress to involve the central portions
(can lead to a "pencil sharpening" effect). The hands are the most commonly affected
(second most common is the feet). Up to 40% o f cases will have SI joint involvement
(asymmetric).

Additional Buzzwords                          ***         f
D "Fuzzy Appearance" to the bone            f
                                                          ·
     around the joint (bone proliferation)             M m
D Sausage Digit - whole digit has soft
                                                                                 0^
     tissue swelling
D Ivory Phalanx - sclerosis and/or          IP Joints  Ray Pattern Pencil        Mouse
                                                                         in Cup  Ears
     bone proliferation (most commonly
     the great toe)
D Pencil in Cup Defonnities
D Ankylosis in Finger
D "Mouse Ears"
D Acro-osteolysis

When I say Ankylosis in the Hand, You Say (1) Erosive OA or (2) Psoriasis

          RA                  Psoriasis                               M utilans
       Symmetric
        Proximal               Asymmetric              Severe bone resorption leading to
(favors MCP, caipals)              Distal              soft tissue "telescoping" collapse.
     Osteoporosis
                            (favors IP joints)         Trivia: If you
No Bone Proliferation       No Osteoporosis            pulled on the
                                                       patient's fingers
Can Cause "Mutilans"       Bone Proliferation          they would
     When Severe       - in the form of periostitis    lengthen - but who
                                                       would want to
                        Can Cause "Mutilans"           touch a patient ?
                              When Severe              Yuck!

                                        113
R e ite r's (Reactive Arthritis):                                         R eiter's Triad:

Apparently Reiter was a Nazi (killed a bunch o f people with                  Urethritis
typhus vaccine experiments). So, people try not to give him any            Conjunctivitis
credit for things (hence the name change to Reactive arthritis).
Regardless o f w hat you call it, it's a very sim ilar situation to           Arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis - both have bone proliferation, erosions, and
asymmetric SI joint involvement.                                      (Can't See or Climb a
                                                                      Tree to Pee on a Nazi
The difference is that R eiter's is rare in the hands (tends to       named Reiter).
affect the feet more). Just rem em ber R eiter's favors things below
the waist (like the penis = urethritis, and the foot).                You Know Who Else
                                                                      Was A Nazi?
        Psoriatic and Reactive arthritis are both associated
                                                                      Henry Ford
A with HLA-B27                                                        - Google It.

Ankylosing Spondylitis: This disease favors the spine and SI joints. The classic
buzzword is "bamboo spine" from the syndesmophytes flowing from adjacent vertebral
bodies. Shiny comers is a buzzword, for early involvement. As you might imagine, these
spines are susceptible to fracture in trauma. SI joint involvement is usually the first site
(symmetric). The joint actually widens a little before it narrows. As a point o f trivia, these
guys can have an upper lobe predominant interstitial lung disease, with small cystic spaces.

Next Step - Any significant Ank Spon / DISH + Even Minor Trauma = Whole Spine CT

                  Random High Yield Topic: Ankylosing Spondylitis in the Hip

W hen the peripheral skeleton is involved in patient's with A nk Spond, think about the
shoulders and hips (hips more common). Hip involvement can be very disabling.

Heterotopic Ossification tends to occur post hip replacement or revision. It occurs so
much that they often get postoperative low dose radiation and NSAlDs to try as
prophylactic therapy.
If they show you normal SI joints - then show you anything in the spine it's not AS. It has
to hit the SI joints first (especially on multiple choice).

in fla m m a to ry B ow el D ise ase (E n te ro p a th ic ) - A llegedly 20% o f patient's
with Crohns & UC have a chronic inflammatory arthritis. The imaging findings occurs in
two distinct flavors.

(A): Axial Arthritis (favors SI joints and spine) - often unrelated to bowel disease
(B): Peripheral Arthritis - this one varies depending on the severity o f the bowel disease.

                                                        114
SI J o in t In vo lvem en t P a tte rn s (Rheumatoid Variants)

                                  P-A-I-R                       P-A- I-R

    Unilateral = Infection               Asymmetric =                   Symmetric =
                                       Psoriasis, Reiters       Inflammatory Bowel, AS
          Psoriatic Arthritis
                  M = F                 Reiters (Reactive)            Anl^yiosing Spondylitis
                                                M >F                              M>F
        Asynimetric SI Joint
Hands, Feet, Thoracolumbar Spine      Asymmetric SI Joint                Symmetric Si Joint
                                  Feet, Lumbar Spine, SI joint     SI joint. Spine (whole thing)

                                         M etabolic:

Gout: This is a crystal arthropathy from the deposition o f uric acid crystals in and around the
joints. It's almost always in a man over 40. The big toe is the classic location.

Buzzwords / Things to Know:                                         Gout on MR
 Earliest Sign = Joint Effusion
 Spares the Joint Space (until late in the disease); Juxta-     Juxta-articular soft
                                                                tissue mass (LOW
     articular Erosions - away from the joint.                  ON T2).
 "Punched out lytic lesions"
 "Overhanging Edges"                                            The tophus will
 Soft tissue tophi                                              typically enhance.

                                                   Gout Mimickers:

There are 5 entities that can give a similar appearance to a gouty arthritis, although they are much
less common. This is the mnemonic I was taught in training:

"American Roentgen Ray Society Hooray"

    D Amyloid
    D RA (cystic)
    D Reticular Histocytosis (the most rare)

      Sarcoid

    D Hyperlipidemia

                                  115
CPPD: Calcium Pyrophosphate Dihydrate Disease is super com mon in old people. It often
causes chondocalcinosis (although there are other causes). Synovitis + CPPD =
"Pseudogout." CPPD loves the triangular fibrocartilage of the wrist, the peri-odontoid tissue,
and intervertebral disks. Another important phrase is "degenerative change in an
uncommon joint" - shoulder, elbow, patellofemoral joint, radiocarpal joint. Having said
that, pyrophosphate arthropathy is most common at the knee.

· I f you see isolated disease in the patellofemoral, radiocarpal, or talonavicularjoint, think
   CPPD.

· H ooked M CP Osteophytes with chondrocalcinosis in the TFCC is a classic look (although
  hemochromatosis can also look that way).

CPPD can (and does commonly) cause SLAC wrist by degenerating the SL Ligament.

                             THIS vs THAT-- vs CPPD ?

 There are many overlapping features including joint space narrowing, subchondral
  sclerosis, subchondral cyst, and osteophyte formation. However, CPPD has some unique
  features, such as an "atypical joint distribution" - favoring compartments like the
 patellofemoral or radiocarpal. Subchondral cyst formation can be bigger than expected.

Hemochrom atosis:

This iron overload disease also is known for calcium
pyrophosphate deposition and resulting
chondrocalcinosis. It has a sim ilar distribution to
CPPD (MCP joints). Both CPPD and
Hemochromatosis will have "hooked osteophytes"
at the MCP joint.

THIS THAT CPPD and Hemochromatosis:

Hemochromatosis has uniform joint space loss at
ALL the MCP joints. CPPD favors the index and
middle finger MCPs.

Trivia: As a point o f trivia, therapy for the        Hooked Osteophytes
systemic disease does NOT affect the arthritis.       --CPPD vs Hemochromatosis

                                                 116
``M ilw a u k e e S h ou lder" - This is an apocalyptic  Humeral Head has
destruction of the shoulder (alm ost looks neuropathic)
secondary to the demon mineral hydroxyapatite.           been massacred.
                                                         -I'm talking scorched
The articular surface changes will be very advanced,     Earth Mother Fuckers
and you have a lot of intra-articular loose bodies.

The humeral head will look like it needed the United
Nations to delivery a binding resolution to keep the
hydroxyapatite from fucking destroying it.

Classic History: Old women with a history o f trauma to
that joint.

H yperparathyroidism - As you may remember from medical school, this can be
primary or secondary, and its effects on calcium metabolism typically manifest in the bones.
Here are your buzzwords: "Subperiosteal bone resorption" o f the radial aspect of the 2nd and
3rd fingers, rugger-jersey spine, brown tumors, and terminal tuft erosions.

The classic ways this can be shown:
     D Superior and inferior rib notching - bone resorption
      Resorption along the radial aspect o f thefingers with brown tumors
     D Tuft Resorption
      Rugger Jersey Spine
     D Pelvis with Narrow ing or "C onstricting" o f the fe m o ra l necks, and wide S I joints.

Subperiosteal Resorption, Tuft Resorption                       %  Brown Tumor
               and brown tumors            Rugger Jersey Spine

Fuckery: They can show you any o f these classic pictures and then want you to say
"Phosphate Retention" is the cause (Hyper PTH causes phosphate retention)

                                           117
                                             Problem Solving:

If you are given a picture o f a hand or foot and asked w hat the arthritis is, it will probably be
obvious (they show a gull-wing for erosive OA, or bad carpals for RA, or the pencil in cup for
psoriasis, or the 5th metatarsal for RA). If it's not m ade obvious with an "A unt M innie"
appearance, I like to use this approach to figure it out (I also use this in the real world).

                                                  Infection

Has one or more:                 One Joint

-Symmetric Joint   Inflammatory                   No Bony Proliferation           RA
Space Narrowing                                   Proximal Distribution
-Erosions                                     /                               AS
                                                  Bony Proliferation          Psoriasis
                                 Multiple Joints  Distal Distribution         Reactive
                                                                              Inflammatory
                                                                              Bowel Related

Has one or more:                            Typical Joints (Hands, Knees)         OA

-Asymmetric Joint  Degenerative Atypical Joint                                -Post Traumatic
Space Narrowing                                                               -Gout or CPPD
-Osteophytes           \ Atypical Age                                         -Hemophilia
                                            Atypical Joint
                                            Atypical Age                       Neuropathic
                                            SEVERE or "Surgical Destruction"

                                 118
Spine Degenerative Change:

In the real w orld it's usually ju st m ultilevel degenerative change. But in m ultiple choice
world you should be thinking about other things. Shiny comers with early AS, or flowing
syndesmophytes with later AS. DISH with the bulky osteophytes sparing the disc space.
The big bridging lateral osteophyte is classically shown for psoriatic arthritis.

                 Vertebral Ossifications                            Cervical Spine:
                                                                     Gamesmanship
"Flowing               Ankylosing           I Bamboo Spine
Syndesmophytes'        Spondylitis                                Fusion: Either
                                                                  congenital (Klippel-
Diffuse Paravertebral  DISH                 Ossification o f ALL  Feil) or Juvenile RA.
Ossifications
                                                                  Erosions of the
Focal Lateral          Psoriatic Arthritis  Ossification of       Dens: CPPD and RA
Paravertebral                               Annulus Fibrosis      famously do this.
Ossification
                                                                  Bad Kyphosis = NFl

DISH (Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis) :
You see ossification o f the anterior longitudinal ligament involving more than 4 levels with
sparing of the disc spaces, you say DISH. The thoracic spine is most commonly used.
These guys often have bony proliferation at pelvis, ischial tuberosities, trochanters, and iliac
crests. There is no saeroiliitis (helps you differentiate from AS).

OFLL (Ossification of the Posterior Longitudinal Ligament):
This is an ossification o f the posterior longitudinal ligament. It is associated with DISH,
ossification o f the ligamentum fiavum, and Ankylosing Spondylitis. It favors the cervical
spine o f old Asian men. It can cause spinal canal stenosis, and can lead to cord injury after
minor trauma. A key point is that it's bad news in the cervical spine (where it is most
common); in the thoracic spine it is usually asymptomatic.

Destructive Spondyloarthropathy.:
This is associated with patients on renal dialysis (for at least 2 years), and it most commonly
affects the C-spine. It looks like bad degenerative changes or CPPD. A m yloid deposition is
supposedly why it happens.

                                            119
Misc stuff Thars Sorta in the Arthritis Category:

^ stem ic Lupus Erythematosus:

The Aunt Minnie look is reducible deformity
of joints without articular erosions. Joint
space narrowing and erosions are uncommon
findings. They can show you the hands with
ulnar subluxations at the MCPs on Norgaard
view, then they reduce on AP (because the
hands are flat).

This ligamentous laxity also increases risk of  PA View
patellar dislocations.                           SLE: Shows Reversible Ulnar Deviation

Jaccoud's Arthropathy: This is very similar to SLE in the hand (people often say them together).
You have non erosive arthropathy with ulnar deviation of the 2"`*-5th fingers at the MCP joint. The
history is post rheumatic fever.

Mixed Connective Tissue Disease: One unique feature is that it is positive for some antibody-
Ribonucleoprotein (RNP) - and therefore serology is essential to the diagnosis.

Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis: This occurs before age       Widened
16 (by definition). What you see is a washed out hand    Intercondylar
that has a proximal distribution (carpals are jacked),
and is ankylosed (premature fusion of growth plates).        Notch
Serology is often negative (85%). In the knees, you see
enlargement of the epiphyses and widened intercondvlar
notch - similar to findings in hemophilia.

               Buzzword'. "Epiphyseal Overgrowth'

Am yloid Arthropathy: This is seen with patients on dialysis (less commonly in patients with chronic
inflammation such as RA). The pattern of destruction can be severe - similar to septic arthritis or
neuropathic spondyloarthropathy. The distribution is key, with bilateral involvement of the shoulders,
hips, carpals, and knees being typical. Carpal tunnel syndrome is a common cHnical manifestation.
The joint space is typically preserved until later in the disease. When associated with dialysis, it's rare
before 5 years of treatment, but very common after 10 years (80%).

Pituitary Gigantism: If they happen to show you x-rays of Andre the Giant, look for "widening of
the joint space in an adult hip" - can be a classic buzzword. Late in the game, the cartilage will
actually outgrow its blood supply and collapse, leading to early onset osteoarthritis. The formation of
endochondral bone at existing chondro-osseous junctions results in widening of osseous structure.

                                                120
