                 Site-Specific Entitles - Elbow & Forearm

General Trivia:

 Radial Head Fracture is most com mon in adults (supracondylar is m ost common in PEDs)
 Sail sign - elevation o f the fat pads from a joint effusion. Supposedly a sign of occult

  fracture. The testable trivia is (1) the posterior fat pad is more specific (posterior is
  positive), and (2 ) the posterior fat pad can appear falsely elevated (false positive) if the
  lateral isn't a true 90 degree flexed lateral. "Posterior Positive, Posterior Position
  D ep en d en t"
 Capitellum fractures are associated with posterior dislocation

Forearm Fractures I Eponyms:

Forearm fractures are "ring" or "pretzel" type fractures, similar to the pelvis or mandible.
Think about breaking a pretzel, it always snaps in two spots (not just one). So forearm
fractures are often two fractures, or a fracture + dislocation.

Gamesmanship: A fracture o f the forearm can be shown ~ "N ext Step" style questions
would prompt an additional view. Ulna Fx = Elbow X-Ray. Radius Fx = Wrist X-Ray.

There are 3 French sounding (therefore high yield) fractures o f the forearm which follow this
ring / pretzel principal.

     Monteggia Fracture (MUGR):           M onteggia fractures occur in children (rare in adults)
                                          "M onteggia fo r M inors "
Fracture of the proximal ulna, with
anterior dislocation of the radial head.

Dislocation of the radial head follows
the angulation of the Ulnar Fx.

       Galeazzi Fracture (MUGR)

Radial shaft fracture, with anterior
dislocation of the ulna at the DRUJ.

               Essex-Lopresti

Fracture of the radial head + Anterior
dislocation of the distal radial ulnar
joint (DRUJ).

Unstable fracture - With rupture of the
interosseous membrane

                                                   26
Cubital Tunnel Syndrome

There are several causes - the m ost com mon in the real w orld is probably repetitive valgus
stress. The most common shown on multiple choice is probably an accessory anconeus.

WTF is an "Anconeus " ? It's a piece o f shit m uscle that does nothing but get in the way o f
an orthopedic scope. It's norm ally on the lateral side the elbow. You can have an "Accessory
Anconeus " - also called an "Anconeus Epitrochlearis " - on the medial side which will exert
mass effect on the ulnar nerve.

Anatomic Trivia: The site where the ulnar nerve passes beneath the cubital tunnel
retinaculum also known as the epicondylo-olecranon ligam ent or O sborne's ligament.

          NORMAL         Cubital Tunnel Syndrome -

                         Secondary to an Accessory Anconeus

Anconeus                                Retinaculum
                                     Ulnar Nerve
                  Posterior Band o f the UCL

                                                     Accessory Anconeus " AKA
                                                     "Anconeus Epitrochlearis "

L ateral E picondylitis (more common than medial) - seen in Tennis Players
 Repetitive Extension
 Extensor Tendon Injury (classically extensor carpi radialis brevis)
 Radial Collateral Ligament Complex - Tears due to varus stress

M edial E p ico n d ylitis (less common than lateral) - seen in golfers
 Repetitive Flexion
 Common flexor tendon and ulnar nerve may enlarge from chronic injury

                         27
Partial Medial Ulnar Collateral Ligam ent Tear:

For the exam all you really need to know is      Normal                             T-Sign
that throwers (people who valgus overload)                                   "UCL Partial Tear"
hurt their ulnar collateral ligament (which
attaches on the medial coronoid - sublime
tubercle). The ligament has three bundles,
and the anterior bundle is by far the most
important. If you get any images it is most
likely going to be of the partial UCL tear,
described as the "T sign," with contrast
material extending medial to the tubercle.

Little Leaguer Elbow

The children of insecure men who sucked at sports in high school are most
susceptible to this injury. The mechanism is repetitive micro-trauma from
endless hours of training (necessary to finally rectify the injustice which
beset their family when dad was benched senior year from the junior varsity
baseball squad).

We are talking about a repetitive                                            1 Posterior
chronic injury to the medial
epicondyle. When 1 say injury I mean                                         \ Sheer
stress fracture, avulsion, or delayed                                         (osteophyte
closure of the medial epicondvlar
apophysis. This is usually associated                                           formation)
with UCL injury.
                                                                                . J / Lateral
Children aren't the only ones who can          Valgus                          ^C om pression
fuck up their elbows pursuing the kind       Overload
of immortality that is only offered to
those worthy enough to step foot on          Media%l
the field at Yankee stadium. There is a      Tension
well described "valgus overload
syndrome" seen in throwers,
consisting of a triad of lateral
compression, medial tension, and
posterior sheer. This mechanism
results in LfCL injury (often anterior
band). Arthritis at the Posterior
Humerus / Ulna, and the development
of an OCD at the capitellum.

Epitrochlear Lymphadenopathy: This is a classic look for cat-scratch disease.

Dialysis Elbow: This is the result of olecranon bursitis from constant pressure on the area, related to
positioning of the arm during treatment.

                                             28
Biceps Tear

Tears can be partial or complete. When complete the tear typically occurs in shoulder with the
tendon avulsing off the labrum (or at the level of the bicipital groove).
Common mechanism is incorrect deadlift form (while doing cross fit like an ape on cocaine). If
you plan on going nuts slinging that shit around consider switching to a double over grip. If you
want to use over under grips - you need strict form (keep your arms locked out dummy). There
are tons of highlight reals on youtube of people tearing biceps while deadlifting - notice every
single one is using an over under grip, and not maintaining straight arm technique.

         Partial Biceps Tear - Gamesmanship
         -Partial tears often are associated with bicipitoradial bursitis

Patients present with a painful mass in the antecubital fossa (rolled up muscle) - with the classic
history of "trying to impress the girl in the pink spandex sports bra with my deadlift." This rolled
up muscle is sometimes referred to as the "Popeye Deformity" - in reference to my childhood
hero - a heavily muscled blue collar worker, who smokes, and solves his all of his problems with
violence. If the tom biceps doesn't retract it might be held down by an intact lacertus fibrosis.

Sneaky: Injury to the bicep is associated with median nerve symptoms

Tricep Rupture                                                           Normal
                                                                         Striations
The tricep tendon has the honorable distinction of being the LEAST
common tendon in the body to rupture. Even tendinopathy is fairly
uncommon relative to other nearby structures. When it does tear you
should be thinking about salter harris II fractures of the olecranon -
that is the classic scenario.

I think because this is so uncommon that mimics would be more likely
on the exam. So, I'd be aware of two things: (1) the normal striated
appearance of the insertion at the olecranon, and (2) the common entity
of olecranon bursitis - which you should think of first if you see a
bunch of fluid signal in the posterior elbow.

Elbow Dislocation

This is the second m ost coniinon jo in t dislocated in the adult. The associated fractures
are usually the radial head and the coronoid process.

Instability in the elbow (so called P o sterio r R o tary In s ta b ility ) is described in a
pattern starting in the posterior lateral com er with tearing o f the lateral UCL.

Tearing of the        Partial Dislocation                                      Dislocation
     LUCL          Coronoid Perched on
                   Trochlea                                              Coronoid Posterior
(lateral UCL).                                                           to Humerus with a
                   (LUCL + LCL + Capsule)                                UCL Tear

                   29
