                       S E C T IO N 2:
O s te o p o r o s is , O s te o p e n ia , & AVN

O steo p en ia: This ju st means increased lucency o f bones. A lthough this is m ost
commonly caused by osteoporosis, that is not always the case.

O s te o m a la c ia : This is a soft bone from excessive uncalcified osteoid. This is
typically related to vitamin D issues (either renal causes, liver causes, or other misc
causes). It generally looks ju st like diffuse osteopenia. For the purpose o f multiple choice
you should think about 4 things: Ill-defined trabeculae. Ill-defined corticomedullary
junction, bowing, and "Looser Zones."

Looser Zones; These things are wide lucent               nil!
bands that transverse bone at right angles to
the cortex. These things can happen in lots        §11'  $
of different locations - but the classic two
are the fem oral neck and the pubic rami.      Looser Zones
Typically there is sclerosis surrounding the   -- Raise your suspicion for this shit when
lucency. You should think two things:          you see (1) Symmetric Findings
osteomalacia and rickets. Less com m on is     (2) The "90 Degree" to the cortex line
01. The other piece o f trivia is to
understand they are a type of insufficiency
fracture.

O steoporosis: The idea is that you have low bone density. Bone density peaks around
30 and then decreases. It decreases faster in women during menopause. The imaging
findings are a thin sharp cortex, prominent trabecular bars, lucent metaphyseal bands, and
spotty lucencies.

Causes: Age is the big one. M edications (steroids, heparin, dilantin). Endocrine issues
(cushings, hyperthryoidism), Anorexia, and Osteogenesis Imperfecta.

Complications: Fractures - M ost com m only o f the spine (2"^ m ost common is the hip,
3''`i most com mon is the wrist).

                                               68
                        DEXA:

This is a bone mineral density test and an excellent source o f multiple choice trivia.

General Things to know about DEXA

   D T score = Density relative to young adult
   D T score defines osteopenia vs osteoporosis
   D T score > -1.0 = Normal, -1.0 to -2.5 = Osteopenia, <-2.5 Osteoporosis
   D Z score = Density relative to age-matched control "to ZaZame Age"
   D False negative / positive (see below)

False Positive /N egative on DEXA: DEXA works by measuring the density. Anything
that makes that higher or lower than normal can fool the machine.

     False Positive:

      D Absent Normal Structures; Status post laminectomy

     False Negative:

      D Including excessive Osteophytes, dermal calcifications, or metal
      D Including too much o f the femoral shaft when doing a hip - can elevate the

               number as the shaft normally has denser bone.

      D Compression Fx in the area measured

                        IRAK:

The Fracture Risk Assessment Tool is a clinical risk tool used to predict fractures by
using clinical risk factors (age, sex, race, BMI, family history, personal fracture history,
prior steroid use, where the patient lives, etc...) with or without femoral neck bone
density. The fracture risk is calculated as a ten year fracture probability.

Trivia:

· FRAX calculates fracture risk at a 10 year probability
· FRAX adds "value" by helping to identify the subset o f osteopenic patients whoareat a

  higher risk for fracture - and might benefit from pharmacologic intervention
· FRAX is NOT supposed to be used in patient who have already been placed on medsfor

  osteoporosis. The entire point o f the FRAX is to make big pharm a more m oney... I
  mean help identify those who would benefit most from pharmacologic intervention -
  those already on meds don't need identified.
· FRAX is applicable for men and women
· FRAX is recom m ended to calculate 10 year fracture risk in patients with a T-Score
  between -1 and -2.5.
· Some guidelines suggest pharmacologic intervention for patients with a FRAX
   calculated 10 year hip fracture risk o f > 3% or m ajor fracture risk o f > 20%

                                                       69
Reflex Sym pathetic Dystrophy (RSD):

Also called ''Complex Regional Pain Syndrome" -- which makes it sound hke some
Rheumatology Psycho-somatic bullshit (i.e. fibromyalgia).
Also called ''Sudeck Atrophy" - which makes it sound serious - like some incurable
neurodegenerative death sentence.
The classic clinical vignette is a history o f trauma or infection.
On plain film, it can cause severe osteopenia (like disuse osteopenia). Some people say it looks
like unilateral RA, with preserved joint spaces. Hand and shoulder are the most common sites
of involvement.
It's one o f the many causes o f a 3 phase hot bone scan. In fact, intra-articular uptake o f tracer on
bone scan is typically seen (on multiple choice) in patients with RSD (secondary to the increased
vascularity o f the synovial membrane), and this is somewhat characteristic.

                                                        70
Transient Osteoporosis:

There are two types o f presentations.:

Transient osteoporosis o f the hip: For the purpose o f multiple choice tests, by far you
should expect to see the fem ale in the 3'r^ trim ester o f pregnancy w ith involvem ent o f
the left hip. Having said that, it's actually more com m on in m en in w hom it's usually
bilateral. The jo int space should rem ain normal. It's self limiting (hence the word
transient) and resolves in a few months. Plain film shows osteopenia, M R l shows Edema,
Bone scan shows increased uptakefocally.

Regional migratory osteoporosis - This is an idiopathic disorder which has a very classic
history o f pain in a joint, w hich gets better and then shows up in another joint. It's
associated with osteoporosis - which is also self-limiting. It's more com m on in men.

Hip Edema - Strategy Session -- This vs That - Transient Osteoporosis vs AVN vs Fx

On radiograph, transient osteoporosis and AVN
look totally different. Transient Osteoporosis is
super lucent - so lucent that sometimes you can
barely see the femoral head. AVN on the other
hand, will have patchy areas of sclerosis.

                                                       Normal  Transient      AVN

                                                               Osteoporosis

On MRl, the story is different. These things can look similar. They both have edema on STIR, and
they are both are dark on T1. The difference is that AVN should be shown with a serpiginous dark
line (double line if you are lucky) - that represents infarct core. Joint effusions can be seen in both -
so this isn't helpful.

Now - if these assholes want to take it to the twilight zone, they can add "insufficiency fracture" to
the list o f distractors. This is really a dirty trick as both Transient Osteoporosis and AVN are
susceptible to this. The distinction is that this fracture line should be less serpiginous and instead

parallel the subchondral bone o f the femoral head.

T1

    Normal                  'L /                       AVN     Insufficiency
                         Transient                             Fracture
                         Osteoporosis

                                                   71
O steoporotic Com pression Fracture: Super Common. On M R you want to see
a "band like" fracture line - which is typically T1 dark (T2 is more variable). The non­
deformed portions o f the vertebral body should have normal signal. Look also for
retropulsion of posterior bone fragments.

Neoplastic Compression                           What is this "Abnormal Marrow Signal" ?
Fracture: Most vertebral mets
don't result in com pression fracture      Normally (in an adult) the marrow of the spine is
until nearly the entire vertebral          fatty - so it should be T 1 bright. The internal control
body is replaced with tumor. If you        is an adjacent normal disc (not a desiccated disk).
see abnormal marrow signal (not
band like) with involvement of the         If you see dark stuff - it might just be red marrow.
posterior margin you should think          BUT if it is darker than the adjacent (normal) disc,
about cancer.                              you have to assume that it's a bad thing.

    Next Step ? - Look at the rest o f the spine - mets are often multiple.

^ T H I S vs THAT - Osteoporotic F x V5 Neoplastic Fx

If I was going to show a Neoplastic vs Osteoporotic Fracture case, this is how I would do it.
1would have 2 sequences, a T1 and a STIR. The STIR w ould be positive (bright on both).
The Osteoporotic Fracture would have a T1 dark line. The N eoplastic Fracture would be
diffusely low T1 signal and blobby - and I would stick a few lesions in other vertebral bodies.

                                                                             k

                                                                                                     k

T1  STIR                               T1  STIR  T1                             STIR

NORMAL    O steoporotic Fx                       N eoplastic Fx

                                           72
                               OCDS/ OClS

Osteochondritis Dissecans (OCD):                                               OCD Trivia:

The new terminology is actually to call these "OCLs" (the "L" is for         Most common in
Lesion). This a spectrum o f aseptic separation of an osteochondral          males under 18
fragment which can lead to gradual fragmentation o f the articular surface
and secondary OA. M ost o f the time it is secondary to trauma, although it  Most common in
could also be secondary to AVN.                                              the lateral aspect
                                                                             of the medial
Where it happens: Classic locations include the femoral condyle (most        femoral condyle
common site in the knee), patella, talus, and capitellum.

Staging: There is a staging system, which you probably need to know exists.

   D Stage 1: Stable - Covered by intact cartilage, Continuous with host bone
   D Stage 2: Stable on Probing, Partial discontinuity with host bone
   D Stage 3: Unstable on Probing, Com plete discontinuity o f lesion.
   D Stage 4: Dislocated fragment

Treatm ent/ Who cares? If the fragment is unstable you can get secondary OA. You want to
look for high T2 signal undercutting the fragment from the bone to call it unstable

(edema can force a false positive). Thus, the absence o f high T2 signal at the bone fragment
interface is a good indicator o f osseous bridging and stability. Granulation tissue at the

interface (which will enhance with Gd), does not mean it's stable.

                             THIS vs THAT: C a p ite llu m Lesions

Osteochondritis                Fanner's Disease                    Pseudo-Lesion
    Dissecans
                                                          Posterior Capitellum
Capitellum of the dominant arm Also in the capitellum of
                                                          A coronal image through the
in throwers                    throwers                   posterior capitellum can mimic
                                                          a defect. This occurs because
Anterior convex margin of the                             the most posterior portion of
                                                          the capitellum has an abrupt
capitellum. Unstable lesions are Entire Capitellum        slope.
characterized by high signal

fluid that encircles the       is abnormal in signal *
osteochondral

fragment on T2W image          (low 11, high 12)

Can lead to intra-articular    Loose body formation is
loose bodies                   NOT seen (usually)

Slightly older patients              5 to 10 years old
                               "Peter Pan wanted to stay
(12-16 years)______

                                         73
Osteochondroses:

These are a group o f conditions (usually seen in childhood) that are characterized by
involvement o f the epiphysis, or apophysis with findings o f collapse, sclerosis, and
fragmentation - suggesting osteonecrosis.

Kohlers                    Tarsal Navicular      Boys 4-6. Treatment is not surgical.
Freiberg Infraction        Second Metatarsal
Sever's                    Head                  Adolescent Girls
Fanner's                   Calcaneal             - can lead to secondary OA
Perthes (LCP)              Apophysis
Kienbock                                         Some say this is a normal
                           Capitellum            "growing pain"
Scheuermann
                           Femoral Head          Kid 5-10 "Thrower";
                                                 does not have loose bodies.
                           Carpal Lunate
                                                 White kid; 4-8.
                           Thoracic Spine
                                                 Associated with negative ulnar
Osgood-Schlatter Disease (OSD) Tibial Tubercle   variance. Seen in adults 20-40.
Sinding-Larsen-Johansson (SLJ) Inferior Patella
                                                 Causes kyphosis. 3 adjacent levels
                                                 with wedging, plus a thoracic kyphosis
                                                 of > 40 degrees (normal 20-40)

                                                 Adolescents (10-15) who jump and
                                                 kick. Need Fragmentation + Soft
                                                 Tissue Swelling.

                                                 Adolescents (10-15) who jump.

                                                            Freiberg

                                                            / - Flat 2nd
                                                                       Metatarsal

    Kienbock:                                    Kohlers    head
    - Lunate
    - Associated                                 - Flat --

       with Negative                      Navicular         Severs
       Ulnar               Perthes                             Calcaneal
       Variance            - Femoral                           Apophysis

               SLJ:           Head
               - Inferior
                               Osgood-                      Scheuermann
                  Patella  N Schlatter:                     - Thoracic

Fanner's:                      - Tibia!                        Wedging
- Capitellum                      Tubercle                  - 3 Levels
- No loose                                                  - Kyphosis
                               - Soft Tissue
   bodies                         Swelling                     > 40 degrees
- Age 5-10

   (younger
   than OCD)

                           74
