   SECTION lO:

U ltr a so u n d

It's absolutely incredible that I even need to go over this, but dinosaur radiologists love this
stuff. Plus it is popular in Europe, so logically it belongs on an intermediate exam in the US.

Anisotropy: The most common and                  Normal
most problematic issues with                     Appearing
ultrasounding tendons is this thing called       Hyperechoic
"anisotropy." The tendon is norm ally            Tendon
hyperechoic, but if you look at it when
it's NOT perpendicular to the sound              Exact same
beam it can look hypoechoic (injured?).          tendon - now
                                                 appearing
I t 's the biggest pa in in the ass:             hypoechoic -
                                                 when
[feupraspinatus tendon - as it curves            scanned non
along the contours o f the humeral head          perpendicular
[Long Head o f the Biceps - In the
bicipital groove

Tears: The tendon is usually hyperechoic. Focal hypoechoic areas are tears. It can be
really tricky to tell if it's partial or complete (that's w hat MRI is for).

                                            124
Tenosynovitis: As discussed above, there are a variety o f causes. If they show it on
ultrasound, you are looking for increased fluid within the tendon sheath. You could also see
associated peritendinous subcutaneous hyperemia on Doppler.

           Tenosynovitis - Increased fluid in the tendon sheath
P lan tar Fasciitis: This is another
pathology that lends itself to a "what is it ? "
type o f ultrasound question. Hopefully, they at
least tell you this is the foot (they could label
the calcaneus). The finding will be thickening
of the plantar fascia (greater than 4 mm), with
loss o f the normal fibrillar pattern. If you see
calipers on the plantar fascia - this is going to
be the answer.
Trivia - M ost com m onlv involves the central band (there are 3 bands - people w ho don't
know anatomy think there are two).
C alcific Tendonitis: As described above, this is very common and related to
hydroxyapatite. The most common site is the supraspinatus tendon, near its insertion. It will
shadow just like a stone in the GB.

   Calcific Tendonitis - Shadowing calcification in the classic location (supraspinatus)
                                                              125
