                                   S E C T I O N 1 1:

                      Procedures

An important point to remember is that the target is not actually the joint. The target is the
capsule. In other words, you just need the needle to touch a bone within the capsule. The trick
is to do this without causing contamination or damaging an adjacent structure (like an artery).
General Tip - Avoid putting air in the joint, as this will cause susceptibility artifact.

Hip: The general steps are as follows: (1) Mark the
femoral artery. (2) Internally rotate the hip (slightly)
to localize the femoral head-neck junction (your
target). (3) Clean and numb the skin. (4) Advance a
20-22 gauge spinal needle into the joint - straight
down on the superior head neck junction. (5) Inject a
small amount o f contrast to confirm position. Contrast
should flow away from the tip. If the contrast just
stays there it's not in the capsule. (6) Put the rest o f the
contrast in.

Trivia: Capsule is widest at the head-neck junction.

Trivia: The cocktail injected is around 14 cc total
(4 cc Lidocaine, 10 cc Visipaque, and only about 0.1 cc Gd).

Shoulder: The general steps are as follows: (1)
Supinate the hand (externally rotate the shoulder) (2)
Clean and numb the skin. (3) Advance a 20-22 gauge
spinal needle into the joint - straight down on the
junction between the middle and inferior third of the
humeral head - 2 mm inside the cortex. (4) Once you
strike bone, pull back 1 mm and turn the bevel towards
the humeral head - this should drop into the joint (5)
Inject a small amount of contrast to confirm position.
Contrast should flow away from the tip. If the contrast
just stays there it's not in a space. (6) Put the rest o f
the contrast in.

Trivia: The cocktail injected is around 12cc total
(4cc Lidocaine, 8cc Visipaque, and only about O.I cc Gd).

                                                        126
Special Situations - Problem Solving

So there are three main reasons that you might get asked to put a needle in a joint
1 - Needs Arthrogram to Evaluate the Labrum
2 - Needs Steroid / Lidocaine Injection for Pain Management
3 - Possible Joint Infection - Needs Aspiration
Only one o f these is going to end up getting imaged (the arthrogram), the other two just need
the needle in the correct spot - and it doesn't m atter what you had to do to get it there.

Scenario 1 - Patient is allergic to (has a phobia of) Gd, but needs an arthrogram?
You could try a CT Arthrogram. So - not Gad, just Visipaque and Lidocaine.

Scenario 2 - Patient is allergic to (has a phobia of) CT Contrast (Visi or Omni), but needs a
steroid joint injection?
You can inject air into the jo in t (instead o f visi) to confirm placem ent - then put the steroid in.

Scenario 3 - Patient is allergic to (has a phobia of) CT Contrast (Visi or Omni), but needs an
arthrogram ?
This situation is different. You can't inject air because you will end up with a big bloom ing
mess on MR. CT isn 't an option either - because obviously you need the CT Contrast or it's
not an arthrogram. Your only choices would be to either (1) pre-medicate them, or (2) use the
force (trust your feelings...) and hope you can get in the joint without confirming positioning
with fluoro.

                                                         127
  PROMETHEUS

   Lion h art, m.t>.

128
