                                       S E C T I O N 1:

                         A natomy

There is a ton o f anatomy that can be asked on a multiple choice test. M y idea is to break it
down into three categories: (1) soft tissue - brain parenchyma {including normal
development), (2) bony anatomy - which is basically foramina, and (3) vascular anatomy.

Soft Tissue Brain Anatomy:

Central Sulcus - This anatomic landmark separates the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe,
and is useful to find if you haven't learned the lazy N euroradiolgist's go to descriptor
"fronto-parietal region." Old school grey bearded Radiologists (likely the ones who are
important enough to write test questions) love to ask how you find this important structure.
There are about 10 ways to do this, which brings me to the m ain reason this is a great
pim ping question. Even if you can name 9 ways to do it, they can still correct you by naming
the 10th way. 1 noticed during my time as a "trainee" that Attendings tend to be excellent at
knowing the answers to the questions they are asking.
Practically speaking, this is the strategy I use for finding the central sulcus:
Pretty high up on the brain, maybe the 3rd or 4th cut, I find the pars m arginalis. This is
called the "pars bracket sign" - because the bi-hemispheric symmetric pars marginalis form
an anteriorly open bracket. The bracket is im m ediately behind the central sulcus. This is
present about 95% o f the time - it's actually pretty reliable.

                                                                                                                                    Central Sulcus

                                                                                                                                     Pars Bracket Sign

                                                          130
Central Sulcus Trivia - Here are the other less practical w ays to do it.

 Superior frontal sulcus / Pre-central sulcus sign: The posterior end o f the superior frontal

   sulcus joins the pre-central sulcus

   Inverted omega (sigmoid hook) corresponds to the motor hand

  Bifid posterior central sulcus: Posterior CS has a bifid appearance about 85%

 Thin post-central gyrus sign - The precentral gyrus is thicker than the post-central gyrus

   (ratio 1.5 : 1).

 Intersection - The intraparietal sulcus intersects the post-central sulcus (works almost

   always)

 Midline sulcus sign - The most prom inent sulcus that reaches the m idhne is the central

   sulcus (works about 70%).

            Intraparietal sulcus             The Post CS is Bifid about
            -Intersects the post CS          85% of the time.

                                        131
Homunculous Trivia:

          The inverted omega
          (posteriorly directed knob)
          on the central sulcus /
          gyrus designates the motor
          cortex controlling hand
          function.

          ACA territory gets legs,

          MCA territory hits the rest.

Norm al Cerebral Cortex: As a point of trivia, the cortex is normally 6 layers thick, and the
hippocampus is normally 3 layers thick. I only mention this because the hippocampus can look
slightly brighter on FLAIR compared to other cortical areas, and this is the reason why (supposedly).

Dilated Perivascular Spaces (Virchow-Robins): These are fluid filled spaces that accompany
perforating vessels. They are a normal variant and very common. They can be enlarged and associated
with muldple pathologies; mucopolysaccharidoses (Hurlers and Hunters) ,"gelatinous pseudocysts" in
cryptococcal meningitis, and atrophy with advancing age. They don't contain CSF, but instead have
interstitial fluid. The common locations for these are: around the lenticulostriate arteries in the lower
third of the basal ganglia, in the centrum semiovale, and in the midbrain.

Cavum Variants:

Normal  -100% of preterm infants,  -Posterior continuation of    -Extension of the
        -15% of adults.            the cavum septum              quadrigeminal plate
        -Rarely, can cause         pellucidum (never exists      cistern to foramen of
        hydrocephalus              without a cavum septum        Monro.
        -Anterior to the foramen   pellucidum)                   -Seen above the 3^^
        of Monroe                  -Posterior to the foramen of  ventricle and below
        -Between frontal horns     Monroe                        the fomices.
                                   -Between bodies of lateral
                                   ventricles

                                   132
Ventricular Anatomy:                 Arachnoid Granulations: These are regions where
                                     the arachnoid projects into the venous system
 Just a quick refresher on this.     allowing for CSF to be reabsorbed. They are
                                     hypodense on CT (similar to CSF), and usually round
 You have two lateral ventricles     or oval. This round shape helps distinguish them
 that communicate with the third     from clot in a venous sinus (which is going to be
 ventricle via the interventricular  linear). On MR they are typically T2 bright (iso to
 foramen (of Monro), which in turn   CSF), but can be bright on FLAIR (although this
 communicates with the fourth        varies a lot and therefore probably won't be tested).
 ventricle via the cerebral          These things can scallop the inner table (probably
 aqueduct.                           from CSF pulsation)

                                                  Lateral Vents

                  ^ ....

Am bient Cistern                        Cerebral
                                        Aqueduct

                                     Foramen ^
                                          of "<

                                     Magendie

The fluid in the fourth ventricle escapes via the median aperture (foramen of Magendie), and the
lateral apertures (foramen of Luschka). A small amount of fluid will pass downward into the
spinal subarachnoid spaces, but most will rise through the tentorial notch and over the surface of
the brain where it is reabsorbed by the arachnoid villi and granulations into the venous sinus
system.
Blockage at any site will cause a noncommunicating hydrocephalus. Blockage of reabsorption at
the villi / granulation will also cause a noncoimnunicating hydrocephalus.

                                                       133
Basal Cisterns: The basal cisterns are good for (1) evaluating mass effect, and (2) anatomy questions.

People say the suprasellar cisterns look like a star, with the five comers lending themselves nicely
to muhiple choice questions. So let us do a quick review; the top of the star is the interhemispheric
fissure, the lateral points are the sylvian cisterns, and the posterior points are the ambient cisterns.

The quadrigeminal plate looks like a smile, or ... I guess it looks like a sideways moon, if you                                                '

don't like smiles.

No Timefo r Smiles. Trainingfo r Domination.  Interpeduncular       Quadrigeminal
Snarls Not Smiles.                                      Cistern     Plate Cistern

Smile later... once you`ve passed the test.

                    Anterior                  Ambient
                    Interhemispheric           Cistern
                    Fissure

                      4* Sylvian Cistern

                       Ambient
                        Cistern
                     ^ Quadrigeminal
                        Plate Cistern

                                              The Ambient Cistern is a bridge between the

                                              Interpeduncular C. ^  ^ Quadrigeminal C.

Midbrain Tectum vs Tegmentum:

Atrophy patterns o f the midbrain will become important when we start talking about some of
the more obscure neurodegenerative disorders. So it's good to review the vocab words.

                                                                                                                                      Red
                                                                                                                                      Nucleus
                                                                                                                                      Aqueduct

When I was in medical school my anatomy teacher told me the midbrain looks like a monkey face.
I said "Please don't confuse me. Last week you said the monkey face was a penis cut in cross section."
I always thought the midbrain looked more like a stoner dog that just got higher than a giraffe's vagina.

                                                      134
Bony Anatomy: Skull Base Foramina ( Botundum, Oval, Spinosum, Hypoglossal)

First let us review the where - then we will do the what. Remember, they don't have to show you the
hole in the axial plane. They can be sneaky and show it in the coronal or sagittal plane. In fact,
showing Foramen Rotundum (FR) in the coronal and sagittal planes is a very common sneaky trick.

Coronal  On the coronal view,
         FR looks like you are
         staring into a gun
         barrel.

         On the sagittal view,
         think about FR as
         being totally level or
         horizontal.

With regard to the relationship between Spinosum and Ovale, I like to think of this as the footprint a
woman's high heeled shoe might make in the snow, with the oval part being Ovale, and the pointy
heel as Spinosum.

         Foramen
         Ovale

         Foramen
         Spinosum

The Hypoglossal Canal is very posterior
and inferior.
This makes it unique as a skull base foramen.

        135
Bony Anatomy: Skull Base Foramina ( Jugular Foramen ]

The jugular foramen has two parts which are
separated by a bony "jugular spine."

 Pars Nervosa - The nervous guy in the
 front. This contains the Glossopharyngeal
 nerve (CN 9), along with it's tympanic
 brach - the "Jacobson's Nerve"

Pars Vascularis - This is the "vascular           Pars
part" which actually contains the jugular   Nervosa
bulb, along with the Vagus nerve (CN 10),
Auricular branch "Arnold's Nerve," and     Jugular Spine
the Spinal Accessory Nerve (CN 11)

Bony Anatomy: Orbital Fissures and the PPF

The relationship between the Superior Orbital Fissure (SOF), the Inferior Orbital Fissure (lOF), Foramen
Rotundum (FR), and the Pterygopalatine Fossa (PPF) is an important one, that can really lead to some
sneaky multiple choice questions (mainly what goes through what - see chart on page 18).
I've attempted to outline this relationship on both sagittal and coronal views.

                                           136
Anatomy: Cavernous Sinus

The question is most likely, what's in it (or asked as what is NOT in it).

. CN 3, CN 4, CN V I, CN V2, CN 6, and the carotid - run through it.

 CN 2 and CN V3 - do NOT run through it.
The only other anatomy trivia I can think of is that CN6 runs next to the carotid, the rest of the nerves are
along the wall. This is why you can get lateral rectus palsy earlier with cavernous sinus pathologies.

Anatomy: Internal Auditory Canal - "lAC                              Superior     Fundus (top) of
                                                                     Vestibular   the lAC
                                                             CN7
                                                                        /
                                         V

                                                                  *

                                                      7              ^

                                                    CN 8              Inferior

                                                                      Vestibular

The thing to remember is "7UP, and COKE Down"                     If it is shown, it is always shown in
- with the 7th cranial nerve superior to the 8th                  this orientation.
cranial nerve (the cochlear nerve component).
                                                                  The ideal sequence to find it is a
As you might guess, the superior vestibular branch                heavily T2 weighted sequence with
is superior to the inferior one.                                  super thin cuts through the IAC.

                          137
Anatomy-What's in It P

Considering multiple choice questions regarding the skull base anatomy.
"W hatgoes w here?" questions essentially write themselves.

H o le/C om p artm ent                     Contents

                                                                             ui

Foramen Ovale             CN V3, and Accessory Meningeal Artery

Foramen Rotundum          CN V2 ("R2V2"),

Superior Orbital Fissure  C N 3 ,C N 4, CN V 1,C N 6
Inferior Orbital Fissure
Foramen Spinosum          CN V2
Jugular Foramen
Hypoglossal Canal         Middle Meningeal Artery
Optic Canal               Pars Nervosa: CN 9,
Cavernous Sinus           Pars Vascularis: CN 10, CN 11
Internal Auditory Canal   CN 12
Meckel Cave               CN 2 , and Opthalmic Artery
Dorello's Canal           CN 3, CN 4, CN V I, CN V2, CN 6, and the carotid
                          CN 7, CN 8 (Cochlear, Inferior Vestibular and Superior
                          Vestibular components). "7 Up - Coke Down"
                          Trigeminal Ganglion

                          Abducens Nerve (CN 6), Inferior petrosal sinus

                          138
Vascular Anatomy-

Arterial vascular anatomy can be thought o f in four sections. (1) The branches o f the external
carotid (commonly tested as the order in which they arise from the common carotid).
(2) Segments o f the internal carotid, with pathology at each level and variants. (3) Posterior
circulation, (4) Venous anatomy

(11 Branches of the External Carotid

Some Administrative assistants Love Fucking Over Poor M edical Students

Superior Thyroid      Posterior                                                       Superficial
Ascending Pharyngeal  Auricular                                                       Temporal
Lingual                                                                               Maxillary
Facial
Occipital                                                                             Facial
Posterior Auricular
M axillary                                                                            Lingual
Superficial Temporal

                      Occipita                   Com m on^

                            Ascending
                            P h a ry n g e a l/

             T H I S VS THAT: External vs Internal Carotid via Ultrasound

                                                 Internal                      External

Branches              Nope                                           Yup

Orientation           Posterior                                      Anterior

Resistance            Low (continuous diastolic)                     High

Temporal Tap (poking the head) No Change in Waveform                 Waveform Reacts
                                                                  _
(21 Segments of the Internal Carotid

Internal Carotid   The bifurcation of the lAC and ECA usually occurs at C3-C4

                   Ccrvical ICA has no branches in the neck - if you see branches either
                    (a) they are anomalous or more likely
                    (b) you are a dumb ass and actually looking at the external carotid.
                    * Remember finding branches is a way you can tell ICA from ECA on
                    ultrasound.

                   Low resistance waveform with continuous forward flow during diastole

                   Flow reversal in the carotid bulb is common

Cl (Cervical)     Atherosclerosis: The origin is a very common location
                  Dissection: Can be spontaneous (women), and in Marfans or Ehlers-
                  Danlos, and result in a partial Homer's (ptosis and miosis), followed by
                  MCA territory stroke.
                  Can have a retropharyngeal course and get "drained" by ENT accidentally.
                  Pharyngeal infection may cause pseudoaneurysm at this level.

C2 (Petrous)      Not much goes on at this level.  Aneurysms here can be
C3 (Lacerum)                                       surprisingly big (thats what she said).

                  Not much here as far as vascular pathology. The anatomic location is
                  important to neurosurgeons for exposing Meckel's cave via a transfacial
                  approach.

C4 (Cavernous)    This segment is affected by      Aneurysms here are strongly
                  multiple pathologies including   associated with hypertension.
                  the development of cavernous -
                  carotid fistula.                 Aneurysm here could compress the
                                                   optic nerve and cause blindness.
C5 (Clinoid)      Origin at the "dural ring" is a
                  buzzword for this artery.        Common site for aneurysm
C6 (Ophthalmic                                     formation.
- Supraclinoid);

Cl                                                 Aneurysm here may compress CN
(Communicating)                                    III and present with a palsy.

                                      140
ICA Angiographic Runs                               ICA Technique          Vertebral Technique

These are done via the right common         petrous bones projected at the : petrous bones projected at the
femoral artery with all the fancy arterial
technique (double flushes, and wet          level of the mid to lower      bottom or below the orbits
connections).
                                            orbits
You don't need to know every branch, but
you should be able to recognize the main    injection rate is 6 to 7 mL/s  injection rate is 3 to 5 mL/s
vessels.                                    for 10 mL total contrast       for total of 8 mL total contrast
Lateral ICA Run:
                                            imaged at two to four fps      imaged at two to four fps

                                                              Ophthalmic                       Anterior
                                                                                               Choroidal
                                                                    \
                                            .- Dural Ring                                      - PCom

                                                                  C5

                                                                           Petrolingual
                                                                           Ligament

                                                                                Carotid Canal
                                                                                         C2

                            ^ Anterior Choroidal

Ophthalmic  Posterior Communicating

            lAC

Temiinal ACA Branches:
 CMB: Calossomarginal Branch (superficial / superior terminal branch of the ACA)
 PCB: Pericalossal Branch (the thicker vessel bellow the Callosomarginal branch)

AP ICA Run (Towne's view):

                                                         This is a pretty good look for an AP ICA run.

                                                         Notice that half the image is relatively blank.
                                                         This is because you have 2 ICAs (right and
                                                         left), only one of which is getting injected.
                                                         For the total neuro angiography novice (most
                                                         residents), this is a helpful thing to notice
                                                         when deciding AP vs Lateral.

                                                         Also notice the MCA is lateral, and the ACA
                                                         is medial.

                                                         A1-- Vessel from the ICA bifurcation to the
                                                         origin of the anterior communicating artery
                                                         (ACOM).
                                                         A2-- Start of ACOM to origin of the
                                                         pericallosal and callosomarginal artery.
                                                         A3--Distal branches supplying the cortex.

                                                    141
                         ACA (A2)  ACA (A2)
                                        ACA (A1)

                                                     T riv ia

  MCA                                                Acute CN3 Palsy (unilateral
                                                     pupil dilation) a classic
M l: Up to                                           neurology boards question -
                                                     grab a relax hammer STAT!
insula,
M 2: vessel                                          The answer is PCOM aneurysiii
over the surface                                     until proven otherwise (although
o f the insula                                       it can also be caused by an
                                                     aneurysm at the apex of the
                                                     basilar artery or its junction with
                                                     the superior cerebellar /
                                                     posterior cerebral arteries).

                                                     The reason is the relationship
                                                     between the CN3 and vessels
                                                     (arrows).

                                   Anterior
                                   Inferior
                                   Cerebellar
                                   A.

PICA origin is variable

PICA (70%)

                                                               Lateral
                                                               Vertebral
                                                               Run

                                             PICA
                                   Choroid Point

                                               PICA
                                      Caudal Point

                                   142
Vascular Variants:

Fetal Origin o f the PC A: Most common vascular variant
(probably) - seen in up to 30% of general population.

Definitions vary on what a fetal PCA is. Just think of this as
a situation where the PCA is fed primarily as an anterior
circulation artery (occipital lobe is fed by the ICA).

Therefore, the PCOM is large (some people define this
vessel as PCOM larger than PI).

Another piece of trivia is that anatomy with afetal PCA has
the PCOM superior / lateral to CN3 (instead o f superior /
medial - in normal anatomy).

Persistent Trigeminal Artery:
Persistent fetal connection between the cavernous ICA to the basilar.
A characteristic sign" on Sagittal MRl has been described.
It increases the risk of aneurysm (anytime you have branch points).

                                                                                        Axial - Connected Basilar and IC

                                                                               Fetal Connection

                                                                  M      ^ Basilar

                                                                1

                                                                Carotid

Sag - Connected Basilar and ICA       T                         au
-Looks like a "T "au

                                 143
(4) Venous:

You can ask questions about the venous anatomy in roughly three ways (1) w hat is it - on a
picture, (2) w hat is a deep vein vs what is a superficial vein, (3) trivia.
W hat is it?

  Superior                                      Internal Cerebral V.
  Sagittal Sinus                                 Basal Vein of
Inferior                                         Rosenthal
Sagittal Sinus                       Cavernous Sinus
Straight Sinus
                             Superior Petrosal
Transverse Sinus            Inferior Petrosal
    Great V. of Galen
          Sigmoid Sinus
                Jugular V,

  Cavernous Sinus                            Sigmoid Sinus
Superior Petrosal
                                                      Transverse Sinus
  Inferior Petrosal                    Superior Sagittal Sinus
                            144
  Occipital Sinus
Anastomotic Superficial Veins:                            Anastomotic Vein o f Trolard
                                                          - Connects the Superficial
                     Rolandic Vein (Central Sulcus)
   Superior Sagittal Sinus                                   Middle Cerebral Vein and
                                                             the Superior Sagittal Sinus
   Superior
   Anastomotic Vein                                       Anastomotic Vein o fLabbe
   (Trolard)                                              - Connects the Superficial

Inferior          Superficial Middle                         Middle Cerebral Vein and
Anastomotic Vein  Cerebral Vein                              the Transverse Sinus
(Labbe)           *drains to
                  Cavernous Sinus                                Trolard = Top
                                                                 Labbe = Lower

                                                          Inferior Petrosal Sinus

Middle            Cavernous Sinus ^                                           \
Cerebral Vein
                           \                                                     Internal Jugular Veins
Superior
Cerebral Vein                       Superior Petrosal Sinus

Inferior          Superior                                             Sigmoid Sinus
Sagittal Sinus    Sagittal Sinus                          Transverse Sinus

Vein of Galen           \ Confluence
                                         of Sinuses

                  Straight
                  Sinus

      THIS vs THAT; S uperficial vs Deep:                 Superficial                 Di'i'P

There is a superficial venous system and a deep           Superior Cerebral Veins Basal Vein of
venous system. The easiest way to test material                                           Rosenthal
like this is your "which o f the fo llo w in g is not? "
or ``which o f the fo llo w in g is ? " type question.    Superior Anastomotic        Vein of Galen
                                                          Vein of Trolard
The big ones to remember are in the chart.
                                                          Inferior Anastomotic        Inferior Petrosal
                                                          Vein of Labbe               Sinus

                                                          Superficial Middle
                                                          Cerebral Veins

                                                     145
       Venous Trivia:

Collateral Pathways: The dural sinuses have accessory drainage pathways (other than the jugular
veins) that allow for connection to extracranial veins. These are good because they can help
regulate temperature, and equalize pressure. These are bad because they allow for passage of
sinus infection / inflammation, which can result in venous sinus thrombosis.
Inverse Relationship: There is a relationship between the Vein o f Labbe, and the Anastomotic
Vein o f Trolard. Since these dudes share drainage o f the same territory, as one gets large the
other get small.
Sounds Latin or French: As a general rule, anything that sounds Latin or French has an increased
chance o f being on the test.

          Vein o f Labbe: Large draining vein, connecting the superficial middle vein and the
          transverse sinus
          Vein o f Trolard: Smaller (usually) vein, connecting the superficial middle vein and
          sagittal sinus
      Basal veins o f Rosenthal: Deep veins that passes lateral to the midbrain through the
          ambient cistern and drains into the vein o f Galen. Their course is similar to the PCA.
          Vein o f Galen: Big vein ("great") form ed by the union o f the two internal cerebral veins.

                                                                                         Superior
                                                                                         Anastomotic Vein
                                                                                             (Trolard)

                                                                                                 Inferior
                                                                                                 Anastomotic Vein
                                                                                                      (Labbe)

          Basal veins of

                Rosenthal

                                                                                   Vein of Galen

                                                        146
A Venous Gamesmanship

An embolus o f venous gas is common and often not even noticed. The classic location is the
cavernous sinus (which is venous), but if the volume is large enough, air can also be seen in
the orbital veins, superficial temporal veins, frontal venous sinus, and petrosal sinus.
Why does this happen?
Peripheral (or central IV) had some air in the tubing. T hat's right, you can blam e it on the
nurse (which is always satisfying). "N urse Induced Retrograde Venous A ir Em bolus "
Significance?
D on't mean shit. It pretty much always goes away in 48 hours with no issues.

                                                                                              Superficial
                                                                                               Temporal

          Cavernous Sinus
          -The most common
          spot to see this

                                                           147
       Sinus Trivial Anatomy Bonus - Tlie Concha Bullosa

This is a common variant where the middle concha
is pneumatized. It's pretty much o f no consequence
clinically unless it's fucking huge - then (rarely) it
can cause obstructive symptoms.
In my private practice, an ENT told me he wanted
these mentioned in all his CT sinus reports.
That way he can justify doing F E S S ...
He drives a nice car.

                     ^ Gamesmanship for Neuro Anatomy

       First Order Trivia:
                  "What is it? " Style questions are most likely; with possibilities including
                 CTA, MRA, or Angiograms. Considering when the people writing the
                 questions trained, angiograms are probably the most likely.
                 " What goes through there? " Neuro foramina
                 "What d o e sn 't? " Style questions - CN 2 and CN V3 don't go through the
                 cavernous sinus.

       Second Order Trivia:
             CN 3 Palsy - Think Posterior Communicating Artery Aneurysm
             CN 6 Palsy - Think increased ICP
            Increased ICP -- Brain Stem Herniates Inferiorly -- CN 6 Gets Stretched

                                                        148
