                                       S E C T IO N 7:

                    B rain T um ors

I want to introduce my idea for multiple choice brain tum or diagnosis. The strategy is as
follows; (1) decide if it's single or multiple, (2) look at the age o f the patient - adults and kids
have different differentials, (3) look at the location - different tumors occur in different spots,
(4) now use the characteristics to separate them. The strategy centers around narrowing the
differential based off age and location till you are only dealing with 3-4 common things, then
using the imaging characteristics to separate them. It's so much easier to do it that way.

Multiple M asses -- ^  Multifocal Primary from Seeding

                       ^ e ts (*50% at solitary)

                       Syndromes (example NF-2)

Single Mass                      Cortical

                                  Intraventricular
             Adult --  CP Angle

                 \ Infratentorial

Before we get rolling, the first thing to do is to ask yourself is this a tumor, or is it a mimic?
Mimics would be abscess, infarct, or a big MS plaque. This can be tricky. If you see an
incomplete ring - you should think giant MS plaque. If they show you diffusion, it is either
lymphoma or a stroke (or an abscess) - you'll need to use enhancement to straighten that out
(remember lymphoma enhances homogeneously).
Y es... GBM can restrict, but for multiple choice it is way more likely to be lymphoma.

                                                        191
Two more high yield topics before we start crushing the differentials:

 1 - Why Do Things EnhanceP

 Understanding the WHY is very helpful for problem solving. Let me first answer the question
  "Why DON'T things enhance?'" They DON'T enhance because of the blood brain barrier.
  So, when things DO enhance it's because either:

            (a) They are outside the blood brain barrier (they are extra-axial), or
            (b) They have melted the blood brain barrier.

  In other words, extra axial things (classic example is meningioma) will enhance. High grade tumors
 (and infections) enhance. Low grade tumors just aren't nasty enough to take the blood brain
 barrier down.

 Are there exceptions? HA! There always are. And Yes... they are ALWAYS testable.

 Gangliogliomas and Pilocytic Astrocytomas are the exceptions - they are low-grade tumors, but
 they enhance.

 2 - "lntra-Axiarvs"Extra-Axiar

  The Brant and Helms discussion on brain tumors will have you asking "intra-axial" vs "extra-
  axial" first. This is not always that simple, but it does lend itself very well to multiple choice
  test questions (therefore it's high yield).

  Basically you need to memorize the "signs o f extra-axial location "

            CSF Cleft
            Displaced Subarachnoid Vessels
            Cortical Gray matter between the mass and white matter
            Displaced and expanded Subarachnoid spaces
            Broad Dural Base / Tail
            Bony Reaction

One of the most             1
reliable signs of an    L Wm
extra-axial mass is
the " cleft" o f CSF.  Vessels are often shown
                       as dark flow voids.
As a general rule,
extra-axial masses
tend to widen the
CSF space often with
a rim of CSF (seen
best on T2) between
the mass and the
cortex.

                       Another reliable sign of an extra-axial mass is the
                       in terp osition o f su b a ra ch n o id v essels between the mass
                       and the brain.

                              192
Multiple Masses

In adults or kids, if you see multiple masses you are dealing with mets (or infection). Differentiating
between mets and infection is gonna be done with diffusion (infection will restrict). If they want you
to decide between those two they must show you the diffusion otherwise only one or the other will be
listed as a choice.

Mets -- High Yield Trivia:

· Most common CNS met in a kid = neuroblastoma (BONES, DURA, ORBIT - not brain)

· Most common location for mets = Supratentorial at the Grey-White Junction (this area has a lot of
  blood flow + an abrupt vessel caliber change... so you also see hematogenous infection / septic
  emboli go there first too).

· Most common morphology is "round" or "spherical"

· Remember that mets do NOT have to be multiple. In fact, 50% of mets are solitary. In an adult, a
   solitary mass is much more likely to be a met than a primary CNS neoplasm.

· MRCT is the mnemonic for bleeding mets
   (Melanoma, Renal, Carcinoid / Choriocarcinoma, Thyroid).

· Usually Mets have more surrounding edema than primary neoplasms of similar size.

· "Next Step Gamesmanship " - Because the most common intra-axial mass in an adult is a met, if
   they show you a solitary mass (or multiple masses) and want a next step it's gonna be go hunting
   for the primary (think lung, breast, colon... the common stuff).

Primary Brain Tumors Can Also Be Multiple:

  Tumors that Like to be Multifocal            Tumors that are M ultifocal from Seeding
                        Mets
                                                                  Medulloblastoma
think thisfirst when you see multiple tumors
                    Lymphoma                                         Ependymoma
                                                                          GBM
                Multicentric GBM
                                                                 Oligodendroglioma
               Gliomatosis Cerebri
                                              i

SYNDROM ES - Tumors in Svndromes are more likelv to be M ultifocal

NFl            NF 2 "MSME"                    Tuberous Sclerosis  VHL

Optic Gliomas  Multiple Schwannomas Subependymal Tubers Hemangioblastomas

Astrocytomas   Meningiomas                         IV Giant Cell
               Ependymomas                         Astrocytomas

                                              193
Conically Based (p -d o q :

Most intra-axial tumors are located in the                            P-DOG:
white matter. So when a tumor spreads to or
is primarily located in the gray matter, you        Pleomorphic Xanthoastrocytoma (PXA)

get a shorter DDx. High yield piece of trivia Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumor (DNET)

regarding the cortical tumor / cortical met is Oligodendroglioma,

that they often have very little edema and so       Ganghoglioma
a small cortical met can he occult without IV

contrast.                                                                       PXA

PXA (Pleomorphic Xanthroastrocytoma):                                           FEDS (10-20)
Superficial tumor that is ALWAYS supratentorial and                             Will Enhance
usually involves the temporal lobe. They are often in

the cyst with a nodule category (50%). There is usually           Q             Dural Tail***
no peritumeral T2 signal. The tumor frequently invades        Cyst with Nodule  Cyst with Nodule
the leptomeninges. Looks just like a Desmoplastic

Infantile Ganglioglioma - but is not in an infant.                              Temporal Lobe

D N ET (Dysembryoplastic Neuroepithelial Tumor):                                             DNET

Kid with drug resistant seizures. The mass will always be in                        FEDS (< 20)
the temporal lobe (on the test - real life 60% temporal).                           No enhancement
Focal cortical dysplasia is seen in 80% of the cases. It is                         High T2 Signal
hypodense on CT, and on MRI there will be little if any                             with Bright
surrounding edema.                                                                  FLAIR Rim
High T2 signal "bubbly lesion."                                                     "Bubbly"
                                                                                    Temporal Lobe
Bright Rim Sign -
                                                                                 Oligodendroglioma
Persistent rim of FLAIR signal                                                 ADULT - (40s-50s)
                                                                               Can Enhance
* Looks Similar to T2-FLAIR                                                    Calcification Common
                                                                               "Expands the Cortex"
Mismatch of Astrocytomas but                                                   Frontal Lobe
                                                                               lp/19q
  usually smaller **discussed later  "T2 Bright & Bubbly" FLAIR
Oligodendroglioma:                                                 Bright Rim       Ganglioglioma
                                                                               Any Age
Remember this is the guy that calcifies 90% of the time. It's                  Can Enhance
                                                                               NOT Bubbly
most common in the frontal lobe and the buzzword is                            Can look like Anything
                                                                               Temporal Lobe
"expands the cortex". This takes after its most specific

feature of cortical infiltration and marked thickening. It's

likely you could get asked about this lp/19q deletion which I

will discuss later when I go into detail about Gliomas

Ganglioglioma:                                                 Mixed Cystic
                                                                  & Solid
This guy can occur at any age, anywhere (usually temporal
lobe), and look like anything. However, for the purpose of
multiple choice testing the classic scenario would be a 13
year old with seizures, and a temporal lobe mass that is
cystic and solid with focal calcifications. There may be
overlying bony remodeling.

                                                    194
Intraventricular

Tumors can arise from the ventricular wall, septum pellucidum, or choroid plexus.

        Ventricular Wall &           Choroid Plexus              Misc
       Septum Pellucidum                              M ets
                            Choroid Plexus Papilloma  M eningiom a
Eoendvmoma fPEDS^           (PEDS in Trigone)         Colloid Cyst
                            (ADULT in 4th Vent)
Medulloblastoma fPEDS)      Choroid Plexus
SEGA (Subependymal          Carcinoma (PEDS)
Giant Cell Astrocytoma) =
PEDS                        X anthogranulom a
Subependymoma (ADULT)       ("Found" in ADULTS')
Central Neurocytoma
(YOUNG ADULT)

V e n tric u la r W all / S ep tu m P ellu cid um O rigin:

Ependymoma: Bimodal distribution on this one (large peak around 6 years of age, tiny peak
around 30 years of age). I would basically think of this as a PEDS tumor.
They come in twoflavors:
(a) 4th Ventricle - which is about 70% of the time.

     There is frequent extension into the foramen of
     Luschka and Magendie. They are the so-called
     "plastic tumor" or "toothpaste" tumor because
     they squeeze out of the base of the 4'h ventricle.
(b) Parenchymal Supratentorial - which is about 30%
     of the time. These are usually big (> 4cm at
     presentation).

                                                        195
Medulloblastoma: Let us just assume we are talking
about the "Classic Medulloblastoma" which is a type of
PNET. If you want to understand the genetic spectrum of
these things, read Osborn's Brain -- seriously don't subject
yourself to that.

This is a pediatric tumor - with most occurring before age
10 (technically there is a second peak at 20-40 but for the
purpose of multiple choice tests I'm going to ignore it).
These guys are cerebellar arising from vermis / ROOF of the
4th ventricle - project into 4* ventricle. They are much
more common than their chief differential the Ependymoma
(which originates from the FLOOR of the 4th ventricle).

The classic look is a dense mass on CT, heterogeneous on T 1
and T2, and enhances homogeneously.
They are hvpercellular and may restrict.
They calcify 20% of the time (less than Ependymoma).

As a point of absolute trivia, they are associated with Basal Cell Nevus
Syndrome and Turcots Syndrome.

This is a tumor that loves to met via CSF pathways -- they like to
"drop met." The buzzword is "zuckerguss" which apparently is
German for sugar icing, as seen on post contrast imaging of the brain
and spinal cord (leptomeningeal carcinomatosis).

              Gorlin Syndrome - If you see a Medulloblastoma next look for dural calcs. If you
                see thick dural calcs you might be dealing with this syndrome.
                They get basal cell skin cancer after radiation, and have odontogenic cysts.

                NEXT STEP Trivia: Preoperative imaging of the entire spinal axis should be done in any
                child with a posterior fossa neoplasm, especially if Medulloblastoma or Ependymoma is
                suspected. Evidence of tumor spread is a statistically significant predictor of outcome.

             Medulloblastoma                                      Ependymoma
                                                                      Less Common
                   More common
             Originate from Vermis /                                Originate from the
            ROOF of the 4th Ventricle                        FLOOR of the 4th ventricle.
Can rproJject into 4* ventricle,' do NOT usuallyJ
             extend into basal cisterns            Can extend into basal cisterns like tooth paste
       "Less plastic than Ependymoma"                via the foramina of Luschka & Magendie
            Enhance Homogeneously
     (more so than Ependymoma anyway)                          Enhance Heterogeneously

                Calcify Less (20%)                                 Calcify More (50%)

Linear "icing-like" enhancement of the brain
     surface is referred to as "Zuckerguss"

                                                   196
S u bepend ym al G ian t C ell A s tro c y to m a (SEGA): This is going to be shown
in the setting o f TS. They will more than likely show you renal AMLs or tell you the kid has
seizures / developmental delay.

Because it's syndromic, you see it in kids (average age 11).

It will arise from the lateral wall o f the ventricle (near the foramen o f Monro), often causing
hydrocephalus. It enhances homogeneously.

THIS vs THAT: SEGA vs Subependym al N odule (SEN) - The SEN will stay stable in size,
the SEGA will grow. The SEGA is found in the lateral ventricle near the foramen o f
Monroe, the SEN can occur anywhere along the ventricle. SENs are way more common.
Both SEN and SEGA can calcify.

          Pearl - Enhancing, partially calcified lesion at the foramen of Monro,
          bigger than 5 mm is a SEGA not a SEN.

-- (the next 2 IV tumors are in ADULTS) --

Subependym om a: Found in ADULTS. W ell-circumscribed IV mass most commonly
at the foram en o f M onro and 4*'' ventricle. They can cause hydrocephalus. They typically
don't enhance. They are T2 bright (like m ost tumors).

Central Neurocytoma:
This is the m ost common I V
mass in an A D U LT aged
20-40. The buzzw ord is
"swiss cheese," because o f
the numerous cystic spaces
on T2. They calcify a lot
(almost like
oligodendrogliomas).

                                                Central Neurocytoma - Two Examples - Cystic IV Mass

      Swiss Cheese +
     Calcification in the

           Ventricle

                                                         197
Choroid Plexus Origin:

Choroid Plexus Papilloma / Carcinoma: Can occur in peds (85% under the age o f 5) or
adults. They make up about 15% o f brain tumors in kids under one. Basically you are
dealing with an intraventricular mass, w hich is often m aking CSF, so it causes
hydrocephalus.

          Here is the trick: Brain tumors are usually supratentorial in adults and posterior fossa

A in kids. This tumor is an exception. Remember exceptions to rules are testable.

                                rw i · ·

          Trivia:

· In Adults it's in the 4`h Ventricle, in Kids it's in the lateral ventricle (usually trigone).
· Carcinoma type is ONLY SEEN IN KIDS - and are therefore basically ONLY SEEN IN

   LATERAL VENTRICLE / TRIGONE
· Carcinoma association with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (bad p53)
· Angiography may show enlarged choroidal arteries which shunt blood to the tumor,
· Carcinoma type o f this tum or looks very similar (unless it's invading the parenchym a) and

  is almost exclusively seen in kids.
· The tum or is typically solitary but in rare instances you can have CSF dissemination

Xanthogranulom a -                      Xanthogranuloma - Note the Restricted Diffusion
This is a benign choroid plexus
mass. You see it all the time (7%)
and don't even notice it.

          The trick is that they

A restrict on diffusion, so

          they are trying to trick you
          into working them up.
          They are benign... leave

A them alone.

                                        198
Misc:

Mets - The most common location of intraventricular metastasis is the trigone of lateral ventricles
(because of the vascular supply of the choroid). The most common primary is controversial - and
either lung or renal. If forced to pick I'd go Lung because it's more common overall. I think all
things equal renal goes more - but there are less renal cancers. It all depends on how the question is
worded.

Colloid Cyst - These are found almost exclusively               Colloid Cyst -
in the anterior part of the 3^^ ventricle behind the            - Anterior 3rd Ventricle
foramen of Monro.                                               - Hyperdense on CT

Their appearance is somewhat variable and depends on
what they are made o f If they have cholesterol they
will be T1 bright, T2 dark (they are filled with "oil").
If they don't, they can be T2 bright. The trick is a
round well circumscribed mass in the anterior 3'^
ventricle. If shown on CT, it will be pretty dense.

They can cause sudden death via acute onset
hydrocephalus. Remember to look for findings of
transependvmal edema (interstitial edema) -which is a
common method to show you that the case is
acute cerebral edema of the ventricles. This is best
demonstrated on FLAIR sequences.

                                     Transependymal edema
                                     (interstitial edema) halo
                                     of increased T2 / FLAIR
                                     signal around the lateral
                                     ventricles. - the look of
                                     acute hydrocephalus

                                                                V

Meningioma - Can occur in an intraventricular                   Homogeneously Enhancing Mass in
location, most commonly (80%) at the trigone of the             the Trigone of the Lateral Ventricle.
lateral ventricles (slightly more on the left).
                                                                Age (over 40) and Location (Trigone)
Mass in Trigone of the lateral ventricle over 40 - can be 3     are the things that make you think
things: (1) Mets, (2) Lymphoma, and (3) Meningioma.             meningioma.

Mass in Trigone of the lateral ventricle under 10 is
usually a choroid plexus papilloma. If you have a
meningioma in a kid - think NF.

                                                        199
C erebellar Pontine Angle (CPA)

Age is actually less o f an issue here because the DDx isn't that big. Most o f these are adult
tumors, but in the setting o f NF-2 you could have earlier onset.

Epidemiology: Vestibular Schwannoma is #1 - making up 75% o f the CPA masses, #2 is the
meningioma making up 10%, and the Epidermoid is #3 making up about 5%. The rest are
uncommon.

(75 % ) Schwannoma (Vestibular) - These guys                 Schwannoma Meningioma

account for 75% o f CPA masses. When they are bilateral    Enhance Less Enhance
you should immediately think NF-2 {onefo r each side).     Homogeneously Homogeneously
Enhances strongly but more heterogeneous than
meningomas. May widen the porus acousticus resulting
in a "trumpet shaped" lAC. "Ice Cream Cone lAC. "

(10 % ) M eningiom a - Second more common CPA              Invade lAC    Don't Usually
                                                                         Invade lAC
mass. One o f the few brain tumors that is more common     lAC can have
in women. They can calcify, and if you are lucky they      "trumpeted"   Calcify more
will have a dural tail (which is pretty close to           appearance    often
pathognomonic - with a few rare exceptions). Because
they are extradural they will enhance strongly. Radiation
o f the head is known to cause meningiomas.

Trivia:

·Most common location o f a meningioma is over the cerebral convexity.

·Meningiomas take up octreotide and Tc-MDP on Nuclear Medicine tests (sneaky).

(5 %) Epidermoid -

Can be congenital or acquired (after trauma - classically after LP
in the spine). Unlike dermoids they are usually off midline.
They will follow CSF density and intensity on CT and MRI
(the exception is this zebra called a "white epidermoid" which is
T1 bright - just forget I ever mentioned it).

          The key points are

A (1) Unlike an arachnoid cyst they are bright on FLAIR

         (sometimes warm - they d o n 't completely null), and

          (2)They will restrict diffusion.

                                                                                           Epiderm oid - Follows CSF
                                                                                           Signal - Restricts Diffusion

                                                        200
Derm oid Cyst - This is about 4x                    The Ruptured Dermoid
less common than an epidermoid. It's
more common in kids / young adults.        It is possible for a dermoid cyst to explode
Usually midline, and usually are           -rare in real life, common on multiple choice.
found in the 3''^' decade. They contain    Sometimes this is after a traum a, but usually
lipoid material and are usually            it's spontaneous. The m ost com m on clinical
hypodense on CT and very bright on         scenario is "headache and seizure" - w hich is
T1. They are associated with NF2.          pretty m uch every brain tumor, so that is not
                                           helpful. W hat is helpful is this:
          Trivia -
                                           · Buzzword: "Chemical M eningitis"
          ·These are usually midline
                                           · Aunt Minnie Appearance: Fat droplets
A ·Most common location for a                (typically shown as low density on CT, or
                                             High Signal on T l) floating in the ventricles
          dermoid cyst is the suprasellar    and/or subarachnoid space.
          cistern (posterior fossa is #2)

THIS vs THAT: D erm oid V5 Epiderm oid -- The easy w ay to think o f this is that the
Epidermoid behaves like CSF, and the Derm oid behaves like fat.

IAC Lipom a - It can occur, and is basically the only reason you get a T 1 when you are
working up CPA masses. It will fat sat out - because it's a lipoma. There is an association
with sensorineural hearing loss, as the vestibulocochlear nerve often courses through it.

A rachnoid C yst - Common benign lesion that is       How can you tell an epidermoid
located within the subarachnoid space and contains         from an arachnoid cyst?
CSF. They are increased in frequency in
mucopolysaccharidoses (as are perivascular spaces).   The epidermoid restricts,
They are d a rk on FL A IR (like CSF), and will N OT  the arachnoid cyst does NOT.
restrict diffusion.

                                           201
In fra te n to ria l - Most are PEDS (Hemangioblastoma is the exception).

Atypical Teratoma / Rhabdoid Tumor                                        THIS vs THAT:
("AT/RT") - Highly malignant tumors (WHO IV), and               AT/RT vs Medulloblastoma
rarely occur in patients older than 6 years. The average
age is actually 2 years, but they certainly occur in the   Both are WHO Grade 4 destroyers
first year of life.                                        (AT/RT is worse) that are often seen in the
                                                           posterior fossa of a kid.
They can occur in supra and infratentorial locations
(most common in the cerebellum). These are usually         Technically they are both subtypes of
large, pissed off looking tumors with necrosis and         Medulloblastoma - but that's the kind of
heterogeneous enhancement. They believe in nothing         knowledge that causes you to miss
Lebowski. They fiack you up. They take the money.          multiple choice questions. For the
                                                           purpose of multiple choice:
               Buzzword =
               "Increased Head Circumference "             · AT/RT is a 2 year old
                                                           · Medulloblastoma is a 6 year old

                                                           · AT/RT has calcifications
                                                           · Medulloblastoma does not

Medulloblastoma & Ependymoma : Both are discussed with the IVlesions

Juvenile Pilocytic Astrocytoma
(JPA): Just think cyst with a nodule in a kid.

They are WHO grade 1, but the nodule will still
enhance. This will be located in the posterior
fossa (or optic chiasm).

JPA  Hemangioblastoma

                                                 Pilocytic Astrocytoma: Cyst + Nodule in Kid

Gamesmanship -- if they don't tell you the age, you can look for enhancement of the cystic wall which

JPA can have (-50%) but Hemangioblastomas don't

Hemangioblastoma: First things first - immediately think           I Say Posterior Fossa Cyst
about this when you see a cyst vt'ith a nodule in an ADULT. Then   with a Nodule - PEDS,
think Von Hippel Lindau, especially if they are multiple. These
                                                                   you say JPA

things are slow growing, indolent vascular tumors, that can cause  1 say Posterior Fossa Cyst
hydrocephalus from mass effect. 70% of the time you will see flow  with a Nodule - ADULT,
voids along the periphery of the cyst. About 90% of the time they

are found in the cerebellum. There is an association with          you say Hemangioblastoma
polycythemia.

Ganglioglioma: Occurs at any age, anywhere, can look like anything - see cortical lesions.

Diffuse Pontine Glioma (DPG): Seen in kids age 3-10. Most common location is the pons,
which is usually a high grade fibrillary glioma. It's going to be T2 bright with subtle or no
enhancement. 4th ventricle will be flattened. Imaging features are so classic that no biopsy is needed.

                                                 202
Supratentorial - Adults Tumors

Astrocytoma: Most common primary brain tumor in adults. There is a trend towards "genetically

classifying" tumors - this actually changes the way they are treated and could be the source of trivia.
Last year I attempted to simply the topic (it can get pretty fucking complicated) and totally failed -
tons of emails asking for clarification. Honestly, it is probably low yield. I am going to try and clarify
(again) but if it doesn't make sense spend your time somewhere else. If this topic makes the difference
between passing and failing - in the immortal words of Kurt Osiander "you fucked up along time ago."

In the simplest terms, you have the neurons and you have the glial cells. The glial cells are the
"support staff' -- there are lots of them and lots of different kinds. Astrocytes and Oligocytes share a
common origin (both are support staff - "glial cells") and have a lot of similarities. In other words,
they are both "Gliomas" and are going to get lumped together in this discussion.

The new way to think about these things is a spectrum of severity based on genetic classification - and

the treatment and prognosis follows that.

IDH Mutation                                    KEY POINTS:
                                                · Pre-operative calcifications (especially

(earliest genomic event)                        ribbon) are association with lp/19q

                                                = Oligodendroglioma

                                                · T2/FLAIR Mismatch (bright T2/ only a rim
                                                  o f bright FLAIR) is NOT seen with lp/19q
                                                  = Astrocytoma

Calcification on     Astrocytoma           Astrocytoma            Astrocytoma        IDH Mutation:
preoperative CT is
associated with      Low Grade             H igher Grade          Grade 4 - G BM     This is typically
codeletion (lp/19q)                        -Grade 2 - Diffuse     G lioblastom a     absent (90%) in the
                                           -Grade 3 - Anaplastic  -O lder Patients   "primary GBM."
Ribbon pattern of                                                 -The Worst
calcification                              T 2 - FLA IR           Prognosis          In 10% of cases, a
Classic for                                M ism atch Sign        -P ro b a b ly     GBM will have the
Oligodendroglioma                                                 "Prim aiy G B M "  IDH mutation. These
                                           - bright on T2                            tend to be;
                                           - Dark on FLAIR
                                                                                     · Younger Patients
                                              (rim of bright on                      · Better prognosis
                                              FLAIR)                                 · Probably "Secondary

Bad Prognosis             Really Bad       Abandon All Hope                             G B M " from
                                                                                        progression o f a
                                           *time is short, go seek                      previous lower-grade
                                                                                        tum or
                                           vengeance on your enemies

You probably noticed me using this WHO classification (1-4). All brain mmors are bad, but 4 is the
worst - this is your GBM. On the following page. I 'll get into a few more details on each type but as a
general rule low grade tumors don't typically enhance (WHO 2) and higher grades do (mild for grade
3, and intense for grade 4 GBM). The exception to this rule is the pilocytic astrocytoma which often
has an enhancing nodule, and the Subependymal Giant Cell Astrocytomas which enhances because of
its location (Intraventricular).

GBM is the beast that cannot be stopped. It believes in nothing Lebowski. It grows rapidly, it can
necrose (creating the ring of enhancement, with a non-enhancing central necrotic core), it can cross
the midline, and it can restrict diffusion. Remember Turcot Syndrome {that G1polyp thing), and NF
1 are associated with GBMs.

                                           203
Supratentorial - Adults Tumors - Continued

Astrocytoma                 Astrocytoma                 Astrocytoma             Astrocytoma
    Grade 1               Grade 2 - Diffuse        Grade 3 - Anaplastic        Grade 4- GBM

Subependymal Giant        White Matter is        White Matter is         White Matter is
Cell Astrocytomas         Preferred              Preferred               Preferred - can cross
                                                                         the midline.
-Intraventricular mass    NO ENHANCEMENT
near the foramen of                              Mild ENHANCEMENT        RING ENHANCEMENT
Monro in a yo un g        T2 Bright - FU\IR Iso                          (can also be diffuse
patient with tuberous     (mismatch sign)        T2 Bright - FLAIR Iso   heterogenous
sclerosis.                                       (mismatch sign)         enhancement)
-Can cause obstructive
hydrocephalus

Pilocytic Astrocytoma                                                    T2 & FI.AIR Bright
                                                                         Central locations (like
- Cyst with nodule in                                                    the thalamus) are
the posterior fossa of a                                                 worse than normal.
kid

Remember these            T2 / FLAIR Mismatch: Seen with WHO 2           NF type 1,
tumors break the rule -   (diffuse) and 3 (anaplastic) astrocytoma, not  Turcot syndrom e,
and enhance despite       with WHO 1. T2 tumor has high signal with      Li Fraumeni syndrome
being low grade.          surrounding vasogenic edema. On FLAIR the
                          tumor signal become isointense - with only a
                          bright rim.

Gliomatosis Cerebri: A diffuse glioma with extensive infiltration. It involves at least 3 lobes
and is often bilateral. The finding is usually mild blurring of the gray-white differentiation on CT, with
extensive T2 hyperintensity and little mass effect on MR. It's low grade, so it doesn't typically
enhance. Buzzwords love mentioning the "preservation of the underlying architecture".

Mets: The most common supratentorial mass. Just like mets favor the lower lobes in the lungs, the
cerebrum is favored over the cerebellum (it is a blood flow thing). They are usually multiple, but can
be solitary -- some sources say 50% of the time, so don't be fooled a solitary lesion can totally be a
met. Some other trivia worth knowing -- melanoma can be T1 bright even if it doesn't bleed.
CT-MR is a good way to remember the ones that like to bleed (Choriocarcinoma / Carcinoid, Thyroid,
Melanoma, Renal).

Metastatic                                       GBM

                          Irregular                                      Spherical
                          Margin

             -Multifocal                                                 -SoHtary
             (25-50% solitary)                                           (25% multifocal)
             -Favors                                                     -Favors
             Grey-White Junction                                         Deep White Matter

                                           204
Supratentorial - Adults Tumors - Continued

Primary CNS Lymphoma: Seen in end stage AIDS patients, and those post-transplant. EB
virus plays a role. Most common type is Non-Hodgkin B cell.

Classic picture would be an intensely enhancing homogeneous solid mass in the periventricular
region, with restricted diffusion. However, it can literally look like and do anything.

Classic Multiple choice test question is that it is Thallium Positive on SPECT
(toxo is not).

I say restricting brain tumor, you say Lymphoma (although GBM can do this also)

THIS VS THAT; Periventricular / Ependymal Enhancement Patterns

                       L.

Ependymitis -          ^Si >  I f  4 Lymphoma
(Classic Example
= CMV)                 1      ^ B       "Rim Phom a "

                       u

                  205
Supratentorial - Peds Tumors

DNET & PXA (Pleomorphic Xanthroastrocytoma):
Discussed under the cortical tumors .

Desmoplastic Infantile Ganglioglioma I Astrocytom a "DIG":

These guys are large cystic tumors that Hke to involve the superficial
cerebral cortex and leptomeninges. Unlike the Atypical Teratoma /
Rhabdoid, these have an ok prognosis (WHO 1). They ALWAYS arise in
the supratentorial location, usually involve more than one lobe (frontal
and parietal most commonly), and usually present before the first birthday.

              -Buzzword is "rapidly increasing head circumference."  Big Cystic Tumor
                                                                         with Hydro
Skull Base:

C hordom a - This is a locally aggressive tumor that originates from the notochord.
WTF is the "notochord" ? It's an embryology thing that is related to spine development.

The thing you need to know is that the notochord is a midline structure. Therefore all
Chordomas are midline - either in the clivus, vertebral bodies (especially C2), or Sacrum. You
can NOT get them in the hips, ribs, legs, arms, or any other structure that is not totally midline
along the axis o f the axial skeleton.

· It is most common in the sacrum (#2 is the clivus)
· When it involves the spine, it's most common at C2 - but typically extends across a disc space

  to involve the adjacent vertebral body.
· It's T2 Bright
· It's ALWAYS Midline. -- it is never in a leg, arm, etc... ONLY MIDLINE structures.

C h on d ro sarco m a - This is the main differential o f the chordoma in the clivus. The thing
to know is that it is nearly always lateral to midline (chordoma is midline). These are also T2
bright, but will have the classic "arcs and rings" matrix o f a chondrosarcoma. Obviously you'll
need a CT to describe that matrix.

Dura:

M en in g io m a - As described above, it is common and enhances homogeneously. The most
common location is over the cerebral convexity and it has been known to cause hyperostosis.

H e m an g io p e ric yto m a - This is a soft tissue sarcoma that can mimic an aggressive
meningioma because they both enhance homogeneously. They also can mimic a dural tail, with a
narrow base o f dural attachment. They won't calcify or cause hyperostosis , but will invade the
skull. Often appear lobulated with vessels along its periphery.

M ets - The most common met to the dura is from breast cancer. 80% will be at the gray-white
junction. They will have more edema than a primary tumor o f similar size.

                                                        206
Sella I Parasella - Adults

P ituitary Adenom a - The most common tumor o f the sella. They are seen 97% of the
time in adults. If they are greater than 1 cm they are "macroadenomas." W hen functional,
most are prolactin secreting (especially in women). Symptoms are easy to pick up in women
(menstrual irregularity, galactorrhea). Men tend to present later because their symptoms are
more vague (decreased libido). On MR, 80% are T1 dark and T2 bright. They take up contrast
more slowly than normal brain parenchyma. Next step = Dynamic contrast enhanced MR.

Things to know (about Pituitary adenomas):

               M icroadenoma under 10 mm,
               M acroadenoma over 10 mm.
               Microadenomas typically form in the adenohypophysis (anterior 2/3).
               Prolactinoma is the most common fianctional type.
               Typically they enhance less than normal pituitary.

P ituitary Apoplexy - Hemorrhage or Infarction of the pituitary, usually into an enlarged
gland (either from pregnancy or a macroadenoma). Here are the multiple choice trivia
association: taking bromocriptine (or other prolactin drugs), "Siieehan Syndrome" in
postpartum woman, Cerebral Angiography. They will be T1 bright (remember adenoma is
usually T1 dark). Supposedly this is an emergent finding because the lack o f hormones can
cause hypotension.

R athke C le ft C y s t-U su a lly an incidental finding. Rarely symptomatic. The "cleft" is
between the anterior and posterior pituitary. They are variable on T1 and T2, but are usually
very bright on T2. They do NOT enhance.

Epidermoid - Discussed on page 200. Remember these guys restrict diffusion.

1 say "Midline Suprasellar Mass that Restricts Diffusion ", You say Epidermoid.

C raniopharyngiom a - They come in two flavors: (a) Papillary - 10% and (b)
Adamantinomatous - 90%. The Papillary type is the adult type (Papi for Pappi). They are solid
and do not have calcifications. They recur less frequently than the Adamantinomatous form
(because they are encapsulated). They strongly enhance. The relationship to the optic chiasm is
key for surgery. These things occur along the infundibulum. Pediatric type is discussed below
(under on the next page with the peds tumors).

                                                        207
 Sella I Parasella - Peds                                 Craniopharyngioma
                                                          - Shown on bone window
Craniopharyngiom a - As stated above, they                - Calcifications in the Sella
come in two flavors: (a) Papillary and
(b) Adamantinomatous. The kid type is the
Adamantinomatous form. These guys are calcified
(papillary is not). These guys recur more (Papillary
does less - because it has a capsule).
Buzzword is "machinery^ oil. "

· T1 Bright
· T2 Bright (80% of the time)
· CT / GRE = Calcifications
· Enhance Strongly (in the solid parts)

H ypothalam ic H am artom a - A classic Aunt
Minnie. This is a hamartoma o f the tuber cinereum (part
of the hypothalamus located between the mammillary
bodies and the optic chiasm). The location is the key.

      Mammillary Body                Midbrain             Hamartoma of the
                                     Pons                 Tuber Cinereum
\ Tuber Cinereum

                          /

                   ^    HamartomS*
                   ^  Would Be Here
                      Infundibulum
    
                          Pituitary
T1 Iso
T2 Iso
Do NOT enhance.

The Classic History is Geiastic Seizures
(although precocious puberty is actually more common).

                                            208
Pineal Region -                                                         Germinoma:
                                                             "Engulfed" Calcification Pattern
There are 3 main characters here, all o f which can present
with "vertical gaze palsy" (dorsal Parinaud syndrome).

Germ inom a: The most common of the 3, and seen
almost exclusively in boys (Germinomas in the suprasellar
region are usually in girls). Precocious puberty may occur
from secretion of hCG. Characteristic findings are a mass
containing fat and caicification with variable contrast
enhancement. It is heterogeneous on T1 and T2 (because
o f its mixed components).

P in eo b lasto m a: Does occur in childhood. Unlike the
pineocytoma, these guys are highly invasive. Some people
like to think o f these as PNETs in the pineal gland. They
are associated with retinoblastoma ("trilateral"). They
are heterogeneous and enhance vividly.

Pineocytom a: Rare in childhood. Well-circumscribed,
and non-invasive. Tend to be more solid, and the solid
components do typically enhance.

                                                             Pineoblastoma & Pineocytoma:
                                                             "Expanded" Calcification Pattern

P ineal C yst - An incidental findings that is
m eaningless... although frequently obsessed over. They can
have thin enhancement. Calcifications occur in 25%.

                                                                                                    Pineal Cyst:
                                                                                         Classically-- looks like a cyst

                                                        209
         Special Topics - A Few Extra Tips on Characterization:

                                      "R e s tric tio n "

If they show a supratentorial case with restriction it's Hkely to be one o f two things
(1) Abscess or (2) Lymphoma. Technically any hvpercellular tumor can restrict
(GBM & M edulloblastoma), but lymphoma is the one they classically show restricting.
If it's a CP angle case, then it's an Epiderm oid.
Lastly, a dirty move could be to show Herpes encephalitis restricting in the temporal horns.

                                 "Midline Crossing"

If they show it crossing the midline, it's most likely going to be a GBM or Lymphoma.
Alternative sneaky things they could show doing this would be radiation necrosis, a big
MS plaque in the corpus callosum, or M eningioma o f the falx simulating a midline cross.

                                    "C a lc ific a tio n "

If they show it in the brain it is probably an Oligodendrogliom a. The trick is that
Ohgodendrogliomas calcify 90% o f the time by CT (and 100% by histopathology),
w hereas astrocytomas only calcify 20% o f the time. But astrocytom a is very com m on and
oligodendroglioma is not. So in other words, in real life it's probably still an astrocytoma.

«T1 Bright"

M ost tumors are T1 dark (or intermediate).                    T1 Bright:
Exceptions might include a tumor that has bled           Fat: Dermoid, Lipoma
(Pituitary apoplexy or hemorrhagic mets).
Hemorrhagic mets are classically seen on M R and           Melanin: Melanoma
CT (Melanoma, Renal, Carcinoid /                    Blood: Bleeding Met or Tumor
Choriocarcinoma, Thyroid). Tumors with fat will
also be T1 bright (Lipoma, Dermoid). M elanin is       Cholesterol: Colloid Cyst
T1 bright (Melanoma). Lastly think about
cholesterol in a colloid cyst.                    Cholesterol Granuloma is T1
                                                  bright because of blood products
                                                  (paramagnetic intracellular
                                                  methemoglobin)

210
NF-1               Special Topics - Syndromes
NF-2
VHL                   Optic Nerve Gliomas
TS                    MSME: Multiple Schwannomas, Meningiomas, Ependymomas
Nevoid Basal Cell     Hemangioblastoma (brain and retina)
Syndrome (Gorlin)     Subependymal Giant Cell Astrocytoma, Cortical Tubers
Turcot
Cowdens- "COLD"       M edulloblastom a

                      GBM, Medulloblastoma, Intestinal Polyposis
                      Lhermitte-Duclos (Dysplastic Cerebellar Gangliocytoma)

                                           MSME

If you see tumors EVERYWHERE then you are
dealing with N F-2. Ironically there are no
neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis type 2 (obviously
that would make a great distractor).

Just remember M SM E
          Multiple Schwannomas,
          M eningiom as,
          Ependymomas

                 Lherm itte-D uclos (Dysplastic Cerebellar Gangliocytoma)

This thing is very uncommon, but when you see it you need to have the following thoughts:

- Hey! That is Lhermitte Dulcos....
- I guess she has Cowdens syndrome....
- I guess she has breast CA
Next Step? - Mammogram

The appearance is classic, with a "tiger stripe" mass, typically
contained in one cerebellar hemisphere (occasionally crosses
the vermis). It's not a "cancer", but actually a hamartoma -
which makes sense since Cowdens is a hamartoma syndrome.

                   211
                               Brain Tumors - MRS Pearls

As cell walls get broken down NAA (a maker for neuronal viability) will go down,
Creatine (marker for cellular metabolism) will go down, and Choline (a maker for cell
mem brane turnover) will go up. This is why the ratios o f N AA /Cho, Cho/Cr and N A A /C r
get throw around.

Other relevant marker changes:

· L actate may go up. You see this in the scenario o f a high grade tumor outgrowing its
  blood supply and changing over to anaerobic pathways.

· Lipids may go up. You see this in the scenario o f a necrotic tumor. Lipids are associated
  with necrosis.

· A lanine - is associated with meningiomas.

· NAA - This is a glioma maker. Non gliomas tend to have little or no NAA.

     Tumor Grade:              R ecurrent Tum or vs                   GBM vs iVlet:
                               Radiation Necrosis
Higher Grade Tumors will                                      Both can look gnarly on
have more cellular          Recurrent Tumor: Rising           conventional M R (big
destruction, inflammation,  choline infers that cell walls    enhancing tumor).
and more ischemia /         are being turned over
necrosis.                   (something is growing).           The GBM is classically
                                                              underestimated on brain MRI
Higher Grade Will Have;     ^ o Choline, Mo Problems          (if you are just looking at the
                                                              solid enhancing tumor). The
Less NAA                    Radiation Necrosis: When          surrounding T2 edema often
Less Creatine               you think necrosis you should     contains infiltrative micro­
More Lactate                think elevated lipids (found in   tumor. By using a multiple
More Choline                necrotic tissue) and elevated     voxel analysis (looking at the
More Lipids                 lactate. You could also reason    tumor, and also surrounding
                            that NAA, Creatinine, and         tissue) MRS supposedly adds
Relative to a lower grade   Choline (makers o f cell          value (allegedly).
tumor.                      integrity, metabolism, and
                            turnover) would also be low -     For the purpose o f multiple
                            if the tissue in that region was  choice, elevated Choline in
                            fried like chicken (or bananas    the T2 signal surrounding the
                            - if you enjoy denying your       tumor = infiltrating ghoma
                            true nature as the apex           (rather than a met)
                            predator).

Voxel Selection: It is im portant to choose an area o f interest with enhancing tum or (avoid
cystic parts o f the tumor, calcifications, blood, or frank necrosis).

                            212
