                                             S E C T IO N 3:

                      V O L U M E 8c E d e m a

Monro-Kellie Hypothesis:

The M onro-Kellie Hypothesis is the idea that the head is a closed shell, and that the three
major components: (1) brain, (2) blood - both arterial and venous, and (3) CSF, are in a state
of dynamic equilibrium. As the volume o f one goes up, the volume o f another must go
down.

                                                     \Bloodj

                                         ^ CSF \ . 7

Normal Situation  Leaking CSF            Intracranial Hypertension
                  -Venous Blood Expands  -Venous Sinuses Compress
                  to Compensate

Intfacranial Hypotension: i f you are leaking CSF, this will decrease the overall fixed volume,
and the volume o f venous blood will increase to m aintain the equilibrium. The result is
meningeal engorgement (enhancement), distention o f the dural venous sinuses, prominence
of the intracranial vessels, and engorgement o f the pituitary ("pituitary pseudo-mass"). The
development o f subdural hem atom a and hygromas is also a classic look (again, compensating
for lost volume).

Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension (Pseudotumor Cereiiril: Classic scenario o f a fat
middle-aged woman with a headache. Etiology is not well understood (making too much
CSF, or not absorbing it correctly). It has a lot o f associations (hypothyroid, Cushings,
vitamin A toxicity). The findings follow the equilibrium idea. With increased CSF the
ventricles become slit-like, the pituitary shrinks (partially empty sella), and the venous
sinuses appear compressed. You can also have the appearance o f vertical tortuosity o f the
optic nerves and flattening o f the posterior sclera.

Changes in intracranial pressure can create a dow nward displacem ent o f the
brainstem stretching the 6th cranial nerve - it is said that 1/3 o f patients with
pseudotumor cerebri have sixth nerve paresis as their only neurologic deficit.

                  168
Hydrocephalus-- "Too Much CSF"

Questions on this topic are most likely to be centered on the sub-type, location of obstruction, and
cause. So, let us now review the vocab.

                                                                      True Obstruction

              "Communicating"                             Blood, Pus, and Cancer ~~Anything that
                                                         plugs up the villi --the three most common
              -All Ventricles are Big                     causes being SAH, Meningitis (TB or
              (25% o f the time the fourth                Bacterial), and Carcinomatous Meningitis.
              ventricle is normal)
                                                          Without Obstruction
              -Level o f obstruction
              between basal cisterns and                  Brain Atrophy (ex-vacuo)
              arachnoid granulations
                                                          Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus
              - CSF can exit all the                      -see discussion below
              ventricles
                                                          Choroid Plexus Papilloma
Ventricles    "NGN-Communicating"                         -Tumor that secretes CSF.
are Big                                                   -Discussed more later in the chapter
(one or all)  -Upstream Ventricles are
              Big                                         Level of Obstruction

              -Level o f Obstruction is                   Foramen of Monro =
              within the ventricle System                  Colloid Cyst

              - CSF can NOT exit all the                  Aqueduct =
              ventricles                                 '  Aqueduct Stenosis
                                                           Tectal Glioma

                                                          4th Ventricle =
                                                           Posterior Fossa Tumor
                                                           Cerebellar Edema / Bleed

Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus: it s not well             Quiz: Is
understood - and idiopathic. The step 1 trivia is "wet,  transependymal
wacky, and wobbly" - describing the clinical triad of    flow seem more
urinary incontinence, confusion, and ataxia. The key     with acute
points clinically are the patient is elderly (60s), and  hydrocephalus
the ataxia comes first and is most pronounced.           or chronic
                                                         hydrocephalus?
The buzz-phrase is "ventricular size out of proportion
to atrophy." The frontal and temporal horns of the       Answer: Acute.
lateral ventricles are the most affected. "Upward
bowing of the corpus callosum" is another catch          Communicating Hydrocephalus +
phrase. On MRI you may see transependymal flow           Elderly + Ataxia = NPH.
and/or a flow void in the aqueduct and 3''^ ventricle.
This is treated with surgical shunting.

Syndrome of Hydrocephalus in the Young and Middle-aged Adult (SHYMA); Similar to NPH but in a
middle aged population - and more headaches less peeing of the pants (HA+Wacky+Wobbly).
Communicating Hydrocephalus + Middle Aged + Headache = SHYMA.

                                            169
Congenital Hydrocephalus

There are several causes of hydrocephalus that can be present at birth or be related to fetal
development. These conditions are typically diagnosed prior to birth via routine ultrasound
(discussed partially in the reproductive chapter in volume 1).

The big 4 are: (1) Aqueductal stenosis, (2) Neural tube defect - usually Chiari II, (3) Arachnoid cysts,
and (4) Dandy-Walker. I've discussed Chiari II and Dandy-Walker already.

So, let us turn our attention to Aqueductal Stenosis and Arachnoid Cysts.

Aqueductal Stenosis;

This is the most common cause of congenital obstructive hydrocephalus. Classically from a web or
diaphragm at the aqueduct (hence the name). Because of the location you get a "non-communicating"
pattern with a dilation of the lateral ventricles and 3rd ventricle with a normal sized 4th ventricle. You
can have a big noggin (macrocephaly) with thinning of the cortical mantle.

                                                                     Obstruction at the
                                                                     level of the
                                                                     aqueduct

Normal for Comparison

                       Normal
                       Sized 4th

Treatment is going to be either shunting or
poking a hole in the 3rd ventricle (third ventriculostomy).

Clinical Trivia: Question header may describe "sunset eyes" or an upward gaze paralysis.

Clinical Trivia: A male with "flexed thumbs" should make you think about the x-linked variant.
(Bickers Adams Edwards syndrome).

Arachnoid Cysts:

As the name implies, these are cysts located in the subarachnoid
space. They are CSF density, without any solid components, or
abnormal restricted diffusion. You wouldn't even notice them
except that they can exert mass effect on the adjacent brain, or in
the context of this discussion block a CSF pathway (obstructive
type).

                                                        170
                               CSF Shunt Malfunction

Normal: The most basic shunt consists of a proximal tube (usually placed in
the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle just anterior to the foramen of Monro), a
valve to control flow, and a distal tip (usually dumped in the peritoneum, but
can be placed in the pleural space or right atrium).

Shunt Evaluation Options: Your first line options for shunt evaluation are going to be (a) non-con CT or
(b) rapid single shot T2 sequence - mainly looking at catheter position and ventricle size. *May need to
verify shunt settings with a plain film post magnet. If the ventricles are big (shunt is not working) you
might follow that up with a radiograph series (neck, chest, abd) to make sure the catheter is intact.
Ultrasound or CT can be used to inspect the distal tip for a fluid collection. Alternatively (if you are a
weirdo) you can inject < 0.4ml pertechnetate into the shunt reservoir and take images to look for leakage
or blockage (remember to not aspirate when you inject).

DU -Proximal > Distal
G Obstruction -Most common cause = ingrowth of choroid

G (proximal) plexus and particulate debris / blood products
a             -Can also be from catheter migration


si                                                                                       Prior Comparison

n                                                                                      Loculated fluid
s                                                                                      around the tip of
              -Pseudocyst                                                              the catheter

    Obstmction (loculatedfluid along the distal tip)                                Slit Ventricles
                                                                                    Extra-Axial Fluid
    (distal)  -Catheter migration                                                   C o lle c tio n s
                                                                                    (subdural hygroma)
              (more common in children)

Over-         - "Slit Like Ventricles" - can be meaningless or
Shunting      suggest too much shunting.
              - The big fear is that not enough CSF will cause
              subdural hygroma or hematoma fonnation via
              Monroe Kelly mechanics (less CSF - more
              blood).

Infection     -Usually within 6 months of placement                   T l+ C : ventricular DWI: Debris /
              -Blood cultures are usually negative (fluid from
              the shunt should be cultured instead).
              -Mild enhancement after catheter placement can
              be normal - be on guard for fuckery.
              -The best sign is debris within the ventricles,
              ideally shown with DWI - this is the weapon of
              choice for diagnosis of ventriculitis.

                                                                      ependymal     Pus Restricts

                                                                      enhancem ent  D iffusion

              -Late stigmata may include ventricular

              loculations - which can cause restricted flow /

              obstruction and in some case isolate or ""trap" the

              4th ventricle -- as shown in diagrams.               ^

Hydrothorax   Either deliberately or via migration the catheter can end up in the pleural space. A little
Ascites       bit of pleural fluid doesn't mean shit. But, if the volume gets large enough and the
              patient becomes symptomatic - then revision might be needed.

              Usually the ascites from a VP shunt isn't symptomatic, although there are reports of
              inguinal hemias and hydroceles forming secondary to the increased abdominal pressure.

                                              171
Edema:

Cytotoxic: This type o f edema can be thought about as intracellular swelling secondary to
malfunction o f the Na/K pump. It tends to favor the gray matter, and looks like loss of the
gray-white differentiation. This is classically seen with stroke (or trauma), and is why
EARLY signs o f stroke involve loss o f the GM-W M interface.

Vasogenic: This type o f edema is extracellular, secondary to disruption o f the blood-brain
barrier. It looks like edema tracking through the white matter (which is less tightly
packed than the gray matter). This is classically seen with tumor and infection. You can
also see this type o f edem a as a LATE stage o f cerebral ischemia. A response to steroids is
characteristic o f vasogenic edema.

             Cytotoxic Edema             T H IS vs THAT:

Failed Na/K Pump                                             Vasogenic Edema
(BBB intact)
Classic = Ischemia (EARLY)                        Increased Capillary Permeability
White Matter + Gray Matter - "blurring"           (BBB NOT intact)
                                                  Classic = Tumor, Infection, Ischemia (LATE)
                                                  White Matter (Spares Gray Matter)

                                         172
Brain Herniation:

Subfalcine (Cingulate) Herniation: This is just a fancy way of saying midline shift (deviation of
ipsilateral ventricle and bowing of the falx). The trivia to know is that the ACA may be compressed,
and can result in infarct.

Descending Transtentorial (Uncal) Herniation: The uncus and hippocampus herniate through the
tentorial incisura. Effacement of the ipsilateral suprasellar cistern occurs first.

Things to know:

          Perforating basilar artery branches get compressed resulting in "Duret Hemorrhages
          classically located in the midline at the pontomesencephalic junction (in reality they can also
          affect cerebellar peduncles).

          CN 3 gets compressed between the PCA and Superior Cerebellar Artery causing ipsilateral
          pupil dilation and ptosis

          "Kernohan's Notch / Phenomenon" - The midbrain on the tentorium forming an indentation or
          `notch' (best seen on coronal). The physical exam finding is ipsilateral hemiparesis - which
          Neurologists call a "false localizing sign. " O f course, localization on physical exam is stupid
          in the age of MRI, but it gives Neurologists a reason to carry a reflex hammer and how can
          one fault them for that.

Ascending Transtentorial Herniation: Think about this in the setting of a posterior fossa mass. The
vermis will herniate upward through the tentorial incisura, often resulting in severe obstructive
hydrocephalus.

Things to know                          Transcalva^                      Descending
          The "Smile" of the            *through                        / Transtentorial
          quadrigeminal cistern will    Fracture
          be flattened or reversed
          "Spinning Top " is a                          Ascending
          buzzword, for the                             Transtentorial
          appearance of the midbrain
          from bilateral compression         DownwardK^^
          along its posterior aspect         Cerebellar
          Severe hydrocephalus (at           Tonsillar
          the level of the aqueduct).

Cerebellar Tonsil Herniation:
Can be from severe herniation after
downward transtentorial herniation.
Alternatively, if in isolation you are
thinking more along the lines of
Chiari (Chiari I = 1 tonsil - 5 mm).

                                        173
