                  B R A IN           S E C T IO N 9:

                                   T r a u m a 8c B l e e d i n g

Parenchymal Contusion: The rough part of the skull base can scrape the brain as it slides
around in a high speed MVA. Typical locations include the anterior temporal lobes and inferior frontal
lobes. The concept of coup (site of direct injury) and contre-coup (opposite side of brain along vector
of force). Contusion can look like blood with associated edema in the expected regions.

Diffuse Axonal Injury/Shear injury: There are multiple theories on why this happens

(different density of white and gray matter etc...) they don't matter for practical purposes or for

multiple choice.                                                  .........................................................
                                                                   D A/ Grading

Things Worth Knowing:                                             I Grade 1 = Grey-White Interface

 Initial Head CT is often normal                                 I Grade 2 = Corpus Callosum

 Favorite sites of DAI are the posterior corpus callosum, and    |
  GM-WM junction in the frontal and temporal lobes                I Grade 3 - Brainstem

 Multiple small T2 bright foci on MRI

Subarachnoid Hemorriiage: Trauma is the most common cause. FLAIR is the most
sensitive sequence. This is discussed in more detail later in the chapter

THIS vs THAT: Subdural vs Epidural

Epidural                           Subdural                       Subdural
                                                                  - Crescent
Classic History:         Classic History: Elderly alcoholic with  Shape
Trauma Patient - with a  a shriveled up atrophic brain spent the
skull fracture           evening with a bottle of                 -No Respect
                         "Rotgut - Hobo Tranquilizer" brand       For the
"Bi-convex" or           whiskey, then fell over stretching &     Sutures
Lenticular               tearing his cortical bridging veins.
Can cross the midline    A week later he seems to be acting        Epidural
                         progressively more confused.              - Lentiform
                                                                   Shape
                         "Bi-concave"
                                                                   -Skull
                         Does not cross the midline, may extend    Fracture
                         into interhemispheric fissure
                                                                   -Respect for
Can NOT cross a suture Can cross a suture                          the Sutures

Usually arterial         Usually venous

Can rapidly expand and More mass effect than expected for size
kill you

                                             221
How Old isthatBloodP

CT: This is an extremely high yield topic. M aybe the m ost high yield topic in all o f neuro,
with regard to multiple choice. The question can be asked with CT or MRI (MRI more
likely). If they do ask the question w ith CT it's m ost likely to be the subacute subdural that is
isointense to brain, with loss o f sulci along the margins. They could also show the "swirl
sign" - see below.

Hyperacute Acute (< 1 hour)   Blood on CT
Acute (I hour - 3 days)
Subacute (4 days - 3 weeks)  Hypodense
Chronic (> 3 weeks)          Hyperdense
                             Progressively less dense, eventually becoming
                             isodense to brain. Peripheral rim enhancement
                             may occur with contrast.
                             Hypodense

S w irl Sign - This is an ominous sign o f active
bleeding. The central low attenuation blood
represents hyper-acute non-clotted blood, with
surrounding acute clotted blood.

Blood Age V ia MR:

MRI is more difficult to remember. Some people use the m nem onic "IB, ID, BD, BB, DD" or
"It Be Iddy Biddy, BaBy, Doo-Doo" which I find very irritating. I prefer mnemonics that
employ known words (not baby noises). Another one with actual words is "George
W ashington Bridge" For T1 (Gray, W hite, Black), and Oreo Cookie for T2 (Black, W hite,
Black).

                                                        222
Blood Age V ia MR (continued): Instead of memorizing baby babbling noises, I use
this graph showing a clockwise movement. This thing may seem tricky and too much to bear,
at first, but it does actually w ork and once you draw it twice, y o u 'll have it memorized.
You'll also notice a few things: (1) you w on't feel like a dipshit for m aking baby noises,
(2) you'll have a renew ed sense o f self-esteem, and (3) you are likely to notice marked
improvement in your golf-swing.

                             Intracellular MetHb          Extracellular
                             "Early-Subacute"             "Late-Subacute"

       T1 Bright             3-                           O
           T1 Iso
                                1

                             (3 *                         Oxy-Hb
                                                          "Hyperacute"
                             DeOxy-Hb
                             "Acute"

                                   Hemosiderin - Chronic

                             O

         T1 Dark I                     T2 Iso             T2 Bright
                    T2 Dark

Another strategy (which is som ew hat unconventional) is to actually try and understand the
MRI changes (1 strongly discourage this). I f you insist on trying to understand this I have a 40
min lecture on TitanRadiology.com explaining it (this lecture is also free on my YouTube
Channel -- google "Prom etheus Lionhart Blood A ge").

Hyperacute  < 24 hours Oxyhemoglobin, Intracellular       T l-Iso , T2 Bright

Acute       1-3 days Deoxyhemoglobin, Intracellular       T1 - Iso, T2 Dark

Early Subacute > 3 days Methemoglobin, Intracellular      T1 Bright, T2 Dark

Late Subacute >7 days Methemoglobin, Extracellular        T1 Bright, 12 Bright

Chronic     > 14 days        Feiritin and Hemosiderin, Extracellular 11/ T2 Dark Peripherally,
                                                                                  Center may be T2 bright

                                                  223
Hemorrhage ( Non-Traumatic)

Subarachnoid Hem orrhage;

Yes, the most common cause is trauma. A com m on point        Sequela of SAH
o f trivia is that the most sensitive sequence on MRI for
acute SAH is FLA IR (because it w on't suppress out -      (1) Hydrocephalus - Early
making it hyperintense). Be aware that supplemental        (2) Vasospasm - 7-10 days
oxygen (usually 50-100%) can give you a fake out that      (3) Superficial Siderosis - Late
looks like SAH on FLAIR.

When the blood is real, in the absence o f trauma, there are a few other things to think about.

Aneurysm - Discussed later in the chapter.

Benign Non-Aneurysm Perimesencephalic hemorrhage:
This is a well described entity (although not well
understood). This is NOT associated with aneurysm
(usually - 95%), and may be associated with a venous
bleed. *You have to prove that - you need a negative CTA.
The location o f the blood - around the midbrain and pons
without extension into the lateral Sylvian cisterns or
interhemispheric fissures is classic. Just think anterior to
the brainstem. Re-bleeding and ischemia are rare- and
they do extremely well.

Superficial Siderosis: This     Superficial Siderosis - Hemosiderin Staining
is a side effect o f repeated
episodes o f SAH. I like to
think about this as "staining
the surface o f the brain with
hemosiderin. " The classic
look is curvilinear low
signal on gradient coating
the surface of the brain.
The classic history is
sensorineural hearing loss
and ataxia.

                                224
                             Pseudo-Subarachnoid Hem orrhage

  This is a described mimic of SAH tiiat is seen in the setting of diffuse cerebral edema (most
  commonly anoxic brain injury). Near drowning, or suicide attempt by hanging would be classic
  clinical vignettes.
  What you are seeing is actually two things at
  once. (1) You are seeing diffuse edema which
  lowers the attenuation of the brain (makes it
  darker). (2) You are seeing compression and
  collapse of the sub arachnoid spaces which
  gives them a hyper dense appearance. The
  combination of these factors gives the
  suggestions of hyper density in the cerebral
  sulci, fissures, and cisterns which can mimic
  SAH (hence the name).

  T H IS vs THAT: Pseudo SAH vs Real SAH: If they give you history that should help (anoxic brain
  injury vs headache / trauma). The absence of any intraventricular bleeding can suggest pseudo SAH.
  Lastly density of the Pseudo SAH will be less than 40. Acute blood tends to be around 60-70 HU.

Intraparenchymal Hemorrhage:

 Hypertensive Hemorrhage: Common locations are the basal ganglia, pons, and cerebellum. For the
  purpose of multiple choice tests, the basal ganglia is the most common location (specifically the
  putamen). You typically have intraventricular extension of blood.

 Amyloid Angiopathy: History of an old dialysis patient (or some other history to think Amyloid). The
  classic look is multiple lobes at dijferent ages with scattered microbleeds on gradient.

 Septic Emboli: These are seen in certain clinical scenarios (IV drug user, organ transplant, cyanotic
  heart disease, AIDS patients, people with lung AVMs). The classic look is numerous small foci of
  restricted diffusion. Septic emboli to the brain result in abscess and mycotic aneurysms (most
  commonly in the distal MCAs), The location favors the gray-white interface and the basal ganglia.
  There will be surrounding edema around the tiny abscesses. The classic scenario should be
  parenchymal bleed in a patient with infection.

 Other Random Causes: These would include AVMs, vasculitis, brain tumors (primary and mats) -
  these are discussed in greater detail in various sections of the text.

Intraventricular Hemorrhage:

 Not as exciting, think about trauma, tumor, hypertension, AVMs, and aneurysms - all the usual players.

Epidural / Subdural Hemorrhage:

 Obviously these are usually post-traumatic - and discussed later in the chapter.
 Dural AVFs and High Flow AVMs can bleed causing subdurals / subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Tension Pneumocephalus

Classic testable neurosurgical complication after draining a subdural. What
you are seeing is air in the subdural space "splitting the frontal lobes." The
mechanism is that air can get in - but can't get out - similar to a tension
pneumothorax. There are two key testable points:

1: What is looks like; the so called "Mt. Fuji" sign

2: When it matters: this only has clinical significant if the patient has
reduced consciousness

                                                        225
