                                    S E C T IO N 15:
                          S u pra h y o id N eck

The suprahyoid neck is usually taught by using a "spaces" method. This is actually the best way to
leam it. What space is it? What is in that space? What pathology can occur as the result of what
normal structures are there? Example: lymph nodes are there - thus you can get lymphoma or a met.

      Parotid Space:

The parotid space is basically the parotid gland,
and portions of the facial nerve. You can't see
the facial nerve, but you can see the
retromandibular vein (which runs just medial to
the facial nerve).

Another thing to know is that the parotid is the
only salivary gland to have lymph nodes, so
pathology involving the gland itself, and
anything lymphatic related, is fair game.

               Parotid Space Contains:
               - The Parotid Gland
               - Cranial Nerve 7 (Facial)
               - Retro-mandibular Vein

Parotid Space Pathology:                                     Major Salivary Glands:
                                                             · Parotid
Pleomorphic Adenom a (benign m ixed tumor)                   · Submandibular
This is the most common major (and minor) salivary gland     · Sublingual
tumor. It occurs most commonly in the parotid, but can also
occur in the submandibular or sublingual glands. 90% o f     Minor Salivary Glands
these tumors occur in the superficial lobe. They are         · Literally 100s of un­
commonly T2 bright, with a rim o f low signal. They have a
small malignant potential and are treated surgically.          named minor glands

Superficial V5 Deep: Involvement o f the superficial (lateral to the facial nerve) or deep
(medial to the facial nerve) lobe is critical to the surgical approach. A line is drawn
connecting the lateral surface o f the posterior belly o f the digastric muscle and the
lateral surface o f the mandibular ascending ramus to separate superficial from deep.

Apparently, if you resect these like a clown you can spill them, and they will have a
massive, ugly recurrence.

261
Parotid Space Pathology Continued:

Warthins: This is the second most common benign tumor. This one ONLY occurs in the parotid
gland. This one is usually cystic, in a male, bilateral (15%), and in a smoker. As a point of total
trivia, this tumor takes up pertechnetate (it's basically the only tumor in the parotid to do i t ,
ignoring the ultra rare parotid oncocytoma).

Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma - This is the most common malignant tumor of minor
salivary glands. The general rule is - the smaller the gland, the more common the malignant tumors;
the bigger the gland, the more common the benign tumors. There is a variable appearance based on
the histologic grade. There is an association with radiation.

Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma - This is another malignant salivary gland tumor, which favors
minor glands but can be seen in the parotid. The number one thing to know is perineural spread. This
tumor likes perineural spread.

When I say adenoid cystic, you say perineural spread.

         Pearl: I used to think that perineurial tumor spread would widen a neural foramen (foramen
         ovale for example). It still might... but it's been my experience that a nerve sheath tumor
         (schwannoma) is much more likely to do that. Let's just say for the purpose of multiple choice
         that neural foramina widening is a schwannoma - unless there is overwhelming evidence to the
         contrary.

Lymphoma - Because the parotid has lymph nodes (it's the only salivary gland that does), you can
get lymphoma in the parotid (primary or secondary). If you see it and it's bilateral, you should think
Sjogrens. Sjogrens patients have a big risk (like lOOOx) of parotid lymphoma. Like lymphoma is
elsewhere in the body, the appearance is variable. You might see bilateral homogeneous masses. For
the purposes of the exam, just knowing you can get it in the parotid (primary or secondary) and
the relationship with Sjogrens is probably all you need.

Sjogrens - Autoimmune lymphocyte-induced destruction of the gland. "Dry Eyes and Dry Mouth."
Typically seen in women in their 60s. Increased risk (hke lOOOx) risk of non-Hodgkins MALT type
lymphoma. There is a honeycombed appearance of the gland.

Benign Lymphoepitiielial Disease - You have bilateral mixed solid and cystic lesions with
diffuselv enlarged parotid glands. This is seen in HIV. The condition is painless (unlike parotitis -
which can enlarge the glands).

Acute Parotitis - Obstruction of flow of secretions is the most common cause. They will likely
show you a stone (or stones) in Stensen's duct, which will be dilated. The stones are calcium phosphate.
Post infectious parotitis is usually bacterial. Mumps would be the most common viral cause. As a point
of trivia, sialography is contraindicated in the acute setting.

                                                        262
Parapharyngeal Space

Also referred to as the                The parapharyngeal
"p r e -s ty lo id " parapharyngeal    space is primarily a
space - for the purpose of             ball of fat with a few
fucking with you.                      branches of the
                                       trigeminal nerves, and
The primary utility of the             the pterygoid veins.
space is when it is
displaced (discussed                 Parapharyngeal Fat (PPF) Displacement
below).

Mets and infections can
spread directly in a
vertical direction through
this space (squamous cell
cancer from tonsils,
tongue, and larynx).

 A cystic mass in this               Carotid        Parotid
 location could be an                Space =        Space =
 atypical 2nd Branchial              Anterior       Medial
 Cleft Cyst (but is more             Displacement   Displacement
 likely a necrotic lymph
 node).                               Masticator    Superficial
                                      Space =       Mucosal
The parapharyngeal space is           Posterior     Space =
bordered on four sides by             Medial        Lateral
different spaces. If you have         Displacement  Displacement
a mass dead in the middle, it
can be challenging to tell
where it's coming from.
Using the displacement o f fat,
you can help problem solve.
Much more important than
that, this lends itself very well
to multiple choice.

Parotid Mass Pushes
Medially (PMPM)

                                     263
Carotid Space:

The carotid space is also sometimes called the
"post styloid" or "retro-styloid" parapharyngeal
space -- for the purpose of flicking with you.

There are 3 Classic Carotid Space Tumors:
(1) Paraganglioma
(2) Schwannoma
(3) Neurofibroma

Although it is worth noting    Carotid Space
that this space is             Contains:
commonly involved in            Carotid artery
secondary spread of            - Jugular vein
aggressive multi-spatial       - Portions o f CN 9,
disease - such as
infectious path                   CN 10, CN 11
(necrotizing otitis external)  - Internal jugular
or malignant spread
(nasopharyngeal,                  chain lymph nodes
squamous cell etc..).
                                                 Lesions Displace the Parapharyngeal Fat ANTERIOR
Metastatic squamous cell
is what you should think
for nodal disease in this
region.

Paragangliom as: There are three different ones worth knowing about - based on location.
The imaging features are the same. They are hypervascular (intense tumor blush), with a
"Salt and Pepper" appearance on MRI from the flow voids. They can be multiple and
bilateral in familial conditions (10% bilateral, 10% malignant, etc.). '>*In-octreotide
accumulates in these tumors (receptors for somatostatin).

                                                                                    Carotid Body Tumor = Carotid
                                                                                    Bifurcation (Splaying ICA and
                                                                                    ECA)

                                                                                    Glomus Jugulare = Skull Base
                                                                                    {often with destruction o f jugular
                                                                                    fo ra m en )

                                                                                    Middle Ear Floor Destroyed =
                                                                                    Glomus Jugulare.

                                                                                    Glomus Vagale = Above Carotid
                                                                                    Bifurcation, but below the Jugular
                                                                                    Foramen

                                                                                    Glomus Tympanicum =
                                                                                    Confined to the middle ear.
                                                                                    Buzzword is "overlying the
                                                                                    cochlear promontory. "

                                                                                    Middle Ear Floor Intact =
                                                                                    Glomus Tympanicum

                                                        264
Schwannoma                                                           Surgical
                                                                     Planning Trivia:
Most commonly in this location we are talking about vagal nerve
(CN 10), but if the lesion is pretty high up near the skull base it  · Distance of Skull
could also be involving CN 9, 11, or even 12. The typical M R          Base (> 1cm =
appearance is an oval mass, heterogenous (cystic and solid parts)      Neck Dissection)
with heterogenous bright signal on T2.
                                                                     · Degree of
These things enhance a ton (at least the solid parts anyway). They     Vascularity
enhance so much you might even think they were vascular.               (might need pre­
Ironically, schwannomas are considered hypo vascular lesions and       embolization)
the only reason they enhance is because o f extravascular leakage
(and poor venous drainage).                                          · Relationship to the
                                                                       Carotid (Don't Fuck
                                                                       with Big Red)

N eu ro fib ro m a

These are less common than the schwannoma. About 10% o f the time they are related to
NF-1 (in which case you should expect them to be bilateral and multiple). In contrast to
schwannomas they tend to be more homogenous, and demonstrate the classic target sign on
T2 with decreased central signal.

       Neurofibroma                 Schwannoma                     Paraganglioma

Mildly Heterogenous        Although they enhance intensely  Hypervascular
Enhancement                they are not vascular on Angio   (tumor blush on angio)

T2: Target Sign            T2: Moderate to High Signal -    T2: Light Bulb Bright with
(bright rim, dark middle)  Heterogenous                     Salt and Pepper (flow voids)

NF-1 Association           NF-2 Associadon                  '·'In-Octreotide avid

                           I* ~ m^ wbsk

                           uSSfir
                           Neck Infection Syndromes

Lem ierre's Syndrome - This is a thrombophlebitis of the jugular veins with septic emboli in
the lung. It's found in the setting of oropharyngeal infection (pharyngitis, tonsillitis, peritonsillar
abscess) or recent ENT surgery. Buzzword bacteria = "Fusobacterium Necrophorum"

Grisei's Syndrome - Torticollis with atlanto-axial joint inflammation seen in H&N surgeiy or
retropharyngeal abscess

                           265
As the name implies this space contains the
muscles of mastication (masticator,
temporalis, medial and lateral pterygoids).

Additionally, you have the angle and ramus
of the mandible, plus the inferior alveolar
nerve (branch o f V3).

A trick to be aware o f is that the space
extends superiorly along the side o f the skull
via the temporalis muscle. So, aggressive
neoplasm or infection may ride right up there.

                                                 Lesions Displace the Parapharyngeal Fat
                                                 POSTERIOR and MEDIAL

Odontogenic Infection

In an adult, this is the most common cause of a masticator space mass. If you see a mass here, the next
move should be to look at the mandible on bone windows. Just in general, you should be on the look
out for spread via the pterygopalatine fossa to the orbital apex and cavernous sinus. The relationship
with the mylohyoid makes for good trivia - as discussed above.

Sarcomas -

In kids, you can run into nasty angry masses like Rhabdomyosarcomas. You can also get sarcomas
from the bone of the mandible (chondrosarcoma favors the TMJ).

Cavernous Hem angiom as -                                                     Key Point:

These can also occur, and are given away by the presence of          Congenital Stuff and
phleboliths. Venous or lymphatic malformations may involve multiple  Aggressive Infection/
compartments / spaces.                                               Cancer tends to be Trans-
                                                                     Spatial.

P erin eu ral S p read - You can have perineural spread from a head and neck primary along V3.

When I say "perineural spread"you should think two things:
(1) Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma of the minor salivary gland
(2) Melanoma

N e rve S h eath Tum ors - Since you have a nerve, you can have a schwannoma or
neurofibroma of V3. Remember the schwannoma is more likely to cause the foramina expansion vs
perineural tumor spread.

                       266
O Retrophanmoeal Space / Danger Space

The retropharyngeal space has some complex anatomy. Simplified, this is a midline space, deep
to the oral & nasal pharynx. The retropharyngeal space has an anterior "true" space which
extends caudal to around C6-C7, and a more posterior "danger space" - which is dangerous
because it listens to rap music and plays first person shooter video games - plus it extends into
the mediastinum - so you could potentially dump pus, or cancer, right into the mediastinum.

Infectious behind this deep cervical fascia (the Prevertebral Space) are different than the ones
discussed below in that they are not spread from the neck but instead the spine/disc (osteomyelitis).

In fectio n - Involvement of the retropharyngeal            N ecro tic Nodes (nodes of
space most often occurs from spread from the tonsillar
tissue. You are going to have centrally low density         Rouviere) - These things are located
tissue and stranding in the space. You should evaluate      in the lateral retropharyngeal region.
for spread of infection into the mediastinum.               In kids you can see suppurative
                                                            infection in these, but around age 4
                                                            they start to regress - so adults are
                                                            actually much less likely to get
                                                            infection in this region. Now, you
                                                            can still get mets (squamous cell,
                                                            papillary thyroid, etc..). Lymphoma
                                                            can involve these nodes as well - but
                                                            w on't be necrotic until treated.

Cartoon A xial                                              Cartoon A xial
Showing Infection                                           Show ing the nodes
Spreading from a                                            o f Rouviere
Tonsillar A bscess to
the Danger Zone        Peritonsillar A bscess

Don't Forget:

D elays are often
critical to
differentiate
phlegm on and
drainable abscess

                       Retropharyngeal A bscess (m idline)  Suppurative Node o f Rouviere (lateral)

                                                  267
