                                     S E C T IO N 13:

         SKULL BASE a S in u ses

P ag ets - This is discussed in great depth in the M SK chapter. Having said that, I want to
remind you o f the Paget skull changes. You can have osteolysis as a well-defined large
radiolucent region favoring the frontal and occipital bones. Both the inner and outer table are
involved. The buzzword is osteolysis circumscripta.

    P aget's Skull related complications:

      H Deafness is the m ost com mon com plication

               Cranial Nerve Paresis
               Basilar Invagination -> Hydrocephalus -> Brainstem Compression
               Secondary (high grade) osteosarcoma.

Pagets - Osteolysis Circumscripta (lytic phase)       Thicicened Expanded Skull (Sclerotic Phase)

C hordom a (midline) & C h on drosarco m a (o ffmidline) discussed in MSK chapter.

Fibrous Dysplasia - The ground-glass lesion. If you are getting ready to call it Pagets,
stop and look at the age. Pagets is typically an older person (8% at 80), whereas fibrous
dysplasia is usually in someone less than 30.

· Classically, fibrous dysplasia o f the skull spares the otic capsule
· McCune Albright Syndrome - Multifocal fibrous dysplasia, cafe-au-lait spots, and

  precocious puberty.
· The outer table is favored (Pagets tends to favor in the inner table)

                                                 252
Sinus Disease Strategy intro: You will see CT and MRI used in the evaluation of sinus

disease. It is useful to have some basic ideas as to why one modality might be prefeired over the
other (for gamesmanship and distractor elimination). CT is typically used for orbital and sinus
infections. In particular it is useful to see if the spread of infection involves the anterior 2/3 of the
orbit. If you wanted to know if the patient has cavernous sinus involvement, or involvement of the
posterior I/3 (orbital apex) MRI will be superior.

CT also has the ability to differentiate common benign disease        - Hyper Dense Sinus
(inspissated secretion and allergic fungal sinusitis) from the more
rare sinus tumors. The trick being that a hyperdense opacified sinus  · Blood
is nearly always benign (tumor will not be dense). In addition to     · Dense (inspissated)
that CT is useful for characterization of anatomical variation
(justification of endoscopic nasal surgery for recurrent sinusitis).    Secretions
                                                                      · Fungus

MRI is more valuable for tumor progression /extension (perineural spread, marrow' involvement, etc).

Fungal Sinusitis

This comes in two flavors; the good one (allergic) and the bad one (invasive). The chart below w'ill
contrast the testable differences:

Allergic Fungal Sinusitis                                   Acute Invasive Fugal Sinusitis

Opacification o f multiple sinuses, usually bilateral  Opacification of multiple sinuses. Stranding /
favoring the ethmoid and maxillary sinuses.            Extension into the fat around the sinuses in the key
                                                       finding.

Normal Immune System (Asthma is common)                Immunocompromised
                                                       - Neutropenic = Aspergillus
                                                       - Diabetic in DKA = Zygomycetes / Mucor

CT: Hyperdense centrally or with layers. Can           CT: Opacified Sinus with is NOT hyperdense. Fat
erode and remodel sinus walls if chronic.              stranding in the orbit, masticator fat, pre-antral fat,
                                                       or PPF suggests invasion. This does NOT require
                                                       bone destruction.

MRI: T1-T2 Dark - because of the high protein          MRI: Also can be T1/T2 Dark. However, the
content / heavy metals. Can mimic an aerated sinus.    mucosa may not enhance (suggesting it is necrotic).
Inflamed (T2 bright) mucosa which will enhance.        The extension of disease out of the sinus will be
The glob of fungus snot will not enhance (thats how    bright on STIR and enhance.
you know it is not a tumor).

Chronic Inflammatory
Sinonasal Disease

This is typically thought of as an inflammation of
the paranasal sinuses that lasts at least 12 weeks.
The causes are complex and people write long
boring papers about the various cytokines and T-
Cell mediation pathways are involved but from
the Radiologist's point of view the issue is
primarily anatomical patency of sinus Ostia (box
with arrow).

                                                       253
Chronic Inflammatory Sinonasal Disease Continued...

There are several described patterns of recurring sinonasal disease.

   Infundibular          Ostlomeatal Unit Pattern                   Sinonasal Polyposis
      Pattern.                                                                Pattern.
                       Second most common pattern. I'm
The most common        not going to get into depth on the     The pattern is characterized by a
pattern.               various subtypes -                     combination of soft tissue nasal
                                                              polyps (found throughout the nasal
In this pattern,       just think about                       cavity) and variable degrees of sinus
disease is limited to  this as more                           opacification. About half the time
the maxillary sinus    centered at the                        fluid levels will also be present.
and occurs from the    middle
obstruction at the     meatus (star)                          A key feature is the bony remodeling
ipsilateral ostium /   with disease                           and erosion. In particular the
infundibulum (star).   involving the                          "widening of the infundibula" is the
                       ipsilateral                            classic description. This erosion and
                       maxillary,                             remodeling is important to distinguish
                       frontal and                            between the "expansion" of the sinus
                       ethmoid                                - which is more classic for a
                       sinuses.                               mucocele.

                       The contributors to this pattern       Testable associations include CF and
                       involve all the usual suspects         Aspirin Sensitivity.
                       (hypertrophied turbinates, anatomic
                       variants - concha bullosa, middle
                       turbinates which curl the wrong way
                       "paradoxical", and septal deviation).

                                      M u c o c e le

This is how I think about these things. You have an obstructed sinus.
Maybe you had trauma which fucked the drainage pathway or you've got
CF and the secretions just clog things up. Mucus continues to accumulate
in the sinus, but it can't clear (because it's obstructed). Over time the sinus
become totally filled and then starts to expand circumferentially. Hence the
buzzword "expanded airless sinus." The frontal sinus is the most common
location. It won't enhance centrally (it is not a tumor), but the periphery
may enhance from the adjacent inflamed mucosa.

                                                      254
Antrochoanal Polyp
Seen in young adults (30s-40s), classically presenting with nasal congestion / obstruction symptoms. Arises
within the maxillary sinuses and passes through and enlarges the sinus ostium (or accessory ostium).

         Buzzword is "widening of the maxillary ostium."

Classically, there is no associated bony destmction but instead smooth enlargement of the sinus. The polyp
will extend into the nasopharynx. This thing is basically a monster inflammatory polyp with a thin stalk
arising from the maxillary sinus.

Juvenile Nasal Angiofibrom a (JNA)

Often you can get this one right just from the history - Male teenager with nose bleeds (obstruction is
actually a more common symptom in real life, but not so much on multiple choice).

        ·Location = Centered on the sphenopalatine foramen
        ·Bone Remodeling (not bone destruction)
        ·Extremely vascular (super enhancing) with intratumoral Flow Voids on MR
        ·Pre-surgical embolization is common (via internal maxillary & ascending pharyngeal artery)

Inverted Papilloma:
This uncommon tumor has distinctive imaging features (which therefore make it testable). The classic
location is the lateral wall of the nasal cavity - most frequently related to the middle turbinate.
Impaired maxillary drainage is expected.

       ·A focal hyperostosis tends to occur at the tumor origin.
       ·Another high yield pearl is that 10% harbor a squamous cell CA.
       ·MRI "cerebriform pattern" - which sorta looks like brain on T1 and T2.

Esthesioneuroblastom a:

This is a neuroblastoma of olfactory cells so it's gorma start at the cribiform plate. It classically has a
dumbbell appearance with growth up into the skull and growth down into the sinuses, with a waist at the
plate. There are often cysts in the mass. There is a bi-modal age distribution.

M k ·Dumbbell shape with waisting at the cribiform plate is classic
      `Intracranial posterior cyst is a "diagnostic" look

M k ·Octreotide scan will be positive - since it is of neural crest origin

Squamous Cell I SNUC:
Squamous cell is the most common head and neck cancer. The maxillary antrum is the most common
location. It's highly cellular, and therefore low on T2. Relative to other sinus masses it enhances less.
SNUC (the undifferentiated squamer), is the monster steroided-up version of a regular squamous cell. They
are massive and seen more in the ethmoids.

 Epistaxis (Nose Bleeds)
 This is usually idiopathic, although it can be iatrogenic (picking it too much - or not enough). They could
 get sneaky and work this into a case of HHT (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia). The most common
 location is the anterior septal area (Kiesselbach plexus) - these tend to be easy to compress manually. The
 posterior ones are less common (5%) but tend to be the ones that "bleed like stink" (need angio). Most
 cases are given a trial of nasal packing. When that fails, the N-IR team is activated.

          The main supply to the posterior nose is the sphenopalatine artery (terminal internal maxillary
           artery) and tends to be the first line target. Watch out for the variant anastomosis between the ECA
           and ophthalmic artery (you don't want to embolize the eye).

                                                        255
Nasal Septal Perforation

Typically involves the
anterior septal cartilaginous
area.
There are a bunch o f things
that can do this. These are
the ones I 'd think about:

  Surgery - Old school Septoplasty techniques
  - essentially resecting the thing (Killian submucous resection)
  Cocaine use (> 3 months)
  Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis) Triad o f renal masses, sinus
  mucosal thickening and nasal septal erosion, disease, and cavitary lung nodules / fibrosis.
  cANCA positive.
  Syphilis - affects the bony septimi (most everything else affect the cartilaginous regions).
  Too much nose picking (or perhaps not picking it enough)

                                                        256
