   SEC TIO N 14:
M OUTH a JAW

S ia lo lith ia s is - Fancy pants way of say "stones in

the salivary ducts." The testable trivia includes:
(1) Most commonly in the submandibular gland duct

     (Wharton's),
(2) Stones can cause an infected gland "sialoadenitis"
(3) Chronic obstruction can lead to gland fatty atrophy.

                  G land D uct N am es                      Big Arrow on the Stone
(some o f which sound French and are therefore high yield)  Small Arrows on Wharton's duct

                Submandibular = Wharton
                      Parotid = Stenson

                    Sublingual = Rivinus

O dontogenic Infection -                       Sublingual

These can be dental or periodontal in          Space
origin. If 1were writing a question            -Above the Mylohyoid Line
about this topic I would ask three             (Anterior Mandibular Teeth)
things. The first would be that
infection is more common from an
extracted tooth than an abscess
involving an intact tooth.

The second would be that the                                         Submandibular
attachment of the mylohyoid muscle
to the mylohyoid ridge dictates the                                  Space
spread of infection to the sublingual                                -Below the Mylohyoid Line
and submandibular spaces. Above                                      (2nd and 3rd Molars)
the mylohyoid line (anterior
mandibular teeth) goes to the
sublingual space, and below the
mylohyoid line (second and third molars) goes
to the submandibular space.

The third thing I would ask would be that an odontogenic abscess is
the most common masticator space "mass" in an adult.

L u d w ig 's A n g in a : We can safely                                                         \ Geniohyoid
assume anyone named Ludwig (bom                                                                   \ Muscle
after the year 1775) is probably a gas
filled asshole. As such, Ludwig's                           Infection Involves Submandibular (SM)
Angina is a super aggressive cellulitis                     Space above the mylohyoid and Sublingual
in the floor of the mouth. If they show                     (SL) Space below the mylohyoid
it, there will be gas everywhere.

Trivia: most cases start with an
odontogenic infection.

Trivia: Infection involves the submandibular space
and sublingual space

                                               257
     Torus Paiatinus:              Osteonecrosis of                        Ranuia:
                                      the Mandible.
This is a normal variant that                                   This is a mucous retention
looks scary.                     The trivia is most likely      cyst (sublingual or minor
                                 gonna be etiology.             salivary gland). They are
Because it looks scary some                                     typically lateral. There are
multiple choice writer may try   Just rem em ber it is related  three testable pieces of
and trick you into calling it    to prior radiation, licking    trivia to know:
cancer.                          a radium paint brush, or
                                 bisphosphonate                 (1) They arise from the
It's just a bony exostosis that  treatment.                     sublingual gland / space,
comes off the hard palate in                                    or minor salivary glands
the midline.
                                                                (2) Use the word
Classic History. "G randma's                                    "plunging" once it's under
dentures w on't stay in."                                       the mylohyoid muscle-
                                                                "extends into
                                                                the submandibular space"

                                                                (3) Plunging Ranula can
                                                                also be called "diving" or
                                                                "cervical" for the purpose
                                                                o f flacking with you.

  Notice how the Ranula trivia box "plunges" under the other two columns

Thyroglossai Duct Cyst - This can occur anywhere between the foramen cecum (the
base o f the tongue) and the thyroid gland. They are usually found in the midline. It looks like a
thin-walled cyst. Further discussion in the endocrine & peds chapters.

Floor of M outh Derm oid / Epiderm oid - There isn't a lot o f trivia about these other
than the buzzword and what they classically look like. The buzzword is "sack of marbles" -
fluid sack with globules o f fat. They are typically midline. Further discussion in the peds
chapter.

M outh C a n ce r - Squamous cell is going to be the most common cancer o f the mouth (and
head and neck). In an older person think drinker and smoker.

In a younger person think HPV. HPV related SCCs tend to be present with large necrotic level
2a nodes (don't call it a branchial cleft cyst!).

Classic Scenario = Young adult with new level II neck mass - H P V related SCC.

                                                        258
                           Lesions of the Jaw / Tooth

There are a BUNCH o f these and they all look pretty similar. Lesions in the jaw are broadly
grouped into either odontogenic (from a tooth) or non-odontogenic (not from a tooth). The
non-odontogenic stuff you see in the mandible is the same kind o f stuff you see in other bones
(ABCs, Simple Bone Cysts, Osteomyelitis, M yeloma / Plasmacytoma etc...). I think if a test
writer is going to show a jaw lesion - they probably are going to go for odontogenic type.
O bviously your answ er choices will help you decide w hat they are going for. The other tip is
that odontogenic lesions are usually associated with a tooth.

I'm going to pick 6 that I think are m ost likely to be asked and focus on how I w ould tell them
apart.

P eriapical Cyst (R ad icu la r C yst) - This is the most
common type o f odontogenic cyst. They are typically the result
of inflammation from dental caries (less commonly trauma).
The inflammatory process results in a cystic degeneration around
the periodontal ligament.

          ·Located at the apex o f a non-vital tooth
          ·Round with a Well Corticated Border
          ·Usually < 2 cm

D entigerous Cyst (F o llicu lar Cyst) - This is a
cyst that forms around the crown of an un-empted tooth.
It's best thought o f as a developm ental cyst (peri-apicals
are acquired). These things like to displace and resorb
adjacent teeth - usually in an apical direction. This is the
kind o f cyst that will displace a tooth into the condylar
regions o f the mandible or into the floor o f the orbit.

          ·Located at the crown o f an un-erupted tooth
          ·Tends to displace the tooth
*

                                                        259
K eratogenic O dontogenic Tum or
(Odontogenic Keratocyst) - Unlike the prior two
lesions (which were basically fluid collections) this is an
actual tumor. They tend to occur at the mandibular
ramus or body. Although they can be uni-locular the
classic look is xmAXx-XocwldiX { "daughter cysts") and
that's how I would expect them to look on the test.

· Body / Ramus Mandible
· They typically grow along the length of the bone
· Without significant cortical expansion
· May have daughter cysts
· When multiple think Gorlin Syndrome

A m e lo b la s to m a (Adamantinoma of the jaw) -
This is another tumor (locally aggressive). The
appearance is variable but for the purpose of multiple
choice I would expect the most classic look - muhi-
cystic with solid components and expansion of the
mandible.

Out of the four I've discussed, this will be the most
aggressive-looking one. If they show you a really
aggressive-looking lesion, especially if it has multiple
"soap bubbles" - you should consider this.

· Hallmark = Extensive Tooth Root Absorption
· Mandibular Expansion
· Solid component (shown on MR or CT) favors the

  Dx of Ameloblastoma
· About 5% arise from Dentigerous Cysts

O d o n to m a - This is the easy one to pick out because it's most
likely to be shown in it's mature solid form (they start out lucent).
It's actually the most common odontogenic tumor of the
mandible. It's basically a "tooth hamartoma."

· Radiodense with a lucent rim

· Can be LARGE with "fluffy" calcifications

O s te o s a rc o m a o f th e M a n d ib le - This is rare but
can definitely happen. These things classically look like
bone forming tumors (as you would expect). The trivia
worth knowing is that:
(1) They tend to be less aggressive than the long bone

     osteosarcomas
(2) They tend to occur in an older population (30s-40s).

I want to distinguish this from the osteosarcoma of the face
that occur after radiation treatment from retinoblastoma.
Those will classically be younger patients - 5-10 years after
treatment, and at the edge of the radiation field.

                                                        260
