          S E C T IO N 12:

   T emporal Bone

It would be very easy to get completely carried away with this anatomy and spend the next
20 pages talking about all the little bum ps and variants. I 'm gonna resist that urge and instead
try and give you some basic framework. Then as w e go through the various pathologies I'll
try and give "norm al" anatomy comparisons and point out some landmarks that are relevant
for pathology. Additionally, I 'm gonna do a full anatomy T-Bone talk for RadiologyRonin
this year - so if you really want to understand this deeper, that might be helpful.

External, Middle, Inner

1  I_______ 1

                                                   Epitympanum
                                                   "TheAttic"

                                                   Mesotympaniiin

                                                   Hypotympanum

At the most basic level you can think about 3      A closer look at the middle ear gives us 3 more
general locations; External, Middle, and Inner.    general locations

The External ear is everything superficial to the  The Epitympanum, also called "the attic" is
ear drum (tympanic membrane).                      basically everything above the tip of the scutum
                                                   (see below).
The Inner ear is everything deep to the medial
wall of the tympanic cavity.                       The Hypotympanum is everything below the
                                                   tympanic membrane. This is where the
The Middle ear is everything in-between.           Eustachian tube arises.

                                                   The Mesotympanum is everything in-between
                                                   (or everything directly behind the ear drum).

               The scutum (arrows) is a "shield" like osseous spur formed
               via the lateral wall of the tympanic cavity. This anatomic
               land mark is often brought up with discussion of the
               erosion pattern of Cholesteatomas.

                                                   239
                               Middle & Inner Ear Pathology

C h o lesteato m a - The simple way to think about this is "a bunch o f exfoliated skin
debris growing in the w rong place." It creates a big inflammation ball which wrecks the
temporal bone and the ossicles.

There are two parts to the ear drum, a flimsy whimpy part "Pars   P. Flaccida
Flaccida" , and a tougher part "Pars Tensa." The flimsy flaccida     P. Tensa
is at the top, and the tensa is at the bottom.

If you "acquire" a hole
with some inflammation /
infection involving the Pars
Flaccida you can end up
with this ball o f epithelial
crap growing and causing
inflammation in the wrong
place.

m                                                                - Typical location of this
                                                                     soft tissue blob with
                                                                     erosion of scutum
                                                                     (arrow)

                                                                  - They restrict diffusion

There are two subtypes based on the location.

     Pars Flaccida Type                                           Pars Tensa Type:

 Acquired Types are more common - typically involving 톂he inner ear structures are

the pars flaccida. They grow into Prussak's Space    involved earlier and more

 The Scutum is eroded early (maybe first)- considered often

a very specific sign o f acquired cholesteatoma      QThis is less com mon than

 The M alleus head is displaced medially            the Flaccida Type

 The long process o f the incus is the most common

segment of the ossicular chain to be eroded.

 Fistula to the semi-circular canal most commonly

involves the lateral segment

                                               240
P ru ssak's S p a c e and S cu tu m Erosion:

                                                       This is a coronal view of the T-Bone. To orient you 1
                                                       drew a cartoon finger in the ear. That finger is running
                                                       right up to the ear drum (tympanic membrane). The
                                                       membrane is usually too thin to see, but it's right around
                                                       there. Remember the flimsy Flacida is at the top and the
                                                       thicker Tensa is at the bottom.

                                                       There are two white arrows:

                                                       The top arrow is pointing to a space between an ossicle
                                                        (incus) and the lateral temporal bone. This is called
                                                        "P russak's space" and is the most common location of
                                                        a Pars Flacida Cholesteatoma. Remember the incus was
                                                       the most common ossicle eroded.

                                                        The bottom arrow is pointing to a bony shield shaped
                                                       bone - "the scutum " which will be the first bone eroded
                                                       by a pars flaccida.

Labyrinthine Fistula (periiym piiatic fistula):

This is a potential complication o f               Coronal  Axial
cholesteatoma (or other things - iatrogenic,
trauma, etc...). What we are talking about here
is a bony defect creating an abnormal
communication between the normally fluid
filled inner ear and normally air filled tympanic
cavity. In the case o f cholesteatoma, the
lateral semicircular canal (arrows) is most
often involved.

The classic clinical history is "sudden fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss and vertigo.'

On CT, you want to see the soft
tissue density of the cholesteatoma
eating through the otic capsule into
the semicircular canal. The
presence of air in the semicircular
canal (pneumolabyrinth) is
definitive evidence of a fistula
(although it's not often seen in the
real world).

                                      241
o titis M ed ia (OM ) - This is a common childhood disease with effusion and infection of the
middle ear. It's more common in children and patients with Down Syndrome because of a more
horizontal configuration of the Eustachian tube. It's defined as chronic if you have fluid persisting for
more than six weeks.

It can look a lot like a cholesteatoma (^soft tissue density in the middle ear).

                  THIS vs THAT:                                Complications of OM

                  Chronic Otitis Cholesteatoma  Coalescent     Erosion of the mastoid septae with or
                       Media                    Mastoiditis    without intraraastoid abscess
                                                Facial Nerve
Mastoids          Poorly         Poorly         Palsy          Secondary to inflammation of the
                  pneumatized    pneumatized                   tympanic segment (more on this later in
                                                Dura) Sinus    the chapter).
Middle Ear ^Can completely Can completely       Thrombosis

Opacification opacity            opacity        Meningitis,    Adjacent inflammation may cause
                                                and            thrombophlebitis or thrombosis of the
For the Purpose   Thickened      Non-           Labyrinthitis  sinus. This in itself can lead to
of Muhiple        mucosa         Dependent                     complications:
Choice - this                    Mass
could be a hint                                                                   Otitic
                                                               Venous Infarct:    Hydrocephalus:
Erosions                          Common                       This can occur     Lateral sinus
(scutum and ; Rare (< 10%)       : (75%)                       secondary to       thrombosis can
ossicular chain)                                               dural sinus        alter resorption of
                                                               thrombosis         CSF and lead to
                                                                                  hydrocephalus.
Displacement      NEVER          It can happen
of the ossicular
chain

                                                               It can happen

Labyrinthitis Ossificans

Gamesmanship - "history o f childhood meningitis. '            WTF is a "m em branous labyrinth " ?
You see it in kids (ages 2-18 months).
Classic Appearance on CT - Ossification o f the                The world "Labyrinth" most coirmionly
membranous labyrinth.                                          refers to the timeless 1986 science
They present with sensorineural hearing loss.                  fiction adventure staring
Calcification in the cochlea is often considered a             David Bowie as Jareth the Mother
contraindication for cochlear implant.                         Fucking Goblin King.

                                                               Another less popular use of the word
                                                               "Labyrinth" is the anatomical blanket
                                                               tenn encompassing the Vestibule,
                                                               Cochlea, and Semicircular Canals.

                                                               Under the umbrella of the "Labyrinth"
                                                               you can have the bony portion (the
                                                               series of canals tunneled out of the t-
                                                               bone), and the membranous portion
                                                               (which is basically the soft tissue lining
                                                               inside the bony part).

                                                               You can then further divide the
                                                               "membranous" portion into the
                                                               cochlear & vestibular labyrinths.

Normal - For Comparison Labyrinthitis Ossificans

                                                242
L ab yrin th itis - This is an inflammation o f the
membranous labyrinth, probably most commonly the
result o f a viral respiratory tract infection. Acute
otomastoiditis can also spread directly to the inner ear
(this is usually unilateral). Bacterial m eningitis can
cause bilateral labyrinthitis.

Classic Look: The cochlea and semicircular canals
will be shown enhancing on T1 post contrast imaging.

T iie Facial N erve (CN 7)

Most people will describe 6 segments to the facial nerve.                  Enhancement

 Intracranial ("Cisternal") segment                       The facial nerve is unique in that
 Meatal ("Canalicular") segment - the part inside the     portions of it can enhance normally.
                                                           The trick is which parts are normal
  Internal Auditory Canal "lAC").                          and which parts are NOT
 Labyrinthine segment (LS) - from the lAC to
                                                           Normal Enhancement: Tympanic &
  geniculate ganglion (GG).                                Mastoid Segments including the
 Tympanic segment (TS) - GG to pyramidal eminence         Geniculate Ganglia. The
 Mastoid segment (MS) - from pyramidal eminence           Labyrinthine segment can also
                                                           sometimes.
  to stylomastoid foramen "SMF"
 Extratemporal segment - Distal to the SMF                No normal enhancement = Cisternal,
                                                           Canalicular, or Extratemporal

                                                           TS

                                                           MS

Axial MR T2 - Cisternal Segment  Axial CT- Level of lAC    SMF
-CN8 is posterior also              -the bend at the GG =          Sagittal CT-
entering the lAC                       "anterior genu" -

What causes abnormal enhancement?                   B ells Palsy & R am sey Hunt
Big one is B ell's Palsy. Lymes, Ramsay
Hunt, and Cancer can do it too.               Bells: Etiology is probably viral. Usually a
                                              clinical diagnosis. Abnormal enhancement in
When do you think Cancer ?                    the Canalicular Segment (in the lAC) is
Nodular Enhancement.                          probably the most classic finding.

When do you damage the fa cia l nerve?        RH: Caused by reactivation varicella zoster
T-Bone fracture (transverse > longitudinal).  virus. Classic rash around ear. CN 5 is
                                              usually also involved.

                                              243
Otosclerosis (Fenestral and Retrofenestral):

A better term would actually be "otospongiosis," as the bone becomes more lytic (instead of sclerotic).
When I say conductive hearing loss in an adult female, you say this.

Fenestral - This is bony resorption anterior to the oval widow at the fissula ante fenestram.
If not addressed, the footplate will fuse to the oval window.

Retro-fenestral - This is a more severe form, which has progressed to have demineralization around
the cochlea. This form usually has a sensorineural component, and is bilateral and symmetric nearly
100% of the time.

Bony
resorption
anterior to the
oval widow at
the fissula ante
fenestram

Treatment Options:

Early on (if the focus is small) dietary supplem entation with Fluoride
may be useful. Although this is controversial - may or m ay not w o rk ...
and may or may not be part o f a new world order David Icke Reptilian
conspiracy to lower IQs (Alex Jones has the documents).

Later on they might try a stapedectomy (partial removal o f the stapes      illuminati villains
with implantation o f a prosthetic device) or a Cochlear implant.           advocate f o r
                                                                            Fluoride treatment.
                                                      244
Superior Sem icircular Canal Dehiscence                                             Pietro Tullio

This is an Aunt Minnie. It's supposedly from long standing elevated         Mad scientist who drilled
ICP. The most likely way this will be asked is either (1) what is it? with  holes in the semicircular
a picture or (2) "Noise Induced Vertigo" or "Tullio's Phenomenon."          canals of pigeons then
                                                                            observed that they became
                                                                            off balance when he
                                                                            exposed them to loud
                                                                            sounds.

                                                                            He also created a "pigeon
                                                                            rat" like Hugo Simpson did
                                                                            in the 1996 Simpsons
                                                                            Halloween Special.

           Normal Anatomy          Superior Semicircular Canal
Note the intact Bony Roof (Arrow)  Dehiscence. Note the Absence

                                         of a Bony Covering

                                                                            "Look, I 've been practicing'

Large Vestibular Aqueduct Syndrome

The vestibular aqueduct is a bony canal that connects the vestibule (iruier ear) with the endolymphatic
sac. The enlargement of the aqueduct (> 1.5 mm) has an Aunt Minnie appearance. The classic
history is progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Supposedly the underlying etiology is a failure of
the endolymphatic sac to resorb endolymph, leading to endolymphatic hydrops and dilation.

Trivia:
톂his is the most common cause of congenital sensorineural hearing loss
톂he finding is often (usually) bilateral.
톂here is an association with cochlear deformity - near 100%
(absence of the bony modiolus in more than 90%)
텾rogressive Sensorineural Hearing Loss (they are NOT bom deaf)

The normal Vestibular Aqueduct (VA) is  Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct
NEVER larger than the adjacent          (larger than PSCC - grey arrow)
Posterior Semicircular Canal (PSCC)

                                        245
Congenital m alform ations of th e inner e a r can be thought about along a
spectrum o f severity. As the construction o f the hearing m achinery is com plicated business,
you can imagine that the earlier things go w rong in this m ulti-stage anatomical developm ent
the more severe the anomaly.

Along those lines, we can discuss two disorders on opposite ends o f that severity spectrum
with the M ichel's Aplasia being the earliest and m ost severe, and the Classic M ondini's
Malformation (incomplete partition II) being the latest and least severe.

Mondini M alform ation - Type o f cochlear hypoplasia where the basal turn is normal, but
the middle and apical turns fuse into a cystic apex. This is usually w ritten as "onlv 1.5 turns" -
instead o f the normal 2.5. There is an association w ith an enlarged vestibule, and enlarged
vestibular aqueduct. They have sensorineural hearing loss, although high frequency sounds are
typically preserved (as the basal turn is normal).

M ich el's A p la s ia - This is also referred to as com plete labyrinthine aplasia or "CLA." As
above, this represents the most severe o f the congenital abnormalities o f the inner ear - with
absence o f the cochlea, vestibule, and vestibular aqueduct. No surprise these kids are
completely deaf

Associations: Anencephaly, Thalidomide Exposure

Gamesmanship: Some people think this looks like labyrinthitis ossificans. Look for the
absent vestibular aqueduct to help differentiate.

            T H I S VSTHAT: Mondini vs Michel

            Mondini                                Michel

Timing      Late (7th Week)                        Early (3rd Week)
Severity
Cochlea:    Some Preserved High Frequency Hearing  Total Deafness
Vestibule
Vestibular  Cystic Apex (basilar turn is normal)   Absent
Aqueduct
            Sometimes Enlarged (can be normal)     Absent
Frequency
            Large                                  Absent

                            Common                 Rare As Fuck
            (relative to other malformations)

                             246
Endolymphatic Sac Tumor
Rare tumor of the endolymphatic sac and duct. Although most are sporadic, when you see this
tumor you should immediately think Von-Hippei-Lindau.

Classic Look: They almost always have internal amorphous calcifications on CT. They are T2
bright, with intense enhancement. They are very vascular often with flow voids, and tumor
blush on angiography.

                                                                                                      Cochlea
                                                                                                              Semicircular
                                                                                                              Canal

CN7&8

Aperture of

Vestibular Aqueduct   ^

             Tumor ^

             Endolymph Sac

Paragangliom a
On occasion, paraganglioma o f the jugular fossa (glomus jugulare or jugulotympanic tumors)
can invade the occipital bone and adjacent petrous apex.

Trivia:

           40% o f the tim e it's hereditary, and they are multiple.
            톂he most common presenting symptom is hoarseness from vagal nerve compression.
           톂hey are very vascular masses and enhance avidly with a "salt and pepper"
            appearance on post contrast MRI, with flow voids.
            톂hey are FDG avid.

More on these later in the chapter

247
Petrous Apex - Anatomic Variations:

Variation can occur in the amount o f pneumatization, m arrow fat, bony continuity, and
vascular anatomy.

A sym m etric M arrow : - Typically the petrous apex contains significant fat, closely
following the scalp and orbital fat (T1 and T2 bright). W hen it's asymmetric you can have
two problems (1) falsely thinking y o u 've got an infiltrative process when you don't, and
(2) overlooking a T1 bright thing (cholesterol granulom a) thinking it's fat. The key is to use
STIR or some other fat saturating sequence.

Cephaloceles: - A cephalocoele describes a herniation of CNS content through a defect
in the cranium. In the petrous apex they are a slightly different animal. They don't contain any
brain tissue, and simply represent cystic expansion and herniation o f the posterolateral portion
o f M eckel's cave into the superomedial aspect o f the petrous apex. Describing it as a
herniation of M eckel's Cave would be more accurate. These can be unilateral or bilateral
(commoner) and are classically described as "smoothly marginated lobulated cystic expansion
o f the petrous apex. "

A b e rra n t in te rn a l caro tid . The classic history is pulsatile tinnitus (although other
things can cause that). This term is used to describe the situation where the C l (cervical)
segment of the ICA has involuted/underdeveloped, and middle ear collaterals develop
(enlarged caroticotympanic artery) to pick up the slack. The hypertrophied vessel runs
through the tympanic cavity and joins the horizontal carotid canal. The ENT exam will show a
vascular mass pulsing behind the ear drum (don't expect them to make it that easy for you).

                                                        The oldest trick in the book is to try and fool you
                                                        into calling it a paraganglioma.
                                                         Look for the connection to the horizontal carotid
                                                        canal - that is the m ost classic way to show this.
                                                        DO NOT BIOPSY !

                                                       248
Apical Petrositis

Infection o f the petrous apex is a rare com plication o f infectious otom astoiditis. It can have
some bad compHcations if it progresses including osteomyelitis o f the skull base, vasospasm of
the ICA (if it involves the carotid canal), subdural empyema, venous sinus thrombosis, temporal
lobe stroke, and full on meningitis.

In children, it can present as a prim ary process. In adults it's usually in the setting o f chronic
otomastoiditis or recent mastoid surgery.

Gradenigo Syndrome                                                     Dorello's Canal

This is a com plication o f apical petrositis, when D orello's canal   The most medial point
(CN 6) is involved. They will show you (or tell you) that the patient  of the petrous ridge -
has a lateral rectus palsy.                                            between the pontine
                                                                       cistern and cavemous
                                                                       sinus

Classic Triad:                            
   Otomastoiditis,
   Face pain (trigeminal         O
    neuropathy), and
   Lateral Rectus Palsy                                                 u

                           Look Straight  Look Left                    Look Right

                             249
Petrous Apex - Inflammatory Lesions

Cholesterol Granuloma

The most common primary petrous apex lesion. M echanism is likely obstruction o f the air
cell, with repeated cycles o f hemorrhage and inflammation leading to expansion and bone
remodeling. The most common symptom is hearing loss.

On CT the margins will be
sharply defined. On MR I
it's gonna be T1 and T2
bright, with a T2 dark
hemosiderin rim, and faint
peripheral enhancement.

Key Point:
Cholesterol Granuloma =
T1 and T2 Bright.

The slow growing ones can   Cholesterol Granuloma = T1 and T2 Bright
be watched. The fast
growing ones need surgery.

Cholesteatom a

This is basically an epidermoid (ectopic epithelial tissue). Unlike the ones in the middle ear,
these are congenital (not acquired) in the petrous apex. They are typically slow growing, and
produce bony changes similar to cholesterol granuloma.

The difference is their M R! findings; T1 dark. T2 bright, and restricted diffusion.

Key Point: Cholesteatom a = T1 Dark, T2 Bright, Restricted Diffusion

                              THIS vs THAT:

Cholesterol Granuloma                        Cholesteatoma

T1 Bright                                    T1 Dark

T2 Bright                                    T2 Bright

D oesn't Restrict                            Does Restrict

Smooth Expansile Bony Change                 Smooth Expansile Bony Change

                                     250
External Ear

Regular and Necrotizing O titis Externa:

Otitis Externa - the so called "swimmers ear" is an infection (usually bacterial) o f the
external auditory canal. The more testable version Necrotizing Otitis Externa (also called
"M alignant " Otitis Externa - for the purpose o f fucking w ith you) is a m ore aggressive
version seen almost exclusively in diabetics.

You are going to see swollen EAC soft tissues, probably with a bunch o f small abscesses, and
adjacent bony destruction.

They always (95%) have diabetes and the causative agent is always (98%) Pseudomonas.

E x te rn a l A u d ito ry C an al E xostosis (``S w im m e rs E ar") - This is an
overgrowth o f tissue in the ear canal, classically seen in Surfers who get repeated bouts o f ear
infections. It's usually b ilatera l and when chronic will look like bone. Unlike N ecrotizing
Otitis, these patients are immunocompetent and non-diabetics (although they are dirty hippie
surfers).

E x te rn a l A u ditory C anal O steo m a - This is a benign bone tumor, maybe best
thought o f as an overgrowth o f normal bone. They are usually incidental and unilateral
{remember exostosis was bilateral) occurring near the junction o f cartilage and bone in the
ear canal.

External Auditory Canal Atresia:
This is a developm ental anom aly w here the external
auditory canal (secondary crayon storage
com partment) doesn't form. As you m ight imagine,
this results in a hearing deficit (conductive subtype).
There may or may not be a mashed up ossicular
chain.

                                                         Noniially, there is a place to stick a
                                                         crayon right around here (arrow).

Trivia: ENT will want to know: (1) if the tissue covering the normally open ear hole (atretic
plate) is soft tissue or bone, and (2) if there is an aberrant course o f the facial nerve.

              251
