                                  S E C T IO N 21:

                             CORD Pa th o lo g y

Syrinx - Also known as "a hole in the cord". People use the word "syrinx" for all those fancy
French / Latin words (hydromyelia, syringomyelia, hydrosyringomyelia, syringohydromyelia,
syringobulbia etc...). They usually do this because they don't know what those words mean.

This is the simple version:

· Hydromyelia = Lined by ependyma.
· Syringomyelia = NOT lined by ependyma

There is zero difference clinically - which is why everyone     '`C en tra l C o rd  ``S yrin x w ith
just says "syrinx." The distinction is strictly academic (i.e.     D ilation"        M yelopathy"
multiple choice trivia).

Most (90%) cord dilations (healthy and sick ones) are congenital, and associated with Chiari 1 and II,
as well as Dandy-Walker, Klippel-Feil, and Myelomeningoceles. The other 10% are acquired either
by trauma, tumor, or vascular insufficiency.

In clinical practice, if there is perfectly central mid cord high signal dilation, surrounded by totally
normal cord I call it "central cord dilation" or "benign central cord dilation." If there is the same
thing but the cord around the dilation looks "sick" - grayish / high signal, or the cord is atrophic, then
I use the word "m yelopathy" or "myelopathic changes." Mvelopathy is a word for a diseased cord -
usually from disc/osteophyte compression. Although, you can have myelopathy from any number of
neoplastic, post traumatic, or inflammatory processes. Lots of the stuff can cause myelopathy. For
example, my Uncle Jamal said that a ghost hurt his back - not sure if it was a true myelopathy, but I
definitely saw him limping and when I ask him he said it was the ghost that "blew out his back."

A lot of people are skeptical about ghosts, but I know for a fact that they exist. As above, my Uncle
Jamal's house is definitely haunted -- because one time I spent the night there, and late at night I
heard a knocking on the door, then footsteps on the staircase, followed by the sound of a strange
man's voice. A few minutes later, I heard a banging noise and the voice o f a man whimpering /
grunting. That went on for like 30 minutes (the banging and grunting). I found the whole experience
very unsettling. So the next morning I asked my Uncle Jamal about it, and he told me his house was
haunted... .about 3 or 4 times a week.

Spinal Cord infarct; - Cord infarct / ischemia can have a variety
o f causes. The most common cause is "idiopathic," although I 'd
expect the most common multiple choice scenario to revolve around
treating an aneurysm with a stent graft, or embolizing a bronchial
artery. Impairment involving the anterior spinal artery distribution is
most common. With anterior spinal artery involvement you are going
to have central cord / anterior horn cell high signal on T2 (because gray
matter is more vulnerable to ischemia).

The "owl's eye" sign o f anterior spinal cord infarct is a buzzword.

It's usually a long segment, (more than 2 vertebral body segments). Diffusion using single shot
fast spin echo or line scan can be used with high sensitivity (to compensate for artifacts from
spinal fluid movement).

                                                        293
Demyelinating (T2 / f l a i r Hyperintense):

Broadly you can think of cord pathology in 5 categories: Demyelinating, Tumor, Vascular, Inflammatory,
and Infectious.

In the real world, the answer is almost always MS - which is by far the most common cause. The other
three things it could be are Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO), acute disseminating encephalomyelitis
(ADEM) or Transverse Myelitis (TM).

MS in the Cord: "Multiple lesions, over space and time." The lesions in the spine are typically
short segment (< 2 vertebral segments), usually only affect half / part of the cord. The cervical cord is
the most common location. There are usually lesions in the brain, if you have lesions in the cord
(isolated cord lesions occur about 10% of the time). The lesions can enhance when acute - but this is
less common than in the brain. You can sometimes see cord atrophy if the lesion burden is large.

   Transverse Myelitis: This is a focal inflammation of the cord. The causes are
   numerous (infectious, post vaccination - classic rabies, SLE, Sjogren's,
   Paraneoplastic, AV-malformations). You typically have at least 2/3 of the cross
   sectional area of the cord involved, and focal enlargement of the cord. Splitters will
   use the terms "Acute partial" for lesions less than two segments, and "acute
   complete" for lesions more than two segments. The factoid to know is that the
   "Acute partials" are at higher risk for developing MS.

ADEM; As described in the brain section, this is usually seen after a viral illness or infection
typically in a child or young adult. The lesions favor the dorsal white matter (but can involve grey
matter). As a pearl, the presence of cranial nerve enhancement is suggestive of ADEM. The step 1
trivia, is that the "anti-MOG IgG" test is positive in 50% of cases. Just like MS there are usually brain
lesions (although ADEM lesions can occur in the basal ganglia and pons - which is unusual in MS).

   NMO (Neurom yelitis Optica): This is also sometimes called Devics. It can

   be monophasic or relapsing, and favors the optic nerves and cervical cord. Tends

   to be longer segment than MS, and involve the fiill transverse diameter of the cord

   (mild swelling). Brain lesions can occur (more commonly in Asians) and are

o  usually periventricular. If any PhDs ask, the reason the periventricular location

   occurs is that the antibody (NMO IgG) attacks the Aquaporin 4 channels - which

   are found in highest concentration around the ventiicles.

   Subacute Combined Degeneration: This is a fancy way of describing the

   effects of a Vitamin B 12 deficiency. The classic look is bilateral, symmetrically
   increased T2 signal in the dorsal columns, without enhancement. The
   appearance has been described as an "inverted V sign." The signal change
   typically begins in the upper thoracic region with ascending or descending
   progression. Fuckery: Vitamin B12 can also be called "cobalamin."

   H IV Vacuolar Myelopathy: This is the most common cause of spinal cord

   dysfunction in untreated AIDS. Key word there is "untreated" - this is a late
   finding. Atrophy is the most common finding (thoracic is most common). The T2
   high signal will be very similar to B12 (subacute combined degeneration) -
   symmetrically involving the posterior columns. It can only be shown 2 ways - (a)
   by telling you the patient has AIDS or risk factors such as unprotected anal sex at
   a track stop with a man "bear" with a thick mustache while sharing IV dmg
   needles, (b) not including B 12 as an answer choice.

                                              294
         MS: Lesions favor the white matter of the cervical region.
         They tend to be random and asymmetric.

"Owl's Eye"             -Ischemia              -Ischemia              Vitamin B12(SCD)
-Classic for Ischem ia  - More extensive       -This time a                      HIV
(Anterior)              anterior involvement.  posterior circulation
-Also seen in Polio     -Also seen in NMO,     pattern. These tend    Posterior. Can look
                        TM, or MS              to be unilateral.      like an inverted "V"
                                               -MS can also look
                                               like this

MS       Usually Short  Usually Part of the         Not swollen, or   Can Enhance /
TM       Segment        Cord                        Less Swollen      Restrict when
NMO                                                                   Acute
ADEM     Usually Long
Infarct  Segment        Usually involves both Expanded,               Can Enhance
Tumor    Usually Long                                                 Optic Nerves
         Segment        sides of the cord           Swollen Cord      Involved

         Usually Long   Usually involves both                         Restricted
         Segment        sides of the cord                             Diffusion
                                                                      Can Enhance
                                                    Not swollen, or
                                                    Less Swollen

                                                    Expanded,
                                                    Swollen Cord

                                               295
Inflammatory / Infectious:

A rach n o id itis: This is a general term for inflammation o f the subarachnoid space. It can
be infectious but can also be post-surgical. It actually occurs about 10-15% of the time
after spine surgery, and can be a source of persistent pain / failed back.

It's shown two ways:

(1) E m pty Thecal S a c S ig n - N erve roots are
adherent peripherally, giving the appearance o f an
empty sac.
(2) Central N erve R o o t C lum ping. This can range in
severity from a few nerves clumping together, to all
of them fused into a single central scarred band.

                                                                                       Eniptj Thecal Sac Sign

Guiiiain B arre Syndrom e (GBS) - Also known as "Acute inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy" (AIDP). One o f those weird auto-immune disorders that
causes ascending flaccid paralysis. The step 1 trivia was Campylobacter, but you can also
see it after surgery, or in patients with lymphoma or SLE.

The thing to know is enhancement of the nerve roots of the cauda equina.

Other pieces o f trivia that are less likely to be asked are that the facial nerve is the most
common cranial nerve affected, and that the anterior spinal roots enhance more than the
posterior ones.

Chronic Inflam m atory             CIDP - Diffuse Thickening of the Nerve Roots
Dem yiinating
Polyneuropathy (ClDP) -                 296
The chronic counterpart to GBS.
Clinically this has a gradual and
protracted weakness (GBS
improves in 8 weeks, CIDP does
not). The buzzword is thickened,
enhancing, "onion bulb" nerve
roots.

"Dreadlocks," "Locs," "Jata"
some people call them.
                                   Tumor

The classic teaching with spinal
cord tumors is to first describe
the location o f the tumor, as
either (1) Intramedullary,
(2) Extramedullary Intradural, or
(3) Extradural.

This is often easier said than     Intram ed ullary     E xtram edullary      E x tra d u ra l
done. Differentials are based
on the location.                       Astrocytoma,          In tra d u ra l   Disc Disease
                                      Ependymoma,                             (most common)
                                   Hemangioblastoma         Schwannoma,
                                                            Meningioma,       Bone Tumors,
                                                           Neurofibroma,            Mets,

                                                              Drop Mets         Lymphoma

IN T R A M E D U L L A R Y :                                Astrocytoma            Ependymoma
                                                                              Most common in Adults
A s tro c y to m a - This is the most common            Most common in child
intramedullary tumor in peds. It favors the upper                                        Central
thoracic spine. There will be fusiform dilation of the          Eccentric            Homogenous
cord over multiple segments. They are eccentric,             Heterogenous            Enhancement
dark on T l, bright on T2, and they enhance. They            Enhancement
may be associated with rostral or caudal cysts which                          More Often Hemorrhagic
are usually benign syrinx(es).

E p e n d y m o m a - This is the most common primary cord tumor      Ependymoma - Cervical Cord
of the lower spinal cord and conus / filum terminale. You can see
them in the cervical cord as well. This is the most common
intramedullary mass in adults.

The "myxopapillary form" is exclusively found in the conus /
filum locations. They can be hemorrhagic, and
have a dark cap on T2. They have tumoral cysts about % of the
time. They are a typically long segment (averaging 4 segments).

Myxopapillary = Most commonly located in the Lumbar spine
(conus/filum location)

H em angioblastom a -                                                       VHL Associations:
These are associated with Von Hippel Lindau (30%).
The thoracic level is favored (second most common is cervical).       ·Pheochromocytoma
The classic look is a wide cord with considerable edema. Adjacent     ·CNS Hemangioblastoma
serpinginous draining meningeal varicosities can be seen.             (cerebellum 75Vo, spine 25%)
                                                                      ·Endolymphatic Sac Tumor
Intram edullary M ets -                                               ·Pancreatic Cysts
This is very rare, but when it does happen it is usually lung (70%).  ·Pancreatic Islet Cell Tumors
                                                                      ·Clear Cell RCC
                                                        297
EXTRAMEDULLARY INTRADURAL:

Schw annom a: This is the most common tumor to occur in the Extramedullary
Intradural location. They are benign, usually solitary, usually arise from the dorsal nerve
roots. They can be multiple in the setting o f NF-2 and the Carney Complex. The appearance
is variable, but the classic look is a dum bbell with the skinny handle being the intraforam inal
component. They are T1 dark, T2 bright, and will enhance. They look a lot like
neurofibromas. If they have central necrosis or hemorrhage, that favors a schwannoma.

Neurofibrom a: This is another benign nerve tumor (composed o f all parts o f the nerve:
nerve + sheath), that is also usually solitary. There are two flavors; solitary and plexiform.
The plexiform is a multilevel bulky nerve enlargement that is pathognomonic for NF-1.
Their lifetime risk for malignant degeneration is around 5-10%. Think about malignant
degeneration in the setting o f rapid growth. They look a lot like schwannomas. If they have
a hyperintense T2 rim with a central area o f low signal - "target sign" that makes you favor
neurofibroma.

          Schwannoma                     N eu ro fib ro m a

Does NOT envelop the adjacent nerve root Does envelop the adjacent nerve root
                                                              (usually a dorsal sensory root)

Solitary                       Solitary

Multiple makes you think NF-2  A ssociated with NF -1 (even when single)

Cystic change / Hemorrhage     T2 bright rim, T2 dark center "target sign"

                               Plexiform = Pathognomonic for NF-1

M eningiom a: These guys adhere to but do not originate from the dura. They are more
common in women (70%). They favor the posterior lateral thoracic spine, and the anterior
cervical spine. They enhance brightly and homogeneously. They are often T1 iso to hypo,
and slightly T2 bright. They can have calcifications.

Drop iVlets: M edulloblastom a is the m ost com m on prim ary tum or to drop. Breast cancer
is the most com mon systemic tum or to drop (followed by lung and melanoma). The cancer
m ay coat the cord or nerve root, leading to a fine layer o f enhancem ent ("zuckerguss").

                               298
EXTRADURAL:

V erteb ral Hem angiom a: These are very common - seen in about 10% o f the population.

They classically have thickened trabeculae appearing as parallel linear densities "jail bar" or
"corduroy" appearance. In the vertebral body they are T1 and T2 bright, although the
extraosseuous components typically lack fat and are isointense on T 1.

Osteoid Osteom a: This is also covered in the MSK chapter, but as a brief review focusing
on the spine, they love to involve the posterior elements (75%X and are rare after age 30. They
tend to have a nidus and surrounding sclerosis. The nidus is T2 bright and will enhance. The
classic story is night pain, improved with aspirin. Radiofrequency ablation can treat them (under
certain conditions).

O steoblastom a: This is similar to an Osteoid osteoma but larger than 1.5 cm. Again, very
often in the posterior elements - usually of the cervical spine.

Aneurysm al Bone Cyst: These guys are also covered in the MSK chapter. They also like
the posterior elements and are usually seen in the first two decades o f life. They are expansile (as
the name implies) and can have multiple fluid levels on T2. They can get big and look
aggressive.

Giant Cell Tumor: These guys are also covered in the MSK chapter. These are common in
the sacrum, although rare anywhere else in the spine. You don't see them in young kids. If they
show this, it's going to be a lytic expansile lesion in the sacrum with no rim of sclerosis.

Chordoma: This is most common in the midline                      Benign Notochordal
sacrum (they will want you to say clivus - that is actually              Cell Tumor
number 2). They like the lower sacrum - usually S4-S5.
When they are in the vertebral bodies - the most common      This is a thing that looks very
spot is C2. The thing to know is that a vertebral primary    similar to a chroma. It is also
tends to be more aggressive / malignant than its counter     midline, favors the cloves and
parts in the clivus or sacrum. The classic story in the      sacrum.
vertebral column is "involvement o f two or more adjacent
vertebral bodies with the intervening disc."                 The key differences are:
                                                             (1) It is sclerotic on CT (chordoma
Most are very T2 bright.
                                                                  is usually lytic), and
                                                             (2) They don't usually enhance

Leukemia: They love to show it in the                       Vertebra Plana:
spine. You have loss o f the normal fatty
marrow - so it's going to be homogeneously  The pancake flat vertebral body.
dark on T1. More on this in the MSK         Just say Eosinophilic Granuloma in a
chapter.                                    kid (could be neuroblastoma met), and
                                            Mets / Myeloma in an adult.
Mets: The classic offenders are prostate,
breast, lung, lymphoma, and myeloma.
Think multiple lesions with low XI signal.
Cortical breakthrough or adjacent
paravertebral components are also helpful.

                                            299
   PROMETHEUS

    L i o n h a r t , m.d.

300
