        S p in e  S E C T IO N 20:

                  s p e c ific V a s c u l a r

AVFs I AVMs:

There are 4 types. Type 1 is by far the m ost com m on (85%). It is a Dural AVF; the result
of a fistula between the dorsal radiculomedullary arteries and radiculomedullary vein /
coronal sinus - with the dural nerve sleeve. It is acquired and seen in older patients who
present with progressive radiculomyelopathy. The most common location is the thoracic
spine. If anyone asks, the "gold standard for diagnosis is angiography" , although CTA or
MRA will get the job done. You will have T2 high signal in the central cord (which will be
swollen), with serpentine perimedullary flow voids (which are usually dorsal).

Typel                       Spinal AVM /AVFs
Type 2
Type 3  Most Common Type (85%). Dural AVF - with a single coiled vessel
Type 4
        Intramedullary Nidus from anterior spinal artery or posterior spinal artery. Can
        have aneurysms, and can bleed. Most common presentation is SAH. Associated
        with HHT and KTS (other vascular syndromes).
        Juvenile, very rare, often complex and with a terrible prognosis

        Intradural perimedullary with subtypes depending on single vs multiple arterial
        supply. These tend to occur near the conus.

Foix A lajouanine Syndrome:

This is a congestive m velopathv associated with a Dural AVF. The classic history
is a 45 year old male with lower extremity w eakness and sensory deficits.

You have increased T2 signal (either at the conus or lower thoracic spine), with
associated prominent vessels (flow voids). The underlying pathophysiology is
venous hypertension - secondary to the vascular malformation.

             Key Finding. - This vs That  Blob Like        Swollen High Signal
                                                CSF        Cord with Serpentine
The vascular malformation flow voids are                   flow voids along the
- punctate, serpiginous, and serpentine.  Pulsation        surface of cord
                                           Artifacts

They are NOT blob like
- sorta like what you see with CSF pulsation signal loss.

                                          292
