           S E C T IO N 4:

M e s e n t e r i c Is c h e m i a

This can be broadly classified as acute or chronic.

Chronic: Significant Stenosis o f 2 out o f 3 main mesenteric vessels + symptoms ("food
fear") , LUQ pain after eating, pain out o f proportion to exam). Some practical pearls are
that you can have bad disease and no symptoms if you have good collaterals. Alternatively
if you have bad one-vessel disease you can have symptoms if you have crappy collaterals.
Rem ember that the splenic flexure ( "Griffith s P oint") is the m ost common site because it's
the watershed o f the SMA and IMA.

A cute: Comes from 4 main causes. Arterial, Venous, Non-occlusive, and Strangulation.

 Arterial (-7 0 % ): Occlusive emboli (usually more distal, at branch points), or Thrombus
  (usually closer to the ostium). Vasculitis can also cause it. The SMA is m ost com m only
  affected. Bowel typically has a thinner wall (no arterial inflow), and is NOT typically
  dilated. After reperfusion the bowel wall will become thick, with a target appearance.

 Venous (-1 5 % ): Dilation with wall thickening (8-9mm, with < 5mm being normal) is
  more common. Fat stranding and ascites are especially common in venous occlusion.

Non-Occlusive / "NOM I" (-2 0 % ): This is the                  NOMI Clues:
"confusing" subtype where there is NOT a clot in the
artery or the vein, yet the bowel looks abnormal. The    History of Hypotension
situation here is systemic hypoperfusion (the body is
shunting blood to more important areas while trying      Delayed filling of the portal
not to die). The question will usually describe someone  vein (normally the PV is
in shock (low blood pressure), on pressers in the ICU    filled by 70 seconds - if it
(makes you assume they had a low blood pressure), had    isn't filled - that is a clue)
a recent trauma with blood loss, had a recent MI, or
had a m ajor surgery. There is also a sneaky scenario    Narrow SMA and Intramural
were the patient has overdosed on amphetamines or        Branches
cocaine and is having mesenteric vasospasm (this is
also describes in a digitalis overdose). The involved    Involved thickened bowel
bowel segments are often thickened. Enhancem ent is      segments favor watershed
variable.                                                areas (splenic flexure and
                                                         sigmoid-rectal junction), and
                                                         the small bowel (ileum,
                                                         jejunum)

 Strangulation: This is almost always secondary to a closed loop obstruction. This is
  basically a mixed arterial and venous picture, with congested dilated bowel.
  Hemorrhage may be seen in the bowel wall. The lumen is often fluid-filled.

Trivia: M esenteric Ischemia has a described association with SMA Aneurysm.

326
                     M esenteric Ischem ia

         Arterial    Venous                       Strangulation            N on -O cclu sive
Thin Bowel Wall
(thick after         Thick (> 3mm)                Thick (> 3mm)        Thick (> 3mm)
reperfusion)         Bowel Wall                   Bowel Wall           Bowel Wall
Diminished
Enhancement          Variable                     Variable             Variable
                     Moderate Dilation
Bowel Not Dilated    Hazv with Ascites            Severe Dilation (and
                                                                                 Bowel Not Dilated
Mesentery Not Hazy
(until it infarcts)                               fluid filled)
                                                  Hazv with Ascites,

                                                                                 Mesentery Not Hazy
                                                  and "whirl sign" with

                                                                                 (until it infarcts)
                                                  closed loop.

                                                            Griffith's Point

                                                            . SMA-IMA - Watershed
                                                             "Most Common Location for

                                                              Ischemia"

                     Sudeck's Point

                      IMA - Iliac Watershed
                      Highly Susceptible to Ischemia

This is my general algorithm if I see angry (thick walled) bowel:

                                    Infection
                                   -diffuse or Ti

Colitis / Enteritis                 Inflammatory                       Embolic
                                                                       -Brach points
                     S, -TI                                 Occlusive
                                Ischemic                               Thrombotic
                                                  Arterial             -Closer to ostium

                                                  Venous    Non-Occlusive
                                                            -think hypotension (watershed)
                                                  327
