                                 S E C T IO N 1

                                   A natom y

Aorta: The thoracic aorta is divided anatomically into four regions; the root, the ascending aorta,
the transverse aorta (arch), and the descending aorta. The "root" is defined as the portion of the aorta
extending from the aortic valve annulus to the sino-tubular junction. The diameter of the thoracic
aorta is largest at the aortic root and gradually decreases (average size is 3.6 cm at the root, 2.4 cm in
the distal descending).

D Sinuses o f Valsalva: There are 3 outpouchings (right,

left, posterior) above the annulus that terminate at the                     Isthmus

ST Junction. The right and left coronaries come off the Arch                          Ductus
right and left sinuses. The posterior cusp is sometimes                               Bump

called the "non-coronary cusp."                             Ascending

D Isthmus: The segment of the aorta between the origin      ST Junction

     of the left Subclavian and the ligamentum arteriosum.

D Ductus hump: Just distal to the isthmus is a contour

     bulge along the lesser curvature, which is a normal
     structure (not a pseudoaneurysm).

Aortic Arch Variants: There are 4 common variations:

Normal (75%), Bovine Arch        Normal                     Brachiocephalic
(15%) - common origin of
brachiocephalic artery and left
common carotid artery, left
common carotid coming off
the brachiocephalic proper
(10%), and in 5% of people
the left vertebral artery
originates separately from the
arch. Branching with regards
to right arch, left arch and
double arch was discussed in
more detail in the cardiac
chapter.

Pulmonary Sling: Aberrant Left pulmonary artery coming off the
right pulmonary artery.

-Unique as the only anomaly to create indentations in the posterior
trachea and anterior esophagus.

-Unique as the only anomaly that can cause stridor in a patient with
a normal left sided arch.

                                         302
Adamkiewicz:                                              Hairpin Turn'

The thoracic aorta puts off multiple
important feeders including the great
anterior medullary artery (Artery of
Adamkiewicz) which serves as a dominate
feeder of the spinal cord.

This thing usually comes off on the left side
(70%) between T9-T12.

 "Beware of the Hairpin Turn"
 -The classic angiographic appearance of the artery is
 the "hairpin turn" as its anastomosis with the anterior
 spinal artery.

Mesenteric Branches:

Inferior      SMA                                         The anatomy of the SMA
                                                          and IMA is high yield,
Pancreatico­               IMA                            and can be shown on a
                                                          MIP coronal CT, or
duodenal ·.                                               Angiogram. I think that
                                                          knowing the inferior
Middle                                                    pancreaticoduodenal
Colic                                                     comes off the SMA first,
                                                          and that the left colic
  Right-                                                  (from IMA) to the middle
  Colic                                                   colic (from SMA) make
                                                          up the Arc of Riolan are
          Ileo- Colic             Sigmoid                 probably the highest yield
          Appendicular A.         Branches                facts.
                                Superior
                                Rectal A

C eliac Branches: - Remember this can be shown with an angiogram, CTA, or MRA.

                                303
                Testab le Definitions                                        W hy Give a S hit ?

"Typical"       The artery that gives rise to the          If the anatomy is not "typical" it can change
Celiac Axis     common hepatic artery, left gastric,       the way partial hepatectomy is done for
                and splenic artery                         transplant / tumor resection.

Common          The artery that gives rise to the right    Additionally, accessory or replaced RHAs
Hepatic Artery  or left hepatic artery and the GDA         from the SMA tend to course through Calot's
(CHA)                                                      triangle (triangle surgeons use to identify the
                                                           cystic artery) and have a shorter cystic artery
" Replaced"     Hepatic Artery that arises from an         - making them vulnerable to injury during
Hepatic Artery  ectopic location (not the Celiac)          laparoscopic cholecystectomy.

"Accessory"     Hepatic Artery that is duplicated -        Lastly, the most critical reason of all:
Hepatic Artery  with one vessel from the celiac and        It could be on the test.
                another vessel from an ectopic
                location.

"T y p ic a l" Celiac Branches:

The classic branches of the celiac axis are the
common hepatic, left gastric, and the splenic
arteries.

The "common" hepatic artery becomes the
"proper" hepatic artery after the GDA.

This "traditional anatomy" is actually only seen in
60 % of people.

Most Common Variations:

"Replaced" Right Hepatic Artery (~ 10%): The right hepatic artery arises from an ectopic location --
most commonly the SMA. The proper right hepatic artery is anterior to the right portal vein,
whereas the replaced right hepatic artery is posterior to the main portal vein. This positioning of the
replaced right increases the risk of injury in pancreatic surgeries.

"Accessory" Left Hepatic Artery (~ 10%): There
is a duplicated left hepatic artery, with one arising
normally from the celiac and the other most
commonly from the left gastric artery.

"Replaced" Left Hepatic Artery (~ 7%): The left
hepatic artery arises from an ectopic location - most
commonly from the left gastric artery.

V e s s e l T h ro u g h S t r a it S ig n : If you see a  Vessel in the Ligamentum Venous
vessel in the fissure of the ligamentum venosum            (probably replaced LEFT hepatic)
(where there is not normally a vessel), it's probably
an accessory or replaced left hepatic artery
arising from the left gastric artery.

                                                      304
Iliac Anatomy:                                                    Anterior Division      Posterior Division
                                                                Umbihcal                Iliolumbar
The branches of the internal iliac are high yield, with the     Superior Vesicular      Lateral Sacral
most likely question being "which branches are from the         (off umbilical)
posterior or anterior divisions?" A useful mnemonic is          Inferior Vesicular      Superior Gluteal
 "1 Love Sex, "Illiolumbar, Lateral Sacral, Superior            Uterine                 Inferior Gluteal ***
 Gluteal, for the posterior division.                           (if you have a uterus)  sometimes

My trick for remembering that the mnemonic is for               Middle Rectal
posterior and not anterior is to think of that super religious  Internal Pudendal
girl I knew in college -- I Like Sex in the butt / posterior.   Inferior Gluteal
                                                                Obturator
I don't think they will actually show a picture, it's way
more likely to be a written question.

Trivia: The ovarian
arteries arise from the
anterior-medial aorta
80-90% of time. Rarely
it can have a variant
origin from the internal
iliac.

It does have anastomotic
connections with the
uterine artery.

              Ovarian
              Artery
                (Off the Aorta)

                0

         Uterine Artery
         (Off the Iliac)

Persistent Sciatic Artery:
An anatomic variant, which is a continuation of the
internal iliac. It passes posterior to the femur in the
thigh and then will anastomose with the distal
vasculature. Complications worth knowing include
aneurysm formation and early atherosclerosis in the
vessel. The classic vascular surgery boards question is
"external iliac is acutely occluded, but there is still a
strong pulse in thefo o t" , the answer is the patient has
a persistent sciatic.

                                                       305
                   Mesenteric Arterial Cellaterai Pathways:

Celiac to SMA: The conventional collateral pathway is:

Celiac ^   Common ^ ^       GDA
              Hepatic
                                                                  Superior
                                                                  Pancreatic
                                                                  Duodenal

                    Superior ^           p Inferior
                    Pancreatic               Pancreatic
                    Duodenal                 Duodenal

Arc of Buhler: This is a variant anatomy (seen in like 4% of
people), that represents a collateral pathway from the celiac to
the SMA. The arch is independent of the GDA and inferior
pancreatic arteries.

This rare collateral can have an even more rare aneurysm, which
occurs in association with stenosis of the celiac axis.

SMA to IMA: (critical for chronic mesenteric ischemia -
and access for treating type 2 endo-leaks).

Arc of Riolan (meandering mesenteric artery). Classically                     MOD
a connection between the middle colic of the SMA and
the left colic of the IMA - although not always present.

SMA       M iddle   Arc of               Left   IMA MC                        MOD
          Colic     Riolan               Colic

Marginal A rtery of Drummond - This is another SMA to          MC = Middle Colic, LC = Left Colic
IMA connection - this one is "always" present. The             AOR = Arc of Riolan
anastomosis of the terminal branches of the ileocolic, right   MOD = Marginal Artery of Drummond
& middle colic arteries of the SMA, and of the left colic and
sigmoid branches of the IMA, form a continuous arterial
circle or arcade along the inner border of the colon.

IMA to Internal Iliac:                          Inferior Rectal
The conventional collateral pathway is:
                                                      I

IMA                    Internal Iliac

Superior  Inferior     Anterior                  Internal
Rectal    Rectal       Division                  Pudendal

                        Internal                          Anterior
                        Pudendal                          Division ^

                                                            (Internal Iliac)

                                                306
W inslow P ath w ay - This is a collateral pathway that is seen in the setting o f aorto-iliac
occlusive disease. The pathway apparently can be inadvertently cut during transverse
abdominal surgery. Winslow Pathway:

Subclavian  Internal  Superior                                Inferior    External Iliac
Arteries    Thoracic  Epigastric                              Epigastric  Arteries
                      Arteries                                Arteries

Corona M o rtis /"Crown of Death" - Classically               Variant Anastomosis between the
described as a vascular connection between the obturator and  Internal Iliac (Obturator
external iliac. Some authors describe additional anastomotic  Artery) and the External Iliac
pathways, but you should basically think of it as any vessel  that can cause massive bleeding
coursing over the superior pubic rim, regardless of the       after anterior pelvis ring fracture.
anastomotic connection.

                                  Common
                                  Iliac --i

                        The "crown of death" is significant because it
                        can (a) be injured in pelvic trauma or
                         (b) be injured during surgery - and is
                         notoriously difficult to ligate.

                         Some authors report that it causes 6-8% of
                        deaths in pelvic trauma.

                         The last piece of trivia is that it could
                        hypothetically cause a type 2 endoleak.

                      307
                      Upper Extremity Anatomy:

The scalene muscles make a triangle in the neck. If you have ever had the pleasure of reading a
brachial plexus MRl finding this anatomy in a sagittal plane is the best place to start (in my
opinion). The relationship to notice (because it's testable) is that the subclavian vein runs anterior to
the triangle, and the subclavian artery runs in the triangle (with the brachial plexus).

Trivia to Remember: The subclavian artery runs posterior to the subclavian vein.

                 Brachial Plexus                           Transverse Process C2-C3
 Anterior Scalene Muscle                                      Middle Scalene Muscle
Subclavian VEIN                                                     First Rib

Phrenic Nerve

                                                           Subclavian ARTERY

The subclavian artery has several major branches: the vertebral, the internal thoracic, the
thyrocervical trunk, the costocervical trunk, and the dorsal scapular.

As the subclavian artery progresses down the arm,
anatomists decided to change it's name a few times. This
name changing makes for great multiple choice fodder.

The highest yield thing you can know with regard to upper                                    Subclavian A.
extremity vascular anatomy is when stuff becomes stuff:

· Axillary Artery: Begins at the first rib                                    Axillary A.
· Brachial Artery: Begins at the lower border of the

  teres major (major NOT minor!)
· Brachial Artery: Bifiircates to the ulnar and radial

                                                                              Brachial A.

                                  308
 How To Tell The Ulnar From The Radial Artery On Angiogram Or CTA:
Around the radial head the brachial artery splits into the radial and ulnar arteries. I have
three tricks for telling the radial from the ulnar artery apart (in case it's not obvious).
1. The ulnar artery is usually bigger.
2. The ulnar artery usually gives off the common interosseous
3. The ulnar artery supplies the superficial palmar arch (usually), and therefore the

     radial supplies the deep arch (usually).

Upper Extrem ity Normal Variants:

D Anterior Interosseous Branch (Median Artery) persists and supplies the deep palmar arch
     of the hand.

D "High Origin of the Radial Artery" - Radial artery comes off either the axillary or
     high brachial artery (remember it normally comes off at the level o f the radial head).

Deep  High Origin of the Radial Artery
Arch

      309
                      lower Extremity Anatomy:

Every medical student knows the aorta bifurcates into the right and left common iliac
arteries, which subsequently bifurcate into the external and internal iliac arteries. The
nomenclature pearl for the external iliac is that it becom es the com m on fem oral once it
gives off the inferior epigastric (at the inguinal ligament).

                                                                  Inferior Epigastric

Aorta  Common Iliac External Iliac  Common
                                    Femoral

Once the inferior epigastric comes off (level o f the inguinal ligament) you are dealing with
the common femoral artery (CFA). The CFA divides into the deep femoral (profiinda) and
superficial femoral. The deep femoral courses lateral and posterior. The superficial femoral
passes anterior and m edial into the flexor muscle com partm ent (A DD uctor / H unter's Canal).
At the point the vessel emerges from the canal it is then the popliteal artery. At the level o f
the distal border o f the popliteus muscle the popliteal artery divides into the anterior tibialis
(the first branch) and the tibioperoneal trunk. The anterior tibialis courses anterior and
lateral, then it transverses the interosseous membrane, running down the front o f the anterior
tibia and terminating as the dorsalis pedis. The tibioperoneal trunk bifurcates into the
posterior tibialis and fibular (peroneal) arteries. A com m on quiz is "w hat is the m ost medial
artery in the leg?" , with the answer being the posterior tibial (felt at the medial malleolus).
Notice how lateral the AT is - you can imagine it running across the interosseous membrane,
just like it's suppose to.

                                    Anterior Tibialis  Interosseous
                                                       Membrane

                                                                            Anterior Tibialis

Posterior Tibialis

       Peroneal

          Medial                                                  Peroneal
          Malleolus
                                    310
       Dorsalis Pedis
                   Mesenteric Venous Collaterals:

G astric V arices: As described in more detail in the GI chapter, portal hypertension
shunts blood away from the liver and into the systemic venous system. Spontaneous portal-
systemic collaterals develop to decompress the system. The thing to know is that most
gastric varices are formed by the left gastric (coronary v e in ). That is the one they
always show big and dilated on an angiogram. Isolated gastric varices are secondary to
splenic vein thrombosis. Gastric Varices (80-85%) drain into the inferior phrenic and then
into the left renal vein, forming a gastro-renal shunt.

                                                            D Left Gastric

                                                                                                 (Coronary) = Cardia

                                                            D Posterior and Short

                                                                                                 Gastric = Fundus

Splenorenal Shunt: Another feature o f portal hypertension, this is an abnormal
collateral between the splenic vein and renal vein. This is actually a desirable shunt because
it is not associated with GI bleeding. However, enlarged shunts are associated with
hepatic encephalopathy (discussed in greater detail in the BRTO section o f the IR chapter).
A common way to show this is an enlarged left renal vein and dilatation o f the inferior vena
cava at the level of the left renal vein.

                                                        311
Caval Variants

Left Sided S V C -T h e most common                 Left Sided SVC - When you see that
congenital venous anomaly in the chest. In a few    son of a bitch right there, that thing
rare cases these can actually result in a right to  can only be one of two things - a
left shunt. They are only seen in isolation in 10%  lymph node or a duplicated SVC.
o f cases (the other 90% it's "duplicated"). The
location and appearance is a total A unt M innie.

Trivia to know:

· Most commonly associated CHD is the ASD

· Associated with an unroofed coronary sinus

· Nearly always (92% o f the time) it drains into
  the coronary sinus

D uplicated SVC - The above discussed "Left Sided SVC" almost never occurs in
isolation. Instead, there is almost always a "norm al" right sided SVC, in addition to the left
sided SVC. It is in this case (which is the m ajority o f cases o f left sided SVC) that the
terminology "duphcated SVC" is used. It is so common that people will use the terms
duplicated and left sided interchangeably. But, technically to be duplicated you need a right
sided and left sided SVC (even if the right one is a little small - which is often the case in the
setting o f a left SVC).

Duplicated IVC - There are two main
points worth knowing about this: (1) that the
appearance is an Aunt M innie, and (2) it's
associated with Renal stuff. Renal
associations include horseshoe and crossed
fused ectopic kidneys.

Also these dudes often have circumaortic renal
collars (see below).

                                                                   Duplicated IVC (IVCs are the bread,
                                                                   Aorta is the cheese or peanut butter.,
                                                                   or bacon)

                                                        312
C ircu m ao rtic Venous C o lla r - Very common variant with an additional left renal
vein that passes posterior to the aorta. It only matters in two situations (a) renal transplant,
(b) IVC filter placement. The classic question is that the anterior limb is superior, and the
posterior limb is inferior.

Azygos C o n tin u atio n - This is also know n as absence o f the hepatic segm ent o f the
IVC. In this case, the hepatic veins drain directly into the right atrium. O ften the IVC is
duplicated in these patients, with the left IVC terminating in the left renal vein , which then
crosses over to join the right IVC.
The first thing you should think when I say azygous continuation is polysplenia (reversed
IVC/Aorta is more com m only associated w ith asplenia).

         Azygos Continuation - No IVC in the Liver, Dilated Azygos in the Chest

                                                        313
