                                   S E C T IO N 7:

                    Va scu litis

Basically all vasculitides look the same, with wall thickening, occlusions, dilations, and
aneurysm formation. The trick to telling them apart is the age o f the patient, the gender /
race, and the vessels affected. Classically, they are broken up into large vessel, medium
vessel, small vessel ANCA +, and small vessel ANCA negative.

Large:

Takayasu - "The pulseless disease." This vasculitis loves young Asian girls (usually
15-30 years old). If they mention the w ord "A sian," this is likely to be the answer. Also, if
they show you a vasculitis involving the aorta this is likely the answer. In the acute phase
there will be both wall thickening and wall enhancement. There can be occlusion o f the
major aortic branches, or dilation o f the aorta and its branches. The aortic valve is often
involved (can cause stenosis or AI). In the late phase there is classically diffuse narrowing
distally. The pulmonary arteries are commonly involved, with the typical appearance of
peripheral pruning.
If anyone was a big enough jerk to ask, there are 5 types with variable involvement o f the
aorta and its branches. W hich type is w hich is beyond the scope o f the exam, ju st know type
3 is m ost com mon - involves arch and abdom inal aorta.

                         Takayasu - Wall Thickening Involving the Aorta

                                                        335
Giant Cell (GCA) - The most common primary system vasculitis. This vasculitis loves old men
(usually 70-80)** although there are afew papers that will say this is slightly more common in
women. This vasculitis involves the aorta and its major branches particularly those of the external
carotid (temporal artery). This can be shown in two ways: (1) an ultrasound of the temporal artery,
demonstrating wall thickening, or (2) CTA / MRA or even angiogram of the armpit area (Subclavian/
Axillary/ Brachial), demonstrating wall thickening, occlusions, dilations, and aneurysm. Think
about it as the part of the body that would be compressed by crutches (old men need crutches).

Trivia worth knowing:

 ESR and CRP are markedly elevated,
 Disease responds to steroids.
 "Gold Standard" for diagnosis is temporal artery biopsy (although it's often negative).
 Clinical connection between GCA and polvmvalgia rheumatica. (they might be different phases of the

  same disease). History might be "morning stiffness in shoulders and hips."

G am esm anship
Location Strategy

Central =
Think Takayasu
Mid-Clavicle =
Think Thoracic Syndrome
Armpit =
Think Giant Cell

                              Takayasu

                     Cogan Syndrome - Total Zebra probably not even worth mentioning. It is a
                       large vessel vasculitis that targets children and young adults. It likes the eyes and
                       ears causing optic neuritis, uveitis, and audiovestibular symptoms resembling
                       Menieres. They can also get aortitis, and those that do have a worse prognosis.

Basically, kid with eye and ear symptoms + or - aortitis.

                         336
Medium                                                            Micro-aneurysms and
                                                                  wedge shaped infarcts
PAN (Polyarteritis Nodosa) - This is one of two
vasculitides {the other being Buergers) that is more common in        Clinical Trivia:
men. PAN is more common in a MAN. This can affect a lot            "Fever for 5 Days"
of places with the big 3 being Renal (90%), Cardiac (70%), and    Strawberry Tongue
GI (50-70%). Typically we are talking about microaneurysm         Neck Lymph Nodes
formation, primarily at branch points, followed by infarction. I  Rash of Palms of Hands
would expect this to be shown either as a CTA or angiogram of     / Soles of Feet
the Icidneys with microaneurysms, or a kidney with areas of       Sore Throat Diarrhea
infarct (multiple wedge siiaped areas).

Trivia to know is the association with Hep B.

Also, as a point of trivia the micro-aneurysm formation in the
kidney can also be seen in patients who abuse Crystal Mcth
(sometimes called a "speed kidney").

Kawasaki Disease - Probably the most common vasculitis
in children (HSP also common). Think about this as a cause of
coronaiy vessel aneurysm. A calcified coronary artery aneurysm
shown on CXR is a very rare aunt Minnie.

-Coronary Artery Aneurysms > 8mm are "Giant" and prone to
badness including MI

-Coronary Artery Aneuiysms < 8mm may regress

Small Vessel Disease (ANCA +)                             As I've previously mentioned, you
                                                          aren't supposed to say "Wegener" -
Wegeners - 1think about upper respiratory tract           because apparently he ate his boogers,
(sinuses), lower respiratory tract (lungs), and kidneys.  and was a Nazi. He also could not
cANCA is (+) 90% of the time. Ways this is shown          (more likely deliberately chose not to)
are the nasal perforation (like a cocaine addict) and     correctly pronounce the word "Gyro."
the cavitary lung lesions.                                No matter how many times people
                                                          corrected him. Dude- it is "YEE-roh."
Churg Strauss - This is a necrotizing pulmonary
vasculitis which is in the spectrum of Eosinophilic       Wegener was truly one of histories
lung disease. They always have asthma and                 greatest assholes.
eosinophilia. Transient peripheral lung
consolidation or ground glass regions is the most         So we don't say his name. Instead say
frequent feature. Cavitation is rare (this should make    "Granulomatosis with polyangiitis."
you think Wegeners instead). They are pANCA (+)
75% if the time.                                          You know who else was a Nazi??
                                                          Henry Ford. No one ever talks about
Microscopic Polyangiitis - Affects the                    that... Google it - he wrote a book
kidneys and lungs. Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage is        called " TTze International Jew, the
seen in about 1/3 of the cases. It is pANCA (+) 80%       World's Foremost Problem, " and got
of the time.                                              an awardfrom Hitler

337
Small Vessel Disease UNCA -l

HSP (Henoch-Schonlein Purpura) - The most common vasculitis in children
(usually age 4-11). Although it is a systemic disease, GI symptoms are m ost common
(painful bloody diarrhea). It is a common lead point for intussusception. They could show
this two classic ways: (1) ultrasound with a doughnut sign for intussusception, or (2) as a
ultrasound o f the scrotum showing massive skin edema. A less likely (but also possible)
way to show this case would be multi-focal bowel wall thickening, or a plain film with
thumbprinting.
B eh cets - Classic history is mouth ulcers and genital ulcers in someone with Turkish
descent. It can cause thickening o f the aorta, but for the purpose o f multiple choice test I
expect the question will be pulmonary artery aneurysm.
B uergers - This vasculitis is strongly associated with smokers. It affects both small and
medium vessels in the arms and legs (more com m on in legs). A lthough it is more com monly
seen in the legs, it is m ore com m only tested with a hand angiogram. The characteristic
features are extensive arterial occlusive disease with the development of corkscrew collateral
vessels. It usually affects more than one limb. Buzzword = Auto-amputation.

                     Gamesm anship Hand Angiograms:

  If they are showing you a hand angiogram, it's going to be either B uerger's or H ypothenar
  Hammer Syndrome (HHS).
  My strategy centers around the ulnar artery.
  (1) Ulnar artery involved = HHS. The most helpful finding is a pseudo-aneurysm o ff the

       ulnar artery - this is a slam dunk for HHS.
  (2) Ulnar artery looks ok - then look at the fingers - if they are out, go with Buergers. It

        sure would be nice to see some "corkscrew collaterals" - to make it a sure thing.
  Be careful, because the fingers can be out with HHS as well (distal emboli), but the ulnar
  artery should be fucked. Look at that ulnar artery first.

                                                        338
Takayasu                   Large Vessel

                Young Asian Female - thickened aneurysmal aorta

Giant Cell      Old Person with involvement o f the "crutches" / armpit region
                (Subclavian, axillary, brachial).

Cogan Syndrome  Kid with eye and ear symptoms + Aortitis

PAN             Medium Vessel
Kawasaki
Wegeners        PAN is more com mon in a MAN (M > F). Renal M icroaneurysm
                (similar to speed kidney). Associated with Hep B.

                Coronary Artery Aneurysm

                Small ^\^|(A N C A +)                     4

                Nasal Septum Erosions, Cavitary Lung Lesions

Churg Strauss   Transient peripheral lung consolidations.

Microscopic Polyangiitis Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage

                                 Small Vm el(ANCA-)

HSP             Kids. Intussusception. Massive scrotal edema.

Behcets         Pulmonary artery aneurysm

Buergers        Male smoker. Hand angiogram shows finger occlusions.

Infectious Aortitis:

 This is rare in a "normal" healthy person (the aortic intima is highly resistant to infection).

 The major risk factor for aortic infection is atherosclerosis - with the most common mechanism
  described as bacterial seeding o f atherosclerotic plaques.

 Most common bugs = Staph A. and Salmonella

Gamesmanship: If you see gas around a native aorta (one without a prior surgery or stent graft)
think about infection.
Gamesmanship: W hen I say, "Clostridium Septicum Aoritis," you say occult colonic
malignancy.

                339
