                                   S E C T IO N 6:

                                  E xtrem ity

May T h u rn e r-A syndrome resulting in DVT of the left common iliac vein. The pathology is
compression of the left common iliac vein by the right common iliac artery. Treatment is
thrombolysis and stenting. I f they show you a swollen left leg, this is probably the answer. PE and
acute limb ischemia from severe venous obstruction (Phlegmasia cerulea dolens) are two described
complications.

Right         Left Common Iliac Vein
Common
Iliac Artery

                                                    --I

Popliteal Aneurysm - This is the most common peripheral arterial aneurysm (2"^ most
common overall, to the aorta). The main issue with these things is distal thromboembolism, which
can be limb threatening. There is a strong and frequently tested association with AAA.

 30-50% o fpatients with popliteal aneury'sms have a AAA
 10% o fpatients with AAA have popliteal aneurysms
 50-70% o fpopliteal aneiuysms are bilateral

The most dreaded complication of a popliteal artery aneurysm is an acute limb from thrombosis
and distal embolization of thrombus pooling in the aneurysm.

Popliteal Entrapment - Symptomatic compression or occlusion of the popliteal artery due to
the developmental relationship with the medial head of the gastrocnemius (less commonly the
pophteus). Medial deviation of the popliteal artery is supposedly diagnostic. This usually occurs in
young men (<30). These patients may have normal pulses that decrease with plantarflexion or
dorsiflexion o f thefoot. They will show you either a MRA or conventional angiogram in rest and then
stress (dorsi / plantar flexion) to show the artery occluding.

Cystic Adventitial                           MIP CTA     Fluid
                                             showing     sensitive MR
Disease - This uncommon                      Vascular    showing a
disorder classically affects the             Narrowing   bunch of
popliteal artery, of young men.                          cysts around
Basically you have one or         332                    the vessel,
multiple mucoid-filled cysts                             extrinsically
developing in the outer media                            narrowing it
and adventitia. As the cysts
grow, they compress the artery.
Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) - Blanket term used to refer to PE and DVT (PE and
DVT are both forms of VTE).
Trivia: You are more likely to develop VTE if you are paraplegic vs tetraplegic.
Having said that, VTE is more likely in "motor complete" AIS A patients (those that have lost motor
and sensory) vs motor incomplete AIS B,C,D (those with some residual sensory or motor fiinction) -
which is more intuitive. Quad being worse than tetra for VTE risk makes zero sense (and therefore
makes a good trivia question).

Peripheral Vascular Malformations - About 40% of vascular malformations involve the
extremities (the other 40% are head and neck, and 20% is thorax). Different than hemangiomas,
vascular malformations generally increase proportionally as the child grows. This dude Jackson
classified vascular malformation as either low flow or high flow. Low flow would include venous,
lymphatic, capillary, and mixes of the like. High flow has an arterial component. Treatment is
basically determined by high or low flow.

Kiippel-Trenaunay Syndrome (KTS) - This is often combined with Parkes-Weber which
is a true high flow AV malformation. KTS has a triad of port wine nevi, bony or soft tissue
hypertrophy (localized gigantism), and a venous malformation. A persistent sciatic vein is often
associated. The marginal vein of Servelle (some superficial vein in the lateral calf and thigh) is
pathognomonic (it's basically a great saphenous on the wrong side).
Additional trivia: 20% have GI involvement and can bleed, if the system is big enough it can eat your
platelets (Kasabach Merritt). Basically, if you see a MRA/MRV of the leg with a bunch of
superficial vessels (and no deep drainage) you should think about this thing.
 KTS = Low Flow (venous)
 Parkes Weber = High Flow (arterial)
 "Klippel Trenaunay Weber" = Something people say when they (a) don't know what they are

  talking about, or (b) don't know what kind of malformation it is and want to use a blanket term.

ABIs - So basic familiarity with the so called "Ankle to Brachial Index" can occasionally come in
handy, with regard to peripheral arterial disease. This is basically a ratio of systolic pressure in the
leg over systolic blood pressure in the arm. Diabetics can sometimes have unreliable numbers
(usually high), because dense vascular calcifications won't let the vessels compress.
Opinions vary on what the various cut off numbers mean. Most people will agree that you can safely
deploy the phrase "peripheral arterial disease" if the resting ABI is less than 0.90
You can also deploy the following generalizations: 0.5-0.3 = claudication, < 0.3 = rest pain
**More on this in the IR chapter

                                                        333
Intimal Hyperplasia - "The bane of endovascular intervention." This is not a true disease but
a response to blood vessel wall damage. Basically this is an exuberant healing response that leads
to intimal thickening which can lead to stenosis. You hear it talked about the most in IR after they
have revascularized a limb. Re-Stenosis that occurs 3-12 months after angioplasty is probably from
intimal hyperplasia. It's sneaky to treat and often resists balloon dilation and/or reoccurs.

If you put a bare stent in place it may
grow through the cracks and happen
anyway. If you put a covered stent
in, it may still occur at the edges of
the stent.

The take home point is that it's a pain
in the ass, and if they show an
angiogram with a stent in place, that
now appears to be losing flow, this is
probably the answer.

                                                   Intimal Hyperplasia
                                                   -dark stuff growing along the inside of the stent walls

Hypothenar Ham mer - Caused by blunt trauma (history of working with a jack-hammer) to
the ulnar artery and superficial palmar arch. The impact occurs against the hook of the hamate.
Arterial wall damage leads to aneurysm formation with or without thrombosis of the vessel. Emboli
may form, causing distal obstruction of digits (this can cause confusion with the main DDx Buergers).
Look for corkscrew configuration of the superficial palmar arch, occlusion of the ulnar artery,
or pseudoaneurysm of the ulnar artery.

Normal  Ulnar Artery      Ulnar Artery
        Corkscrew     Pseudo-aneurysm

        334
