                  S E C T IO N 5:

M i s c , S o ON A N D S o F o r t h , E t c .. E t c .

C olonic A n giod ysplasia - This is the second most common cause of colonic arterial
bleeding (diverticulosis being number one). This is primarily right sided with angiography
demonstrating a cluster of small arteries during the arterial phase (along the antimesenteric border of
the colon), with early opacification o f dilated draining veins that persists late into the venous phase.

There is an
association with
aortic stenosis
which carries
the eponym
Heyde
Syndrome
(which instantly
makes it high
yield for multiple
choice).

Osier Weber Rendu (Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia):

This is an AD multi-system disorder characterized by multiple AVMs.  On step  1 they used to show
you the tongue / mouth with the telangiectasis and a
history of recurrent bloody nose. Now, they will
likely show multiple hepatic AVMs or multiple
pulmonary AVMs. Extensive shunting in the liver
can actually cause biliary necrosis and bile leak.
They can have high output cardiac failure.

**Most diefrom stroke or brain abscess.

  Gamesmanship "Next Step " - If the
 syndrome is suspected, these guys need CT of the Lung & Liver (with contrast), plus a Brain
MR/MRA

Nutcracker Syndrome - Usually a healthy (man hating) female 30s-40s. The left renal vein gets
smashed as it slides under the SMA, with resulting abdominal pain (left flank) and hematuria. The left
renal vein gets smashed a lot, but it's not a syndrome without symptoms. Since the left gonadal vein
drains into the left renal vein, it can also cause left testicle pain ("nut cracker") in men, and LLQ pain in
women. Nutcracker Diagnostic Gold Standard = Retrograde venography with renal / caval pressure
measurements

Nutcracker:                                                          Aorta    Left RV
Oppressive
patriarchal renal vein,                                                       Nutcracker
Smashed by SMA.
Note the prominent                                                             Duodenum
venous collateral
(arrow)                                                                       *SMA
                                                                               Syndrome

                                         328
Renal Artery Stenosis (RAS) - Narrowing of the                    Ultrasound Findings of RAS
renal artery most commonly occurs secondary to
atherosclerosis (75%). This chronic process will eventually        Peak SystoHc Velocity Above
lead to hypertension - typically triggering a work up. Acute        180 cm/s
RAS will not cause hypertension.
                                                                   Increased Renal Aorta Ratio
Atherosclerotic narrowing is usually near the ostium, and can       (RAR) of peak systolic
be stented (although medical therapy is preferred first line per    velocities - most people use
CORAL trial).                                                       >3.5 (some use 3.0)

FMD is the second most common cause and typically has a beaded appearance sparing the ostium
(should not be stented). Additional more rare causes include PAN, Takayasu, NF-1, and Radiation.

FMD (Fibromuscular Dysplasia) - A non-atherosclcrotic vascular disease, primarily
affecting the renal arteries of young white women. The classic look is stricturing and beading (loss
commonly tortuosity, aneurysms, and dissections).

Things to Know:
 Renovascular HTN in Young Women = FMD
 Renal arteries are the most commonly involved (carotid #2, vertebral #3)
 Lower extremity FMD: Most Commonly External Iliac - usually bilateral and multifocal
 There are 3 histological types, but just remember medial is the most common (95%)
 Classification is now angiographic -- focal vs multi-focal (usually mid-distal artery)
 They are predisposed to spontaneous dissection
 Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection (SCAD) is associated with FMD.
 Buzzword = String of Beads
 Treatment = Discussed in the IR chapter - if pressure gradient you sometimes angioplasty (don't stent).

FMD Workup:                     ^  Positive CTA                   Do Both A and B
                             ^     findings or Negative
Classic Symptoms:  CTA             with high pre-test             (A) Old school angiogram
HTN in a middle _  Renals          probability                    with pressure
aged white woman                                                  measurements.
                                   Negative CTA
                                   findings with low              (B) CTA of all vessels-
                                   pre-test probability           head to pelvis to screen for
                                                                  FMD and occult aneurysms
                                       \ Meh- probably

                                               something else

NF 1 -- Favors the ostium  Atherosclerosis --                     FMD --
                           Favors the proximal artery             Favors the distal artery

                                        329
RCC-

This can be shown on an angiogram.

The classic look is "bizarre
vascularity. "

SAM (S egm ental A rte ria l M ediolysis) - Targets                       WTF is a
the splanchnic arteries in the elderly, and the coronaries in     "S p la n c h n ic" A rtery ?
young adults. Not a true vasculitis, with no significant
inflammation. It's com plicated but essentially the m edia o f  Typically the splanchnic
the vessel turns to crap, and you get a bunch o f aneurysms.    circulation o f the GI tract
The aneurysms are often multiple. The w ay this is shown is     refers to the Celiac,
multiple abdominal splanchnic artery saccular aneurysms,        SMA, and IMA.
dissections, and occlusion - this is the disease hallmark.
Can also he shown as spontaneous intra-abdominal
hemorrhage.

P elvic C ongestion Syndrom e - This is a controversial entity, sometimes grouped
in the fibromyalgia spectrum. Patients often have "chronic abdominal pain."

The classic demographic is a depressed, multiparous, pre-menopausal women with chronic
pelvic pain - often seen wearing gaudy (although inexpensive) jewelry and consuming large
amounts o f Sunkist orange soda. She is truly miserable. The only one who is more
miserable is her husband. He is a man o f true regret.

Venous obstruction at the left renal vein (nutcracker compression) or incompetent ovarian
vein valves leads to multiple dilated parauterine veins. This very "real" diagnosis can be
treated by your local Interventional Radiologist via ovarian vein embolization.

                                    330
T e s tic u la r V a ric o c e le - Abnormal dilation o f veins in the pampiniform plexus. Most
cases are idiopathic and m ost (98% ) are found on the left side (left vein is longer, and
drains into renal vein at right angle). They can also occur on the left, secondary to the
above mentioned "nutcracker syndrome." They can cause infertility. "Non-
decom pressible" is a buzzw ord for badness. Some sources state that neoplasm is actually the
most likely cause o f non-decompressible varicocele in men over 40 years o f age; (left renal
malignancy invading the renal vein). Right-sided varicocele can be a sign o f malignancy as
well. W hen it's new, and on the right side (in an adult), you should raise concern for a pelvic
or abdominal malignancy. New right-sided varicocele in an adult should make you think
renal cell carcinoma, retroperitoneal fibrosis, or adhesions.

                                            Non-Decompressible = Bad

                                                       Right = Bad

                                                         Left = Ok

                                            Bilateral = Ok (probably)

             Gamesmanship - This diagnosis is the classic next step question o f all next step
             questions because you need to recognize when this com mon diagnosis is
             associated with something bad.

 Isolated Right Varicocele = Get an ABDO CT (or MR, or US)

 Non-decompressible Varicocele = Get an ABDO CT (or MR, or US)

 Bilateral Decompressible Varicoceles = M ight need treatm ent if infertile etc.., but doesn't
  need additional cancer hunting imaging.

 Isolated Left Varicocele = M ight need treatm ent if infertile etc.., but doesn't need
  additional cancer hunting imaging.

U terin e AVM -T h is can present with life threatening massive genital bleeding. Rarely
they can present with CHF. They come in two flavors (a) Congenital, and (b) Acquired.
Acquired occurs after D&C, abortion, or multiple pregnancies. They are most likely to
show this on color Doppler with serpiginous structures in the myometrium with low
resistance high velocity patterns. This one needs embolization. Could look similar to
retained products o f conception (clinical history will be different, and R P O C is usually
centered in the endometrium rather than the myometrium).

                                                        331
