           S E C T IO N 8:

C arotid Do p p ler

        General Vascular Ultrasound Concepts -- Stenosis:

The waveform will go through changes before entering a stenosis, within the stenosis, and after
exiting the stenosis.

    Proximal (Upstream)                   Stenosis              Distal (Downstream)

Waveform can be normal,       Waveform usually has a       Waveform can be Tardus
monophasic decreased          high velocity jet -might     Parvus (prolonged "slow"
peak systolic velocity, or    see aliasing.                systolic acceleration /
loss of diastolic flow.                                    upstroke, and small
                              High velocity = low          systolic peak - "rounding
Diastolic flow is reduced in  pressure (Bernouli's effect  of the peak")
proportion to the severity    mother fuckers)
of the stenosis.

Fuckery with words: It would be correct to say that Tardus Parvus is found downstream from a
stenosis. It would also be correct to say that Tardus Parvus is the result o f upstream stenosis.
See what I did right there? I'm not the only one who can pull some shit like th a t...

                                                        340
                             High Yield Topics of Carotid Doppler
Stenosis: They will show you an elevated velocity (normal is < 125em/s). They may also show
you the ICA/CCA ratio (normal is < 2), or the ICA end diastolic velocity (< 40 cm/s is normal).
Here are the rules:
· Less that 50% stenosis will not alter the peak systolic velocity
· 50-69% Stenosis: ICA PSV 125-230 cm/s , ICA/CCA PSV ratio: 2.0-4.0 , ICA EDV 40-100
· >70 % Stenosis: ICA PSV > 230 cm/s, ICA/CCA PSV ratio: > 4.0 , ICA EDV >100
Proximal Stenosis: OK here is the trick; they will show a tardus parvus waveform. If they show it
unilateral, it is stenosis of the innominate. If it's bilateral then it's aortic stenosis.

Subclavian Steal: This is discussed in greater detail in the cardiac chapter, but this time lets
show it on ultrasound. As a refresher, we are talking about stenosis and/or occlusion of the
proximal subclavian artery with retrograde flow in the ipsilateral vertebral artery.
How will they show it? They are going to show two things: (1) Retrograde flow in the left vertebral,
and (2) a stenosis of the subclavian artery with a high velocity.
How they can get really sneaky? They can
show this thing called "early steal." Steal is
apparently a spectrum, which starts with mid-
systolic deceleration with antegrade late-
systolic velocities. Some people think the
"early steal" waveform looks like a rabbit.

                                                        341
THIS vs THAT: G am esm anship In te rn a l C aro tid vs E x te rn a l C arotid

This really lends itself well to multiple choice test questions. The big point to
understand is that the brain is always on. You need blood flow to the brain all the time,
which means diastohc flow needs to be present all the time, and thus continuous color
flow throughout the cardiac cycle. The external carotid feeds face m uscles... they only
need to be on when you eat and talk.

                Internal Carotid                       External Carotid
Low Resistance                         High Resistance
Low Systolic Velocity                  High Systolic Velocity
Diastolic velocity does not return to  Diastolic velocity approaches zero
baseline                               baseline

Continuous color flow is seen throughout C olor flow is interm ittent during the

the cardiac cycle                      cardiac cycle

Temporal Tap - It is a technique Sonographers use to tell the external carotid from the
internal carotid. You tap the temporal artery on the forehead and look for ripples in the
spectrum. The tech will usually write "TT" on the strip - when they do this.

'^You can also look f o r branches to tell the external carotid V5' the internal.

                                                    342
A o rtic R egurgitation: - Just like aortic stenosis they are going to show you bilateral
CCAs. In this case you are going to get reversal o f diastolic flow.
Brain D eath - Apparently in the ever-feuding monarchies of Europe, ultrasound can be
used for brain death studies. A loss of diastolic flow suggests cessation of cerebral blood
flow.
A neurysm s - In case someone asks you, distal formation o f an aneurysm (such as one in
the skull) cannot be detected by ultrasound, because proximal flow remains normal.
In tra-A o rtic Balloon Pump - Remember these guys are positioned so that the
superior balloon is 2 cm distal to the take o ff o f the left subclavian artery, and the inferior
aspect o f the balloon is ju st above the renals (you d o n 't w ant it occluding im porting stuff
when it inflates). W hen the balloon does inflate it will displace the blood in this segment o f
the aorta - smashing it superior and inferior to the balloon. The balloon will inflate during
early diastole (right after the aortic valve closes) because this is when the maximum amount
o f blood is available for displacement.
What does this do to the internal carotid (ICA) waveform? You are going to see an extra
bump or "augmentation" as the balloon inflates and displaces blood superior.

Which wave would you measure to evaluate the velocity?
The first one (the one that is not assisted).

                                                        343
                              Doppler Evaluation In th e LVAD

Bw ... W TF isa "LVAD"?
The Left Ventricular A ssist Device is a surgically
implanted device that helps pump blood from the left
ventricle to the aorta. It's done in the setting o f severe
heart failure, typically as a bridge to cardiac
transplantation, or in those who are simply too evil to die
o f natural causes (Dick Cheney) and require an
intermediate step while the Darth Vader suit is prepped.

Testable Doppler Changes:
LVAD Waveforms will lose the normal high resistance spiked look o f the ICA, CCA,
Vertebral Arteries. Instead they are mostly flat, w ith a tardus parvus look. The flow is
continuous through systole and diastole. The little spikes you see during systole are from
the small amount o f residual LV function.

                               ICA - LVAD Patient

                             ICA - Normal Patient

                                                      344
Classic Carotid Doppler Cases
                                      - Normal Peak Velocity 60-100cm/s

                                      - Continuous Diastolic Flow

                Lower Peak Velocity
                High Velocity Continuous Diastolic Flow

             " Higher Peak Velocity
             - Less Diastolic Flow

              ICA Occlusion
             -The CCA looks like the ECA. with a high
             resistance waveform, and loss of diastolic
             flow

              Aortic Regurgitation
              -With Classic Reversal of Diastolic Flow
              -Most Likely Shown Bilaterally

                 Aortic Regurgitation
                -This time showing the "Pulsus Bisferiens"
                or double systolic peak. This is also seen in
                hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
                 Aortic Stenosis
                -Characteristic Tardus Parvus waveform
                -This will be shown BILATERAL - to prove it's
                the aortic valve.

                    Dissection - with Flap

                      345
   FROMETHEUS

    L io m h a r t , m.t>.

346
