AC U TE   S E C T IO N 2:

         A o r t ic S y n d r o m e s

There are 3 "acute aortic syndromes" , aortic dissection,           Intima
intramural hematoma, and penetrating ulcer. Lets take these one at  Media
a time and talk about the trivia.                                   Externa

Anatom y Review:
Remember vessels have 3 layers: Intima, Media, and that other
one no one gives a shit about.

                          Penetrating Ulcer:

This is an ulceration o f an atheromatous plaque that has eroded the inner elastic layer o f the
aortic wall. When it reaches the media it produces a hematoma within the media.

     #1 R isk Factor = Atherosclerosis
     (Delicious Burger King and Tasty Cigarettes)
     Classic Scenario: Elderly patient with hypertension and
     atherosclerosis usually involving the descending thoracic
     aorta
     Genesis: Eating Hke a pig and smoking results in
     atherosclerosis. Nasty atherosclerotic plaque erodes
     through the intima. Hematoma forms in the media (intra­
     mural hematoma). With severe disease can eventually
     progress to a pseudo aneurysm (and maybe even rupture)

     Pearl: Look for a gap in the intimal calcifications (that's how you know it's truly
     penetrated through the intima, and not just some funky contour abnormality).
     Classification: All 3 AASs can be classified as type A or B Stanford, based on their
     locations before (type A) or after the takeoff the o f the left subclavian (type B).
     These things often result in a saccular morphology around the arch. In general, sac
     like aneurysm above the diaphragm is related to penetrating ulcer. Sac like aneurysm
     below the diaphragm is gonna be septic ("m ycotic").

         314
Relationship betw een Penetrating U lcer and Dissection:
--Controversial (which usually means it w o n 't be tested) - famous last words

If forced to answer questions on this relationship, I would go with the following:
· Penetrating Ulcers are caused by atherosclerosis (this is a fact)
· Penetrating U lcer can lead to D issection (this is probably true in some cases)
· Atherosclerosis does NOT cause Dissection (which is confusing, may or may not be true,

   and is unlikely to be tested). W hat is true is that the presence o f dense calcified plaque can
   stop extension o f a dissection tear.
· Dissections often occur in the aortic root - where you have the highest flow pressures
· Penetrating Ulcers nearly never occur in the root - as these flow pressures prevent
   atherosclerosis (wash those cheeseburger crumbs away).

Treatm ent of Penetrating Ulcer ?

· "Medical" = Similar to Type B Dissections. If they do get treated (grafted e tc ...) they tend
  to do WORSE than dissections (on average)

· Q: When are they Surgical ?
· A: Hemodynamic instability, Pain, Rupture, Distal Emboli, Rapid Enlargement

                               Dissection

· The most common cause o f acute aortic syndrome (70%)
· Hypertension is the m ain factor - leads to an intimal tear resulting in two lumens
· Marfans, Turners, and other Connective Tissue Diseases increase risk

Classic Testable Scenarios:
  · Pregnancy -- known to increase risk
  · Cocaine Use in a young otherwise healthy person
   · Patient with "Hypertension" and a sub-sternal "Tearing Sensation."

Chicken vs Egg: Some people say that hypertensive pressures kill the vasa vasorum (the
little vessels inside the vessel walls) leading to development o f intramural hematoma which
then ruptures into the intima. This is the "inside out" thinking. Other people think the
hypertensive forces tear the inner layer directly ("outside in" thinking).
H onestly... who gives a shit? N ot even sure w hy I m entioned that.

                                                        315
                             Dissection Continued...

There are two general ways to classify these things:
(1) Time: Acute (< 2 weeks), or Chronic
(2) Location:

  · Stanford A: Account for 75% of dissections and involves the ascending aorta and arch proximal
     to the take-off of the left subclavian. These guys need to be treated surgically.

  · Stanford B; Occur distal to the take-off o f the left subclavian and are treated medically unless
     there are complications (organ ischemia etc...)

        T H IS vs THAT:                                       Floating Viscera Sign:

        True Lumen                  False Lumen               This is a classic angiographic sign of
                                                              abdominal aortic dissection.
Continuity with              "CobWeb Sign" -slender
undissected portion of       linear areas of low              It is shown as opacification of
aorta                        attenuation                      abdominal aortic branch vessels during
                                                              aortography (catheter placed in the aortic
Smaller cross sectional Larger cross section area             true lumen), with the branch vessels--
                                                              ( celiac axis, superior mesenteric artery,
areas (with higher velocity I(slower more turbulent           and right renal artery) arising out of
                                                              nowhere.
blood)                       flow)

SuiTOunded by                1Beak Sign - acute angle at
calcifications (if present)   edge of lumen - seen on
                              axial plane

                                    f False ^                 They appear     ^

                                                              to be

                                                              floating, with

                                                              little or no

 Usually contains the origin Usually contains the origin      antegrade
 of celiac trunk, SMA, and of LEFT renal artery
 RIGHT renal artery                                           opacification

                                     Surrounds true lumen in  of the aortic
                                     Type A Dissection
                                                              tine lumen.
**just rememberfalse is left (like left handed people
    are evil, orfalse) - then everything else is true.

Dissection Flap in the Abdomen - Vocab Trivia:

· Static = dissection flap in the feeding artery (usually treated by stenting)
     Dynamic = dissection flap dangling in front of ostium (usually treated with fenestration).

It can be hard to tell these apart. I f asked I 'd expect them to just use the vocab words.

THIS vs THAT: Aneurysm with Mural Thrombus VS Thrombosed Dissection
· The dissection should spiral, the thrombus tends to drop straight down
· Intimal Calcs - the dissection will displace them.

                                                 316
  For the purpose of multiple choice - the cause is HTN

Ways this can be shown:

Hyperdense on Non Con  Contrast CT - Difficult to             T1 Bright Crescent
                       distinguish from plaque

Treatment:
· Also uses the Stanford A vs B idea

     Some people will say Type A = Surgery, Type B medical
     This is controversial and unlikely to be tested

Predictors of Shitty Outcome:
· Most of these will spontaneously regress. These are the things that make that less likely;

  · Hematoma Thickness Greater than 2 cm
  · Association with aneurysmal dilation of the aorta - 5 cm or more
  · Progression to dissection or penetrating ulcer
  · IMH + Penetrating Ulcer has a worse outcome compared to IMH + Dissection

                                                         317
