                                 SECTIO N 3:

                                A n e u r y s m , M i s c ...

THIS vs THftT: A n eu rysm vs P seu do -an eurysm - The distinction between a true
and false aneurysm lends itself well to multiple choice testing. A true aneurysm is an
enlargement o f the lumen o f the vessel to 1.5 times its normal diameter. True = 3 layers are
intact. In a false (pseudo) aneurysm all 3 layers are NOT intact, and it is essentially a
contained rupture. The risk o f actual rupture is obviously higher with false aneurysm. It
can sometimes be difficult to tell, but as a general rule fusiform aneurysms are true, and
saccular aneurysms might be false. Classic causes o f pseudoaneurysm include trauma,
cardiologists (groin sticks), infection (mycotic), pancreatitis, and some vascuhtides. On
ultrasound they could show you the classic yin/yang sign, with "to and fro" flow on pulsed
Doppler. The yin/yang sign can be seen in saccular true aneurysms, so you shouldn't call it
on that alone (unless that's all they give you). To and Fro flow within the aneurysm neck +
clinical history is the best way to tell them apart.

SVC Syndrom e - Occurs secondary to complete or near complete obstruction o f flow
in the SVC from external compression (lymphoma, lung cancer) or intravascular
obstruction (Central venous catheter, or pacemaker wire with thrombus). A less common
but testable cause is fibrosing mediastinitis (just think histoplasmosis). The dude is gonna
have face, neck, and bilateral arm swelling.

Traum atic Pseudoaneurysm -
Again a pseudoaneurysm is basically a
contained rupture. The most common place
to see this (in a living patient) is the aortic
isthm us (90% ). This is supposedly the
result of tethering from the ligamentum
arteriosum. The second and third most
common sites are the ascending aorta and
diaphragmatic hiatus - respectively.
Ascending aortic injury is actually probably
number one, it just kills them in the field so
you don't see it. They could show you a
CXR with a wide mediastinum, deviation
o f the NG Tube to the right, depressed left
main bronchus, or left apical cap and want
you to suspect acute injury.

                                                        318
Ascending A o rtic C alcificatio n s - There are only a few causes o f ascending aortic
calcifications, as atherosclerosis typically spares the ascending aorta. Takayasu and
Syphilis should come to mind. The real-life significance is the clamping o f the aorta may
be difficult during CABG.
A n eurysm - Defined as enlargem ent o f the artery to 1.5 times its expected diameter
(> 4 cm Ascending and Transverse, > 3.5 cm Descending, > 3.0 cm Abdominal).
Atherosclerosis is the m ost com m on overall cause. M edial degeneration is the most
common cause in the ascending aorta. Patients with connective tissue (Marfans, Ehlers
Danlos) diseases tend to involve the aortic root. When I say cystic medial necrosis you
should think Marfans. Aneurysm s m ay develop in any segm ent o f the aorta, but most
involve the infra-renal abdominal aorta. This varies based on risk factors, rate o f growth,
e tc ... but a general rule is surgical repair for aneurysm s at 6cm in the chest (5.5 cm with
collagen vascular disease) and 5 cm in the abdomen.
Sinus of V alsalva Aneurysm - Aneurysms of the valsalva sinus (aortic sinus) are
rare in real life, but have been known to show up on multiple choice tests. Factoids worth
knowing are that they are more common in Asian Men, and typically involve the right
sinus. They can be congenital or acquired (infectious). VSD is the m ost common associated
cardiac anomaly. Rupture can lead to cardiac tamponade. Surgical repair with Bentall
procedure.

                                    Sinus of Valsalva Aneurysm

Endoleaks - There are 5 types, and type 2 is the most common. These are discussed in
detail in the IR chapter.

                                                        319
Rupture I Impending Rupture- Peri-aortic stranding, rapid enlargement (10 mm or

more per year), or pain are warning signs of impending rupture. A retroperitoneal hematoma
adjacent to an AAA is the most common imaging finding o f actual rupture. The most common
indicator for elective repair is the maximum diameter o f the aneurysm , "Sac Size Matters," with
treatment usually around 6 cm (5.5 cm in patients with collagen vascular disease). A thick,
circumferential mural thrombus is thought to be protective against rupture. Enlargement o f the
patent lumen can indicate lysis o f thrombus and predispose to rupture.

Findings of impending Rupture                                Draped
                                                             Aorta
                 Posterior wall of the aorta drapes
                 over the vertebral column.

Increased Aneurysm   10 mm or more increased per year
Size

Focal Discontinuity                                          Hyperdense
in Circumferential                                           Crescent
Wall Calcifications
                                                             Non-con CT

Hyperdense Crescent  Well-defined peripheral crescent of
Sign                 increased attenuation on non-con CT.
                     It represents hemorrhage and is one
                     of the most specific manifestations of
                     impending rupture.

M ycotic Aneurysm - These are most often saccular and most often pseudoaneurysms.
They are prone to rupture. They most often occur via hematogenous seeding in the setting of
septicemia (endocarditis). They can occur from direct seeding via a psoas abscess or vertebral
osteomyelitis (but this is less common). Most occur in the thoracic or supra-renal aorta (most
atherosclerotic aortic aneurysms are infra-renal). Typical findings include saccular shape, lobular
contours, peri-aortic inflammation, abscess, and peri-aortic gas. They tend to expand faster than
atherosclerotic aneurysms. In general small, asymptomatic, and unruptured.

           Gamesmanship - If you see a saccular aneurysm o f the aorta (especially the abdominal
           aorta) you have to lead with infection.

NF 1 - One of the more common neurological genetic disorders, which you usually think about
causing all the skin stuff (Cafe au lait spots and freckling), and bilateral optic gliomas. Although
uncommon, vascular findings also occur in this disorder. Aneurysms and stenoses are
sometimes seen in the aorta and larger arteries, while dysplastic features are found in smaller
vessels. Renal artery stenosis can occur, leading to renovascular hypertension (found in 5%
o f children with NF). The classic look is orificial renal artery stenosis presenting with
hypertension in a teenager or child. The mechanism is actually Dysplasia o f the arterial wall
itself (less common from peri-arterial neurofibroma).

                                                        320
Marfan Syndrom e - Genetic disorder caused by mutations of the fibrillin gene (step 1
question). There are lots o f systemic manifestations including ectopic lens, being tall, pectus
defonnity, scoliosis, long fingers etc... Vascular findings can be grouped into aneurysm,
dissection, and pulmonary artery dilation:

   D Aneurysm: Dilation with Marfans is classically described as "Annuloaortic ectasia",

          with dilatation of the aortic root. The dilation usually begins with the aortic sinuses, and
          then progresses into the sinotubular junction, ultimately involving the aortic annulus.
          Dilatation of the aortic root leads to aortic valve insufficiency. Severe aortic
          regurgitation occurs that may progress to aortic root dissection or rupture. The
          mechanism for all this nonsense is that disruption o f the media elastic fibers causes
          aortic stiffening, and predisposes to aneurysm and dissection. The buzzword for the
          Marfans ascending aneurysm is "tulip bulb." They are usually repaired earlier than
          normal aneurysm (typically around 5.5 cm).

M arfan's - Annuloaortic Ectasia, with dilation of the aortic root

D Dissection: Recurrent dissections are common, and even "triple barreled dissection" can

     be seen (dissections on both sides o f a tme channel).

D Pulmonary A rtety Enlargement: Just like dilation o f the aorta, pulmonary artery

     enlargement favors the root.

Loeys Dietz Syndrome - Despite the name,                            Loeys Dietz Classic Triad:
this is actually not a Puerto Rican DJ. Instead think o f
this as the really shitty version o f Marfans. They        1. H ypertelorism (frog eyes),
have a terrible prognosis, and rupture their aortas all    2. Bifid uvula or cleft palate
the time. Vessels are very tortuous (twisty). They         3. A ortic aneurysm w ith tortuosity
also have crazy wide eyes (hypertelorism).

Classic Look: Crazy twisty vertebral arteries

                                               321
E hlers-D anlos - This one is a disorder in collagen, with lots o f different subtypes. They
have the stretchy skin, hypermobile joints, blood vessel fragility with bleeding diatheses.
Invasive diagnostic studies such as conventional angiography and other percutaneous
procedures should be avoided because o f the excessive risk o f arterial dissection. Imaging
characteristics o f aortic aneurysms in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome resemble those in Marfan
syndrome, often involving the aortic root. Aneurysms o f the abdominal visceral arteries
are common as well.
S y p h ilitic (L u e tic ) A n eu rysm - This is super rare and only seen in patients with
untreated tertiary syphilis. There is classically a saccular appearance and it involves the
ascending aorta as well as the aortic arch. Classic description "saccular asymmetric aortic
aneurysm with involvement of the aortic root branches. " Often heavily calcified "tree
bark" intim al calcifications. Coronary artery narrowing (at the ostium) is seen 30% o f the
time. Aortic valve insufficiency is also common.
A o rto e n te ric Fistula - These come in two flavors: (a) Primary, and (b) Secondary.

D Primary: Very, very, very rare. Refers to an A-E fistula w ithout history o f

     instrumentation. They are only seen in the setting o f aneurysm and atherosclerosis.

D Secondary: Much more common. They are seen after surgery with or without stent

     graft placement.
The question is usually w hat part o f the bowel is involved, and the answ er is and 4*''
portions o f the duodenum. The second m ost likely question is A-E fistula vs perigraft
infection (without fistula)? The answ er to that is unless you see contrast from the aorta into
the bowel lumen (usually duodenum ), you can't tell. Both o f them have ectopic perigraft gas
> 4 weeks post repair, both have perigraft fluid and edema, both lose the fat place between
the bowel and aorta (tethering o f the duodenum to the anterior wall of the aorta), both can
have pseudoaneurysm formation.

                                       Aortoenteric Fistula - Prim ary Type

                                                      322
inflammatory Aneurysms - Most are symptomatic, more common in young men, and

associated with increased risk of rupture regardless of their size. Unhke patients with atherosclerotic
AAA, most with the inflammatory variant have an elevated ESR. Their etiology is not well
understood but may be related to periaortic retroperitoneal fibrosis or other autoimmune disorders
(SLE, Giant Cell, RA). Smoking is apparently a strong risk factor, and smoking cessation is the
first step in medical therapy. In 1/3 of cases hydronephrosis or renal failure is present at the time of
diagnosis because the inflammatory process usually involves the ureters. Imaging findings include a
thickened wall and inflammatory or fibrotic changes in the periaortic regions. Often there is
asymmetrical thickening of the aorta with sparing of the posterior wall (helps differentiate it from
vasculitis).

Leriche Syndrome - Refers              Leriche Syndrome - Complete occlusion of the
to complete occlusion o f the aorta              aortal distal to the renal arteries
distal to the renal arteries (most
often at the aortic bifiarcation). It
is often secondary to bad
atherosclerosis. There can be
large collaterals.

Clinical Triad:

· Limp Dick (impotence)
· Ass claudication
· Absence femoral pulses

Mid Aortic Syndrome (Coarctation of                      Mid Aortic Syndrome - N arrow aorta
                                                         without arteritis or atherosclerosis
the Abdominal Aorta) - Refers to progressive
narrowing o f the abdominal aorta and its major
branches. Compared to Leriche, this is higher, and
longer in segment. It's also a total freaking zebra. It
tends to affect children / young adults. This thing is
characterized by progressive narrowing of the aorta.
It is NOT secondary to arteritis or atherosclerosis
but instead the result o f some intrauterine insult
(maybe) with fragmentation o f the elastic media.

This also has a clinical triad:

· HTN (most common presenting symptom) - this
  is the most common cause o f death if not treated

· Weak or Absent Femoral Pulses
· Claudication
· Renal failure

                                       323
Aortic Coarctation -                                 THIS vs THAT: C oarctation of th e A ortic
                                                     (Narrowing the of the Aortic Lumen)
  · There are two subtypes
     (as shown in the chart)                                Infantile                    Adult

  · Strong Association with                          Presents with heart       Leg Claudication
     Turners Syndrome (15-20%).                      failure within the first  BP differences between
                                                     week of life.             arms and legs.
  · Bicuspid Aortic valve is the
     most common associated defect (80%).            Pre-Ductal (Before the    Post-Ductal (Distal to
                                                     left Subclavian A.)       left Subclavian A.)
  · They have more berry aneurysms.
                                                     Aortic Arch =             Aortic Arch =
  · Figure 3 sign (appearance of CXR).               Hypoplastic               Normal Diameter

  · Rib Notching: most often involves 4* - 8* ribs.                            Collateral Formation is
     It does NOT involve the 1^` and 2"^ because                               More Likely
     those are fed by the costocei'vical trunk.

Rib Notching

                                                                               Figure 3 Sign

Pseudocoarctation - This is a favorite of multiple choice writers. You will have elongation
with narrowing and kinking of the aorta. It really looks like a coarctation, BUT there is NO
pressure gradient, collateral formation, or rib notching - that is the most likely question. The
second most likely question is the area of aneuiysmal dilation may occur distal to the areas of
narrowing in pseudocoarctation, and they may become progressively dilated and should therefore be
followed.

Thoracic Outlet Syndrome - Congenital or acquired compression of the Subclavian vessels
(artery and vein), and brachial plexus nerves as they pass through the thoracic inlet. It is a spectrum:
Nerve (95%) » » » Subclavian Vein » Subclavian Artery. With symptoms varying depending
on what is compressed. Compression by the anterior scalene muscle is the most common cause.
However, cervical rib, muscular hypertrophy, fibrous bands, Pagets, tumor etc.,. can all cause
symptoms. Treatment is usually surgical removal of the rib / muscle. The classic way to show this
is arms up and arms down angiography (occlusion occurs with aims up).

Paget Schroetter - This is essentially thoracic outlet syndrome, with development of a
venous thrombus in the Subclavian vein. It's sometimes called "effort thrombosis" because it's
associated with athletes (pitchers, weightlifters) who are raising their arms a lot. They will use
catheter directed lysis on these dudes, and surgical release of the offending agent as above. Stenting
isn't usually done (and can only be done after surgery to avoid getting the stent crushed).

324
Pulmonary Artery Aneurysm/Pseudoaneurysm - Think about three things for
muhiple choice; (1) Iatrogenic from Swan Ganz catheter *most common (2) Behcets, (3)
Chronic PE. When they want to lead Swan Ganz they may say something like "patient in the ICU."
The buzzwords for Behcets are: "Turkish descenf', and "mouth and genital ulcers."

· Hughes-Stovin Syndrome: This is a zebra cause of pulmonary artery aneurysm that is similar (and
  maybe the same thing) as Behcets. It is characterized by recurrent thrombophlebitis and pulmonary
  artery aneurysm formation and mpture.

· Rasmussen Aneurysm: This has a cool name, which instantly makes it high yield for testing. This is a
  pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm secondary to pulmonary TB. It usually involves the upper lobes
  in the setting of reactivation TB.

· Tetralogy of Fallot Repair Gone South: So another possible testable scenario is the patch aneurysm,
  from the RVOT repair.

Splenic A rtery Aneurysm: The most common visceral arterial aneurysm (3rd most
common abdominal - behind aorta and iliac).

Etiology of these things depends on who you ask. Some source     High Risk For Rupture
will say arteriosclerosis is the most important cause. However,  Liver Transplantation
it seems that most sources will say that arteriosclerosis less   Portal Hypertension
important and things like portal hypertension and a history o f  Pregnancy
multiple pregnancy are more important. More common in            Connective Tissue Disorders
pregnancy, and more likely to rupture in pregnancy.              Alpha I Antitrypsin Def

Most are located in the distal artery. False aneurysms are            Visceral Artery
associated with pancreatitis.                                            Aneurysms

An important mimic is the islet cell pancreatic tumor (which is  Most Common
hypervascular). Don't be a dumb ass and try to biopsy the        Splenic Artery (70%)
aneurysm. If you are forced to choose which ones to treat I      2nd Most Common
guess I'd go with: anything over 2 cm, any pseudoaneurysm,       Hepatic Artery (20%)
and any in a women planning on getting pregnant.                 3rd Most Common
                                                                 SMA (5%)
SMA Aneurysm: All SMA aneurysms should be treated -
as there is a high rate of rupture and mesenteric ischemia.

Hepatic A rtery Aneurysm: Treated if the patient is symptomatic or size exceeds 2 cm (just
like the spleen). In patients with FMD or polyarteritis nodosa - they are treated regardless of size.

Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome (Dunbar

Syndrome) : This is compression of the celiac artery by the
median arcuate ligament (fibrous band that connects the
diaphragm). Most people actually have some degree of
compression, but it's not a syndrome until there are symptoms
(abdominal pain, weight loss). Typical age is 20-40 years old.
The buzzword is "hooked appearance." It's classically shown
on angiography and they will want you to know that it gets
worse with expiration. It can actually lead to the development
of pancreaticoduodenal collaterals and aneurysm formation. It's
treated surgically.

325
