  S E C T IO N 4:

STENT G r afts

"EVAR" = EndoVascular                     THIS vsTHAT:Endografts VS Open Repair:
abdominal aortic Aneurysm Repair.
These include the bifurcated iliac        30 Day Mortality is LESS for Endovascular Repair
systems and unilateral aortic + iliac      (like 30% less)
systems.
                                          Long Term Aneurysm Related Mortality (and total
"TEVAR" = Thoracic EndoVascular            mortality) is the SAME for open vs endovascular
aortic Aneurysm Repair.                    repair

                                          Graft Related Complications and Re-interventions
                                           are HIGHER with Endovascular Repair

Indications fo r EVAR:
(1) AAA larger than 5 cm (or more than 2x the size of the normal aorta)
(2) AAA growing "rapidly" (more than 0.5 cm in 6 months)

Anatomy Criteria fo r EVAR:              10 mm Long
 Proximal landing zone must be:         < 3.2 cm Wide
                                         < 60 Degree of Tortuosity
    10 mm long,
   Non- aneurysmal (less than 3.2 cm),
   Angled less than 60 degrees.

Device Deployment:
Tortuosity and Vessel Size are issues for device deployment. The general rules are that you have
problems if:
 Iliac vessels have an angulation > 90 degrees (especially if heavily calcified)
 Iliac artery diameters < 7 mm (may need a cut down and the placement of a temporary conduit).

                                         368
Absolute Contraindication to In fra re n a l EVAR:

 Landing sites that won't allow for aneurysm exclusion

 Covering a critical artery (IMA in the setting o f known SMA and Celiac occlusion,
   Accessory renals that are feeding a horseshoe kidney, dominant lumbar arteries feeding the
   cord).

Dealing with the Renals.

There are several anatomy vocab words that are worth knowing for aneurysms near therenals.

 "P a ra -R en a l" - which is an umbrella term for aneurysms near the renals

 "Ju xta-R enal" - Aneurysm that has a "short neck" (proximal landing zone < 1cm) or one
   that encroaches on the renals.

 "Supra-R en al" - Aneurysm that involves the renals and extends into the mesenteries.

 "^Crawford Type 4 Thoracoabdom inal A ortic Aneurysm " - Aneurysm that extends from the
   12th intercostal space to the iliac bifurcation with involvement of the origins of the renal,
   superior mesenteric, and celiac arteries.

Treating these types of aneurysms requires all kinds of fancy stuff; snorkels, chimney
technique, e tc ... All is beyond the scope of the exam. Just know that it can be done, but it's
not easy.

Complications:                           A d am kiew icz                        T9-T12
                                                    Celiac                        T12
The most feared/dreaded (testable)                     SMA                          LI
comphcation of an aortic stent graft is                                             L2
paraplegia secondary to cord                      Renals                            L3
ischemia. You see this most                                                         L4
commonly when there is extensive                        IMA
coverage of the aorta (specifically T9-
T12 Adamkiewicz territory), or a
previous AAA repair. "Beware of the
hair pinned turn" - famously refers to
the morphology of Adamkiewicz on
angiogram.

Symptoms of possible / developing paraplegia post
procedure. Next Step = CSF drainage.

                                         369
AAA prel post Endograft

After an aneurysm has been treated with an endograft, things can still go south. There are 5
described types of endoleaks that lend themselves easily to multiple choice questions.

     D Type 1: Leak at the top (A) or the bottom (B) of the graft. They are typically high
          pressure and require intervention (or the sac will keep growing).

     n Type 2: Filling of the sac via a feeder artery. This is the M O ST COM M ON type,
          and is usually seen after repair of an abdominal aneurysm. The most likely culprits
          are the IMA or a Lumbar artery. The majority spontaneously resolve, but some may
          require treatment. Typically, you follow the sac size and if it grows you treat it.

   D Type 3: This is a defect/fracture in the graft. It is usually the result of pieces not

          overlapping.

   D Type 4: This is from porosity of the graft. ( "4 is fro m the P ore"). It's of historic

           significance, and doesn't happen with modem grafts.

   D Type 5: This is endotension. It's not a true leak and it may be due to pulsation of the

           graft wall. Some people don't believe in these, but I've seen them. They are real.

Type 1  Type 2  Types  Type 4
         (80%)

Treatment: The endoleaks that must be emergently treated are the highflo w ones - Type 1
a n d Type 3. Most IR guys / vascular surgeons (real doctors) will watch a Type 2 for at least a
year (as long as it's not enlarging). Most Type 4s will resolve within 48 hours of device
implantation.

                                                        370
