                         S E C T IO N 7:

                         F ilter s

An IVC filter is used in the following situations:

· Proven PE while on adequate anticoagulation

· Contraindication to anticoagulation with clot in the femoral or iliac veins

· Needing to come off anticoagulation - complications. There are a few additional
 indications that are less firm (basically, we think he/she might get a DVT and we can't anti­
 coagulate).

Vocab:                                                            Why Not Leave Them In?

UPermanent Filters: Do Not Come Out                            Depending on who bought
URetrievable Filters: Can Come Out, But Do Not Have To         you lunch (gave you a free
D Temporary Filter: Come out, and have a component sticking    pen), thrombosis rates vary.
outside the body to aide in retrieval
                                                               In general (for the purpose
Position (before submission):                                  of multiple choice) about
                                                               10% o f the permanent
The device is usually placed infrarenal with a few exceptions  filters thrombose within 5
(see below chart).                                             years.

Why isn 't it always ju st positioned suprarenal? A supra-renal filter has a theoretic increased
risk of renal vein thrombosis. There is zero evidence behind this - like most things in
medicine.

          Indication         Filter Placem ent                           R a tio n a le
Pregnancy                Supra-renal                           To avoid compression
Clot in the Renals or                                          Get above the clot
Gonadals                 Supra-renal
                                                               Gotta block them both
Duplicated IVCs          Either bilateral iliac, or
                         supra-renal (above the                Risk of clot by passing filter
Circumaortic Left Renal  bifurcation)                          via the renals

                         Below the lowest renal

                         381
MEGA-Cava: If the IVC is less than 28 mm, then any filter can be placed. If it's bigger

than that, you might need to place a bird's nest type of filter which can be used up to 40 mm.
You can also just place bilateral iliac filters.

Random Trivia:

D A "Gunther Tulip" has a superior end hook for retrieval

D A "Simon-Nitinol" has a low profile (7F) and can be placed in smaller veins (like an arm

    vein).

D All filters are MRI compatible

Prior to placing the Filter:

You need to do an angiographic run. Where I trained, the classic pimping question for
residents on service was to "name the 4 reasons you do an angiogram prior to filter
placement!" The only answer that would not result in "additional training" (more weekend
PICC workups) was;

1. Confirm patency of the IVC
2. Measure the size of the IVC
3. Confirm that you are dealing with 1 IVC
4. Document the position of the renal veins

C o m p licatio n s/R isks:

D Malposition: The tip of the filter should be positioned at the level of the renal vein. If it's

not, honestly it's not a big deal

 Migration: The filter can migrate to another part of theIVC, the heart,  or even the

pulmonary outflow tract. If it goes to the heart, you need surgery.If it's just superior, you

need to snare it out.

D Thrombosis: Although the incidence of PE is decreased, the risk o f DVT is increased.

Caval thrombosis is also increased, and you should know that clot in the filter is a

    contraindication to removal (you need to lyse it, before you remove it).

D IVC Perforation: A strut going through the caval wall is common and doesn't mean

anything. However, aortic penetration, ureteral perforation, duodenal perforation, or

lumbar vessel laceration can occur (rarely) from a strut hanging out of the cava - this is a

bigger problem.

D Device Infection: A relative contraindication to IVC filter placement is bacteremia.

                                   382
Positioning the Filter:

Renals on an IV C Gram: There are two ways       ||[ | Obvious , Sneaky j
to show the renals on an IVC Gram. There is
the nice way where they opacify normally and             
it's obvious, and there is the sneaky way where
you see the "steaming effect" of unopacified
blood allowing you to infer the position.

Obviously the sneaky way is more likely to
show up on the exam.

The Tip: For standard anatomy, the standard answer for a cone shaped filter is to put the apex
at the level of the renals. Some people think the high flow in this location helps any clot that
might get stuck in the filter dissolve.

What i f there is clot in the IVC? The filter should be positioned above the most cranial
extension of the clot. As mentioned in my glorious IVC Filter position chart, if the clot extends
beyond the renals you need a suprarenal filter.

What i f you fu c k up the deployment (severe tilt, legs won't open, etc...) ? If it's retrievable,
you may be able to snare it and restart. If it's permanent you are kind of hosed. Some people
will try and stick a second filter above the retarded one.

Filter Removal:

The longer these things stay in, the more likely they will thrombose. Prior to removal you
should perform an angiogram of the IVC. The main reason to do this is to evaluate for clot.

· More than 1 cm^ of clot = Filter Stays In

· Less than 1 cm^ of clot = Filter Comes Out

You snare thefilte r but when you p u ll on it you meet resistance ? In the real world, people
will yank that mother flicker out of there. The IVC is the Rodney Dangerfield of vessels - no
respect. For multiple choice? Stop and assume that it can't be retrieved.

Angiogram should also be done after removal of the filter to make sure you didn't rip a hole in
the IVC. I f you did rip a hole in it - Next Step - Angioplasty balloon with low pressure
insufflation to to create tamponade. If that doesn't work, most people would try a covered stent
graft. If you created a wall injury/dissection ? Again - answers will vary, but the classic
answer is systemic anticoagulation.

                                                        383
