                              SEC TIO N 5:

                            E m b o l iz a t io n

There's a bunch of reasons you might want to do this. The big ones are probably stopping a
bleed and killing a tumor.

W hich agent do you want? Unfortunately just like picking a catheter these types of
questions tend to fall into the mind reading category.

In general you are going to choose the agent based on the desired outcome, and the need to
minimize risk. The most classic thinking goes something like this:

Size of the Vessel  I Wish this Destruction to be  Kill the Mother Fucker       Examples /
I Wish to Destroy:  Temporary or Permanent:        (or just give him            Sample
                    Permanent                      nightmares):                 Indications:
Small
                    Temporary                                               1^  Coils (Lung AVM)
              <     Permanent
                                                                             ^  Gelfoam Pledget
                    Temporary                                                   (Trauma)
                                                                                Liquid Agent
                                                                                (RCC Ablation)

                                                                                Particles
                                                                                (Fibroid Embo)

                                                                                Micro Sphere
                                                                                (Chemo)

It is helpful to think about proximal and distal embolics with the end goal in mind. For
example, if you want to slow down the flow (but not totally occlude it) you might use a large
proximal embolic (coils, plugs, large particles 500-1000 um) -- e.g. in the setting of a GI
bleed. If instead, you want to totally infarct the tissue you would use a distal embolic (small
particles < 250 um) to occlude the arterioles feeding the tissue - e.g. in the setting of a tumor
ablation.

           M echanical                  Particulate               Liquid Agents

Coils                       PVA - Particles (permanent)  Sclerosants
Vascular Plugs (Amplatzer)  Gelfoam (temporary)          Non-Sclerosants
                            Autologous Blood Clot
                            (temporary)

                            371
M echanical Agents;

Coils:

These are typically used to pennanently occlude a                  THIS vs THAT:
large vessel. They come in all kinds of different sizes
and shapes. You can deploy them with a "push" via a            Coils vs Micro-Coils
coaxial system, or if you don't need exact precision
you can "chase" them with a saline bolus.                Coils: Deployed via standard
                                                         4-7F catheter
It gets complicated and beyond the scope of the exam
(probably), but there are a variety of strategies for    Micro: Deployed via Micro-
keeping these in place. Just know you can pack these     Catheter. If you try and
things behind an Amplatzer, or you can use               deploy them through a
scaffolding techniques to hook small coils to a large    standard cath they can ball up
one                                                      inside the thing and clog it.

        Buzzword "Accurate Deployment" = Detachable Coil

Trivia: Remember never deploy these with a side-hole + end-hole catheter. You want end-
hole only for accurate deployment.

Trivia: Never pack coils directly into an arterial pseudoaneurysm sac - more on this later in

the chapter

Amplatzer Vascular Plug (AVP)

This is a self expanding wire mesh that is made of Nitinol (thermal memory James Bond
shit). You mount this bomb on the end of a delivery device/wire. When deployed it
shrinks in length and expands in width.

Best Use = High Flow Situations, when you want to kill a single large vessel. If you are
thinking to yourself - I'm gonna need a bunch of coils to take that beast down the answer is
probably an amplatzer plug.

                     372
Particulate Agents:                                               THIS v'sTHAT:
                                                             Gelfoam Powder vs
These are grouped into:                                   Gelfoam Pledgets/Sheets

 Temporary: Gelfoam, Autologous Blood Clot           Powder causes occlusion at the
                                                      capillary level (tissue necrosis)
 Permanent: PVA Particles
                                                      Pledgets/Sheets cause occlusion
Best Use = Situations where you want to block         at the arteriole or larger level
multiple vessels. Classic examples would be fibroids  (tissue infarct is uncommon)
and malignant tumors.

You are Doing it Wrong / Avoiding Reflux = An easy way to ask this would simply be "When do
you stop deploying the agent?"

The classic teaching is to stop embolization when the flow becomes "to and fro." If you
continue to pile the particulate agent in until you get total occlusion you risk refluxing the agent
into a place you don't want it to go.

                             TH IS vs THAT: Coils VS PVA P a rtic le s

In many cases if you can use coils, you can also use appropriately sized particles.

Size is one way to pick. Coils are good for medium to small arteries. PVA is good for
multiple small arteries or capillaries.
Smaller particles (less than 300 microns) are going to risk tissue necrosis in many cases -
so if you want to preserve the tissue, that's probably the wrong answer.
Another tip for picking between the two is the need for repeat Access. The classic example
is the bronchial artery embolization. These things tend to re-bleed. So you should NEVER
ever use coils (this will block you from re-accessing).
Bronchial artery embolization = Particles (> 325 micrometers).

                                                 Next Step ?

Q: What do you do after placement of an occlusion balloon in the setting of particle
embolization ?

A: Test injection to confirm adequate occlusion.

373
Liquid Agents:
These are grouped into:
 Sclerosants: Absolute Alcohol (the one that hurts) and Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS)
 Non-Sclerosants: Onyx (Ethylene-Vinyl Alcohol Copolymer) , Ethiodol

Sclerosants:
As would be expected, the sclerosant agents work by producing near immediate thrombosis /
irreversible endothelial destruction. As a result, non-targeted embolization can be fairly
devastating. There are three main strategies for not causing a major fuck up (i.e. burning a
hole in the dude's stomach, infarcting his bowel, etc...).

    (1) Knowing the anatomy really well through careful mapping
    (2) Frequent intermittent angiograms during the embolization procedure
    (3) Use of Balloon Occlusion to protect non-target sites.

                                                    Next Step ?
  Q: What do you do prior to deflating the occlusion balloon?
  A: Aggressively aspirate (with a 60 cc syringe) to make sure all the poison is out of there.

Non-Sclerosants:
Onyx: Typically used for neuro procedures, hypervascular spine tumors, shit like that.
It drys slowly (outside in) and allows for a slower, more controlled delivery.
Ethiodol: This is an oil that blocks vessels at the arteriole level (same as the really
small PVA particles). For some reason, hepatomas love this stuff, and it will
preferentially flow to the hepatoma. It is also unique in that it is radio-opaque, which
helps decrease non-targeted embolization and lets you track tumor size on follow up.

                                                        374
                          Single Best Answer Classic Scenario

Autologous Blood Clot = Post-Traumatic High-Flow Priapism (or Priapism induced by the female
Brazilian Olympic volleyball team)
Varicocele (Spermatic Vein) = Coils
Uterine Fibroid embolization (Bilateral Uterine Artery) = PVA or microspheres 500-1000 (xm

Generic Trauma = Gel Foam in many cases.
Diffuse Splenic Trauma (Proximal embolization) = Amplatzer plug in the splenic artery proximal
to the short gastric arteries. **Discussed in detail later in the chapter.
Pulmonary AVM = Coils
Hemoptysis (Bronchial artery embolization) = PVA Particles (> 325 jim).
Hyper-vascular Spinal Tumor = Onyx
Total Renal Embolization = Absolute ethanol
Partial or Selective Renal Embolization = Glue (bucrylate-ethiodized oil)
Segmental Renal Artery Aneurysm = Coils
Main Renal Artery Aneurysm = Covered Stent (or coils after bare metal stent)
Peripartum hemorrhage = Gel Foam
Upper GI Bleed = Endoscopy First (if that fail then in most cases coils)
Lower GI Bleed = Usually Microcoils

LARGE Vessel-      small Vessel -            Post Embolization Syndrome:
   Permanent         Permanent
                                       Pain, nausea, vomiting, and low grade fever - is
Coils              Particles           basically an expected finding. You don't need to
Amplatz Occluder   Liquid Sclerosants  order blood cultures - without other factors to
                   Thrombin            make you consider infection. There is a rule o f
                                       3 days - it starts within the first 3 days, and goes
                   Ethiodol            away within 3 days of starting.

Gelfoam Pledget /    small Vessel -    The vignette is most classic for a large fibroid
Sheet                  Temporary       embolization, but it's actually common after a
                                       solid organ (e.g. liver) - the tumor just needs to
Autologous Clot    Microspheres        be big. Some texts suggest prophylactic use of
                                       anti-pyrexial and antiemetic meds prior to the
                   Gelfoam Powder      procedure.

                                       375
