    S E C T IO N 3:
PTA A N D S t e n t s

General Tips/Trivia regarding angioplasty:                       General Indication for
                                                                        Angioplasty;
The balloon should be big enough to take out the
stenosis and stretch the artery (slightly). The ideal       More than 50% stenosis WITH
balloon dilation is about 10-20% over the normal            svmptoms. The requirement o f
artery diameter. Most IR guys/gals will claim               symptoms is a critical piece o f trivia.
success if the residual stenosis is less than 30%.
                                                            Arterial Pressure Gradient more than 10
Obviously you want the patient anticoagulated, to           Venous Pressure Gradient more than 5
avoid thrombosis after intimal injury. The typical
rule is 1-3 months of anti-platelets (aspirin,
clopidogrel) following a stent.

"Primary Stenting": This is angioplasty first, then stent                DON'T STENT
placement. You want to optimize your result. Stenting after
angioplasty usually gives a better result than just angioplasty    Across a joint (like a knee) -
alone (with a few exceptions - notably FMD - to which stenting     this can cause stent migration
adds very little). An important idea is that a stent can't do      or fracture of the stent
anything a balloon can't. In other words, the stent won't open it
any more than the balloon will, it just prevents recoil.           At the site of a possible
                                                                   surgical bypass

Balloon Expanding vs Self Expanding: Stents come in two basic flavors, balloon expandable or
self expandable. Location determines the choice.

SelfExpandable stents are good for areas that might get compressed (superficial locations).
· Classic Examples = Cervical Carotid or SFA.
Balloon Expandable stents are good for more precise deployment
· Classic Example = Renal ostium

Closed vs Open Cell Stents - Vascular stent
designs may be categorized as

(a) closed-cell - where every stent segment is
connected by a link (less flexible, with better
radial force) or

(b) open-cell in which some stent segment                    Closed:                  Open:
connections are deliberately absent (flexible/   -More Radial Force        -Less Radial Force
conforms to tortuous vessels, less radial        -Less Flexible            -More Flexible
force).                                          -Greater Plaque Coverage  -Conforms to Tortuous
                                                                           Vessel Walls Better

Nitinol (magic?): Nitinol is said to have a "thermal memory." It is soft at room temperature, but can
become more rigid at body temperature. This is exploited for self-expanding stents.

Drug Eluting Stents - These things have been used for CAD for a while. The purpose of the "drug"
is to retard neointimal hyperplasia.

                                                       366
Balloon Selection - Balloons should be 10-20% larger than the adjacent normal (non-stenotic)
vessel diameter. A sneaky move would be to try and get you to measure a post-stenotic dilation.

A rough guessing guide (ifforced):

Common Iliac External Iliac  CFA, Prox SFA  Distal SFA = 5mm
                             = 6mm
= 8mra  = Tram

**Popliteal would be 4 mm

As a general rule, larger balloons allow for more dilating force but the risk of exploding the vessel or
creating a dissection is also increased.

Stent Selection - Stents should be 1-2 cm longer than the stenosis and 1-2 mm wider than the un-
stenosed vessel lumen

Special Situations -

(1) You have more than 30% residual stenosis (failed you have). The first thing to do (if possible)
     is to measure a pressure gradient. If there is no gradient across the lesion, you can still stop and
     claim victory. If there is a gradient you might be dealing with elastic recoil (the lesion
     disappeared with inflation, but reappeared after deflation). The next step in this case is to place a
     stent.

(2) You can't make the waist go away with balloon inflation. Switch balloons to either a higher
     pressure rated balloon, or a "cutting balloon."

(3) You caused a distal embolization. First do an angiographic run. If the limb / distal vessels look
     fine then you don't need to intervene. If you threatened the limb, then obtain ipsilateral access
     and go after the clot ("aspiration").

(4) You exploded the vessel ("Extravasation"). This is why you always leave the balloon on the
     wire after angioplasty. If you see extravasation get that balloon back in there quickly, and
     perform a low pressure insufflation proximal to the rupture to create tamponade. You may need
     to call vascular surgery ("the real doctors").

(5) What if you are trying to cross a tight stenosis and you see something like this ?

This is the classic "s p ir a l" of a dissecting wire.

        367
