                                       S E C T IO N 8:

                         Dia lysis

                                                                         - THE FUCKING FISTULOGRAM -

Generally speaking there are two types of "permanent" access options for dialysis;
(1) the arterio-venous fistula and (2) the arterio-venous graft.
AVFistula - This is a subcutaneous anastomosis between an artery and adjacent native vein
(for example the radial artery to the cephalic vein). All things equal, the preferred access
(over the graft).

A V Graft - This is also a subcutaneous anastomosis between an artery and adjacent native
vein. Except this time the distance between the vessels is bridged with a synthetic tube graft.

                                                                   Artery

Vein                   Artery Graft

Arteriovenous Fistula                         Arteriovenous Graft

What are the pros and cons of each types?

Pros of AV Graft:                             Cons o f AV Graft:

- Ready for use in 2 weeks                    -Less overall longevity
- Easier to declot (clot is usually confined  -Promotes hyperplasia of the venous intima
                                              at or downstream from the graft vein
 to the synthetic graft)                      anastomosis, resulting in stenosis and
                                              eventual obstruction
Pros of AV Fistula:                           -More infections (foreign graft material)

- Lasts Longer & More Durable                 Cons o f AV Fistula:
- Much less prone to development of
                                              -Needs 3-4 Months to "Mature" (vein to
 venous neointimal hyperplasia at or          enlarge enough for dialysis)
 downstream from the artery-vein
 anastomosis.
- Fewer infections

                                              384
Why do grafts/fistulas need treatment (politics and greed) ? The primary reason is "slow
flows." It's important to understand that nephrologists get paid per session of dialysis. If
they can do a session in 1 hour or 4 hours they make the same amount of money. Therefore
they want them running fast. So, really "slow-flow" is referring to slow cash flow in the
direction of the nephrologist's pocket.

For the purpose o f multiple choice I 'd go with:
         < 600 cc/min for graft = diagnostic fistulogram
         < 500 cc/min for fistula = diagnostic fistulogram

Having said that, you may find different numbers different places - the whole issue is
controversial based on the real motivation people have for treating these. Some texts say a
fistula can maintain patency with rates as low as 80 cc/min, and grafts can maintain patency
with rates as low as 450 cc/min. Also remember medicare won't pay for two treatments
within 90 days, so make sure you treat on day 91.
Why do grafts/fistulas need treatment (actual pathophysiology)? Its a violation of nature to
have an AF Fistula / Graft pulsating in your arm. Your body won't tolerate it forever.
Neointimal hyperpasia develops causing an ever-worsening stenosis. If they don't get
treated, they will eventually thrombose. All fistulas/grafts must die.

                                                        385
``W orking it Up'

The only thing worse then actually doing a fistulogram is having to talk with and examine the
patient prior to the procedure. Nearly all the IR texts and any program worth its snufF will
"work them up" starting with physical exam.

Patient arrives in the IR department for "slow flows." Next Step = Physical Exam

This is the buzzword orientated algorithm that I would suggest for dealing with physical
exam / history related fistula/graft questions:

LOOK               "Arm Swelling"            Central Venous Stenosis
LOOK               "Chest Wail Coliaterais"
LISTEN             "Breast Swelling"         Dialysis-Associated Steal
FEEL               "Discolored Hand"         Syndrome (DASS)
                   "Pale Colored Hand"
                   "Pallor of the Hand"      Localized Stenosis
                   "High-Pitched Bruit"      Pre Stenosis
                   "Bruit in Systole Only"   Post Stenosis
                   "Discontinuous Bruit"
                   "Water Hammer Pulse"
                   "Diminished Pulse"

What is normal? A normal graft has an easily compressible pulse, a low-pitched bruit that is
present in both systole + diastole, and a thrill that is palpable with compression only at the

arterial anastomosis.

Localizing a Stenosis - Classic Example - Straight Forearm Graft:

                                             Forceful! Pulse

        High Pitch Bruit/Strong Thrill
                                      386
GRAFTS:

Where is the problem (usually) in grafts? The most common site of obstruction is venous
outflow (usually at or just distal to the graft-to-vein anastomosis). This is usually secondary
to intimal hyperplasia.
What about the norm al th rill and b ru it in a g ra ft ? There should be a thrill at the arterial
anastomosis, and a low pitched bruit should be audible throughout the graft.
What i f the bruit is high pitched? High Pitch = Stenosis, Low Pitch = Normal
What are you thinking i f I tell you the dude has a swollen arm and chest ? This is classic
for central venous stenosis.

FISTULAS:

Where is the problem (usually) in fistulas? It's more variable - you are less likely to be
asked this. If you are forced - I'd say venous outflow stenosis - typically juxta-anastomotic
or runoff vein (AV anastomosis stenosis is uncommon).
I f you f ix a stenotic area - they are good to go right ? Nope - they reoccur about 75% of the
time within 6 months.
What about the " th r ill" in thefistula, is this a helpfulfinding? Yes - there should be a
continuous thrill at the anastomosis. If it is present only with systole then you are dealing
with a stenosis. Also, if you can localize a thrill somewhere else in the venous outflow - that
is probably a stenosis.
What i f thefistula is very "pulsatile" ? This indicates a more central stenosis - the fistula
should be only slightly pulsatile.
Should there be a b ru it ? A low pitched bruit in the outflow vein is an expected finding.
"Steal Syndrome" -The classic story is "cold painful fingers" during dialysis, relieved by
manual compression of the fistula. Too much blood going to the fistula leaves the hand
ischemic. The issue is usually a stenosis in the native artery distal to the fistula. Fixing this
is typically surgical (DRIL = Distal Revascularization and Interval Ligation of Extremity, or
Flow Reduction Banding).

                                                        387
ACCESS and TREATMENT:

Contraindications ? Infection is the only absolute one. If you fuck with an infected fistula or graft
the patient could get endocarditis. If you don't fuck with it, the patient will probably still get
endocarditis but infectious disease will have to blame it on someone else at the QA meeting.

What i f it 's "Fresh " ? A"relative contraindication" is a new graft or fistula. "New"to most people
means less than 30 days. Significant stenosis prior to 30 days strongly suggests a surgical fuck up
("technical problem" they call it). Not to mention that a new dilating anastomosis is high risk for
rupture. Those grafts are doomed to never reach long-term patency.

Access less than 30 days old with stenosis. Next Step = Send them back to the surgeon.

What about "long segments" ? You will read some places that stenotic segments longer than 7 cm
respond poorly to treatment. Some people even consider this a "relative contraindication." If the
question writer actually spells out the length of the stenosis greater than 7 cm he/she probably wants
you to say send themback to surgery. Inreality there are plenty of stubborn IRguys that will try and
treat multiple long lesions because there is no better way than to prove one's manhood.

What about a contrast allergy? You can use CO2 for runs.

What direction do you access the graft ? Access is typically directed towards the venous
anastomosis - unless you are thinking arterial is the problem (which is much less common).
Remember the lingo "antegrade" and "retrograde" refers to the direction of blood flow. Antegrade is
the typical routefor venous problems, and retrograde is the typical route for arterial inflow issues.

How do you typically look at the arterial anastomosis ? The move most places teach is to obstruct
the venous outflow (with a clamp, blood pressure cuff, angioplasty balloon, finger - or whatever)
which allows the contrast to reflux into the artery.

What are the movesfo r angioplasty o f a narrow spot ? Give themheparin (3000-5000 units).
Exchange your catheter for a 5 or 6 F sheath over a standard 0.035-inch guidewire. Dilate the
narrow spot with a 6-8 mm balloon with multiple prolonged inflations. Remember to never take that
balloon off the wire when you are doing diagnostic runs - as you might need to rapidly put it back if
you caused a tear.

When do you place a stent ? There are two main reasons (1) you are getting bad elastic recoil, or
(2) you have recurrent stenosis within 3 months of angioplasty.

Does Nitro have a role? You can use a vasodilator (like nitroglycerin) to distinguish between spasm
and stenosis. The spasm should improve. The stenosis will be fixed.

What is considered a Successful Treatment? (1) Improved Symptoms (armswelling better, etc..),
or (2) less than 30%residual stenosis.

What about Aneurysms ? Small ones get monitored for size increase, but the classic teaching is that
these are managed surgically.

General Vascular Access Trivia: Remember that PICC lines should not be put in dialysis (or
possible dialysis - CKD 4 or 5) patients because they might need that arm for a fistula.

                                                        388
