                                       S E C T IO N 6:
                                   T h e A c u t e L im b

            IL 1                                  BXCONXTOR.

"Threatened Lim b" - Acute limb ischemia can be secondary to thrombotic or emboHc events.
Frequent sites for emboU to lodge are the common femoral bifurcation and the popliteal
trifurcation. You can also get more distal emboli resulting in the so called blue toe syndrome.

As crazy as this may sound to a Radiologist, physical exam is actually used to separate patients
into 3 categories: viable, threatened, or irreversible. This chart (or something similar) is how
most people triage.

Category                           Capillary   Muscle     Sensory   Arterial  Venous
                                   Return     ^Paralysis  Loss      Doppler   Doppler

1 - Viable         Not             Intact     None        None      +         +
                  1Threatened
                                                          Partial
2a -Threatened Salvageable         Intact/Slow None                 -         +

                     Salvageable   Slow/      Partial     Partial   -         +
2b - Threatened if immediate       Absent

                     intervention

3 - Irreversible  NOT              Absent     Complete    Complete
                  Salvageable
                  *Amputation

Know who you can and c a n 't treat

"Critical Limb Ischemia"           is described as rest

pain for two weeks (or ulceration, or gangrene).                ACR Appropriate:
                                                           Embolism Above / Below
General Idea on Treatment: An important point to
realize is that lysis of a clot only re-establishes the      the Common Femoral
baseline (which was likely bad to start with). So                        Artery
after you do lysis, consider additional therapy
(angioplasty, surgery, stenting, etc...). If there is     - Isolated suprainguinal
combined inflow and outflow disease, you should           embolism probably should be
treat the inflow first (they just do better).             removed surgically.
                                                          - Fragmented distal emboli
Surgery vs Thrombolysis: If it has been occluded          should have endovascular
for less than 14 days, thrombolysis is superior, if       thrombolytic therapy
more than 14 days, (surgery is superior).

                                              376
Ankle - Brachial index (ABI)

The idea behind the ABI is that you can compare the blood pressure in the upper arm, to that of
the ankle and infer a degree of stenosis in the peripheral arteries based on that ratio. In a normal
person, ratios are usually slightly greater than 1. In patients with occlusive disease, they will be
less than that - with a lower number correlating roughly with the extent of disease.

     ABI

1.0       Normal   No Symptoms

0.75-0.95 Mild     Mild Claudication

0.5-0.75 Moderate  Claudication

0.3-0.5 Moderate - Severe Severe Claudication

< 0.3     Severe or "Critical" Rest Pain

How they do it: You take blood pressures in both arms, and both ankles. You only use one of
the arm measurements (the higher one). For the actual ratios, opinions vary on this - most
people do it by dividing the higher of either the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial systolic pressure
(at the ankle) by the higher of either the right or left arm systolic pressure.

False Numbers? Arterial calcifications (common in diabetics with calcific medial sclerosis)
make compression difficult and can lead to a false elevation of the ABI. This is when you
will see ratios around 1.3 -- those are bullshit, means the exam is non-diagnostic.

Toe Pressures: As above, diabetics will have noncompressible vessels - which makes ABIs
worthless. What you can do is look at the toe pressure. The reason this works is because the
digital arteries are not as affected by this disease process. A normal systolic toe pressure is
greater than 50 mm Hg, and the ratio (toe-brachial index) should be more than 0.6. The testable

trivia is that i f the toe pressures are less than 30 mm ulcers are less likely to heal.

Segmental Limb Pressures: A modification to the standard ABI involves pressures at the thigh,
calf, and ankle -- if there is a pressure drop of more than 20-30 you can infer that this is the level
of disease. This allows you to sorta sorta sorta guess where the level of disease is.

                                          377
Spectral Waveform Analysis:

The normal pulsatile wave is the result of the
pumping action of the left ventricle
transmitted to the aortic root and then to the
foot. As the LV contracts you have a jet of
blood that dynamically expands the aortic
root. As the bolus of blood travels towards
the feet the vessels will continue to expand
along the path -- like a cartoon snake that has
eaten a mouse (or your neighbor's cat). The
wave falls as the cardiac cycle enters diastole.

There is a secondary event which is the rebound off    Normal
the high resistance tibial vascular tree. This is why
the normal wave has an up-down-up look to it --
"triphasic" they call it. This bounce back or
rebound effect demonstrates normal arterial
compliance. As the vessel hardens you lose this.
With progressive disease there is less and less
compliance to the point where the primary wave
barely even stretches the vessel.

Ulcer Location Trivia (dinosaur IR guys love this - it really gets their dicks hard):

   HI Medial Ankle = Venous Stasis

    D Dorsum of Foot = Ischemic or Infected ulcer
    D Plantar (Sole) Surface of Foot = Neurotrophic Ulcer

Who are Rutherford and Fontaine? These are "useful" categories and classifications of
signs and symptoms of peripheral arterial disease.

False Numbers? Arterial calcifications (common in diabetics) make compression difficult
and can lead to a false elevation of the ABI.

Post-Operative Bypass Vocabulary:

 Prim ary Patency - Uninterrupted patency of the graft with no procedure done on the
    graft itself (repair of distal vessels, or vessels at either anastomosis does not count as loss
    of primary patency).

 Assisted Prim ary Patency - Patency is never lost, but is maintained by prophylactic
    interventions (stricture angioplasty etc..).

 Secondary Patency - Graft patency is lost, but then restored with intervention
    (thrombectomy, thrombolysis, etc..).

                                                        378
" W here to Access ? "

One simple way to ask a threatened leg treatment question is to ask for the best route of
access per lesion. Again, like many IR questions, this falls into the "depends on who you
ask" , and/or "read my mind" category. If forced to choose, this is how I would guess:

                     L e s io n                       Access
Iliac
CFA                              First Choice - Ipsilateral CFA. If that is down also
SFA                              (which it often is), I'd pick the contralateral CFA
Fem-Pop Graft                    Contralateral CFA
Fem-Fem Cross-Over
                                 Ipsilateral CFA

                                 Ipsilateral CFA

                                 First Choice - Direct Stick.
                                 Second choice-inflow CFA

If you are presented with other scenarios, the rule most people use is "shortest, most direct
approach."

When wouldyou use the contralateral CFA ? There are two general situations:

1. The Ipsilateral CFA is occluded.

2. The patient is very very fat. Even fatter than your normal acute leg patient. These are
    the guys/gals who got the milkshake (instead of the diet coke) with the baconator. As a
    point of gamesmanship, if the question header specifically mentions that the patient is
    obese they are likely leading you towards contralateral access.

          Gamesmanship: Watch out for "retrograde" vs "antegrade" access terminology in
          the distractors. The nomenclature for a downward (towards the toe) access is
          "antegrade." The terminology is based on the directions of the arterial flow.

          ·Antegrade access = towards the toes.

 I

          ·Retrograde access = towards the heart.

                                 379
General Procedural Trivia / Possible "Next Steps"

There are a whole bunch of ways to do this. In the most generic terms, you jam the catheter into the
proximal clot and infuse TPA directly into the mother fucker. Every 6-8 hours you check to see if you
are making progress. People call that "check angiography."

What ifyou can't cross the clot with a wire? If they spell that out in the vignette, they are trying to tell
you that this clot is organized and probably won't clear with thrombolysis.

What if there is no clearing o f the clot during a "check angiogram " ? If they specifically state this,
they are describing "lytic stagnation, " which for most reasonable people is an indication to stop the
procedure.

The patient develops "confusion " ? Neuro symptoms in a patient getting TPA should make you think
head bleed. Next step would be non-con CT head.

The patient develops "tachycardia and hypotension " ? This in the setting of TPA means the patient is
bleeding out. Next step would be (1) go to the bedside and look at the site. Assuming he/she isn't
floating in a lake of their own blood (2) CT abdomen/pelvis and probably stopping the TPA.

End Point ? Most people will continue treating till the clot clears. Although continuing past 48 hours
is typically bad form.

Venous Treatment

Varicose Vein Treatment: Just know that "tumescent anesthesia" (lots of diluted subcutaneous
lidocaine) is provided for ablation of veins. Veins are ablated using an endoluminal heat source. A
contraindication to catheter-based vein ablation is DVT (they need those superficial veins).

DVT: The primary complications of DVT are acute PE and chronic post thrombotic syndrome (PTS).
There are several clinical predictive models to keep everyone who comes in the ER from getting a CTPA -
"'Wells Score" is probably the most famous. Recently described is this "Thrombus Density Ratio" as a
superior predictor of PE in patients with known DVT on CTV. The density of thrombus on CTV has been
shown to be higher in patients with both DVT and PE relative to just DVT. Thrombus Density Ratio of
46.5 (thrombus HU / normal vein HU) = probable PE.

Phlegmasia alba (painful white leg) and Phlegmasia cerulea dolens (painful blue leg) - archaic
physical diagnosis terms that are high yield for the exam of the future. Phlegmasia alba = massive DVT,
without ischemia and preserved collateral veins. Phlegmasia cerulea dolens = massive DVT, complete
thrombosis of the deep venous system, including the collateral circulation. These are described as
extreme sequella of May-Thumer - but can occur in any situation where you get a punch of DVT
(pregnancy, malignancy, trauma, clogged IVC filter, etc..)

Post Thrombotic Syndrome (PTS): This is basically pain and stuff (venous ulcers) after a DVT. Risk
factors include being old (>65), a more proximal DVT, recun'ent or persistent DVT, and being fat.
PTS is usually diagnosed between 6 months and 2 years after DVT. VEINES-OOL is the scoring
system used to diagnose and classify severity of PTS. Catheter-directed intrathrombus lysis of
iliofemoral DVT is done to prevent post thrombotic syndrome. This is not needed as much with
femoropopliteal DVT as it will recanalize more frequently and have less severe post thrombotic
syndrome.

                                                        380
