                                    S E C T IO N 1:

                   In s t r u m e n t s o f In t e r v e n t io n

Puncture Needles:

 The smaller the "gauge" number, the bigger the needle. It's totally    Puncture Needle sizes
  counterintuitive. For example, an 8G Needle is much bigger than
  a 16G Needle. *This is the opposite o f a "French, '' which is used    are designated by the
  to describe the size o f a catheter or dilator The larger the French,
  the larger the catheter                                                OUTER diameter

 The Gauge "G" refers to the OUTER diameter of the needle.              Catheter and Dilator

Wires:                                                                   sizes are designated by

Just some general terminology:                                           the OUTER diameter

   D 0.039 inch = 1mm                                                    Sheaths are designated
   D 0.035 inch is the usual size for general purposes                   by their INNER lumen
   D 0.018 and 0.014 are considered microwires
   D "Glide Wires" are hydrophilic coated wires that allow for           size, (the maximum
                                                                         capacity o f a diameter
          easier passage of occlusions, stenosis, small or tortuous      they can accommodate)
          vessels.

Catheters - General

 3 French = 1 imn (6 French = 2 mm, 9 French = 3 mm) Diameter in mm = Fr / 3
 Important trivia to understand is that the French size is the external diameter of a catheter (not the

  caliber of the internal lumen).
 The standard 0.035 wire willfit through a 4F catheter (or larger)

Sheaths

 Sheaths are used during cases that require exchange of multiple catheters. The sheath allows you to
  change your catheters / wires without losing access.

 They are sized according to the largest catheter they will accommodate.
 The outer diameter of a vascular sheath is usually 1.5F to 2F larger than the inner lumen.

                          IF                                             Sheath - Size is Given by
                                                                         INNER Diameter
                     " (outer
                        diameter)        2F                              Add 2 F for the Outer
                                                                         Diameter (1F + 1F = 2F) if
                   -1               (Total Outer                         you want to know how big
                          (outer '   Diameter)                           the hole in the skin will be.

                        diameter)   This would be a 6F Sheath
                                    The hole in the skin would be 8F

                   348
         G am esm anship -- Various Forms o f Fuckery That Can Be Perform ed ~

There are a few classic ways this can be asked. You can get all these questions right if you
understand the following trivia:

 3 French = 1 mm, so 1 French = 0.3 mm
 Puncture Needles, Guide Wires, and Dilators are designated with sizes that describe their

  OUTER diameters.
 Sheaths are designated with sizes that describe their INNER diameter
 The rubber part of the sheath is about 2F (0.6 mm) thick, so the hole in the skin is about

  0.6mm bigger than the size of the sheath.
 Wire DIAMETERS are given in INCHES (example "0.035 wire" is 0.035 inches thick)
 Wire LENGTHS is typically given in CENTIMETERS (example "180 wire" is 180 cm

  long)

E xam ple Quiz 1: What is the size o f a puncture hole in mm o f a 6 French sheath?

Diameter in mm = F r / 3     6 French Describes the Inner Diameter
2.7 mm = {6 + 2 ) / 3        Add 2 French for the thickness of the rubber
                             Total is 8 French
Answer = 2.7 mm

E xam ple Q uiz 2: What is the size o f a puncture hole in mm o f a 6 French sheath, p la ced
coaxially into a short access sheath ?

**This is som e second levelfuckery'.

6 French sheath is being placed inside o f another sheath
6 French sheath is actually 8 French Big (remember you add 2 F fo r the rubber wall).
So you need a sheath that can accommodate an 8 French Diameter. Remember that
sheaths are nam edfo r what they can accommodate, so you need an 8 French Sheath.
8 French sheath is actually 10 French Big (remember yo u add 2F fo r the rubber
wall).

8F*                                                                         10F*

D iam eter in mm = F r / 3  8 French Describes the Inner Diameter
3.3 mm = (8 + 2 ) / 3       Add 2 French for the thickness of the rubber
                            Total is 10 French
Answer = 3.3 mm
                                     349
             Puncture Needles - The Legend Continues:

Some Conversions:

 16G needle has an outer diameter of 1.65 mm, = 5 F catheter;
 20G needle has an outer diameter of 0.97 mm, = 3 F catheter.

Some Needle Wire Rules:                          *Remember 0.035 is probably the
Old School Seldinger Technique:                  most common wire used. Thus the
 18G needle will accept a 0.038 inch guidewire  19G is the standard needle in
 190 needle will allow a 0.035 inch guidewire   many IR suites.

Micro Puncture Style:
 Initial puncture is performed with a 21G (rather than a typical 18G or 19G) needle.
 21G needle will allow a 0.018 inch guidewire
 After you have that tiny wire in, you can exchange a few dilators up to a standard

  4F-5F system with the popular 0.035 wire.

     Micro Puncture is Good when....           Micro Puncture is B ad w hen....

 Access is tough (example = a fucking     Scarred Up Groins
  antegrade fem oral puncture)             Big Fat People
                                           When you try and upsize, sometimes
 You suck ("lack experience")
 Anatomically sensitive areas (internal    that flim sy 0.018 w o n 't give enough
                                            supportfo r antegrade passage o f a
  jugular, dialysis access)                 dilator.

                                          350
          Guidewires - The Legend Continues to Continue:

There are two main flavors of guidewires:

(1) Non-Steerable - These are used as supportive rails for catheters. These are NOT for
     negotiating stenosis or selecting branches

(2) Steerable - These have different shaped tips that can be turned or flipped into tight spots.
     Within this category is the "hydrophilic" coated which are used to fit into the tightest
     spots.

H ydrophilic G uidew ires - "Slippery when w e t". They are sticky when dry, and super slippery
when wet. At most academic institutions dropping one of these slippery strings on the floor
will result in "not meeting the milestone" and "additional training" (weekend PICC workups).

 Next Step Questions: Could revolve around the need to "wipe the wire with a wet sponge
  each time it is used."

 N ext Step Questions: Pretty much any situation where you can 't get into a tight spot. This
  could be a stenotic vessel, or even an abscess cavity.

L ength - Here is the testable trivia regarding wire length.

 Rem em ber D iam eter is in INCH ES, Length is in CENTIM ETERS
 180 cm is the standard length
 260 cm is the long one. These are used if you are working in the upper extremity (from a

  groin access), working in the visceral circulation and need to exchange catheters, using a
  guide cath that is longer than 90 cm , through-and-through situation ("body flossing").
 Minimal guidewire length = length o f catheter + length o f the guidewire in the patient.

Floppy Tips - A lot of wires have pointy ends and soft floppy ends. The floppy ends are
usually available in different sizes. The testable point is that the shorter the floppy part the
greater the chance of vessel dissection. For example, a 1 cm floppy tip has a greater risk of
dissection compared to a 6 cm floppy tip. The practical tip is to choose a wire with a long
floppy tip (unless you are trying to squeeze into a really tight spot).

                                                        351
   G uidew ires - The Legend Continues to Continue to Continue

Stiffness: I feel like there are two primary ways to ask questions about stiffness:

(1) Your classic "right tool fo r the right j o b " questions.
     Unfortunately, these are often "read my mind, and understand my prejudices" questions.
     The following are probably the clearest scenarios:

   Bentson (floppy tip) = Classic guidewire test for acute thrombus lysability

   Lunderquist (super stiff) = "The coat hanger." This thing is pretty much only for aortic
     stent grafting.

   Hydrophilic = Trying to get into a tight spot. Yes a Bentson is also an option, but this is
     more likely the "read my mind" choice.

(2) Which is "Stijfer ? " or Which is "Less S tiff? " types o f question. Basically ju st have a
general idea o f the progression. A second-order style question would be "Which is more or
less likely to cause dissection?" Remember the rule is "more stiff = more dissection."

Less                                                                     'More Stiff

`Noodle Like"  Normal       Supportive         Stiff                     Hulk Smash !!

Bentson        Hydrophilic  Stiff Hydrophilic  Flexfinder                 Lunderquist
                                                                         Backup Meier
               Standard 0.035 J or "Heavy Duty" J or Amplatzer Stiff or

               Straight     Straight           Extra Stiff

                                               0.018 Platinum
                                                     Plus

                                               V I8 - shapeable tip

Trivia: Stiff guidewires should NEVER be steered through even the mildest of curves. You
should always introduce them through a catheter (that was originally placed over a
conventional guidewire).

J Tip Terminology: A "J Shaped" Tip supposedly has the advantages o f not digging up
plaque and of missing branch vessels. Often you will see a number associated with the J
(exam ple 3 m m , 5 mm , 10 mm , 15 mm e tc ...). This num ber refers to the radius o f the
curve. Small curves miss small branch vessels, larger curves miss larger branch vessels. The
classic example is the 15mm curve that can be used to avoid the profunda femoris during the
dreaded arterial antegrade stick.

                                                        352
                    Catheters - The Legend Continues
                           -- Fuckery with Numbers

If you look at a "buyers guide" or the packaging of an angiographic catheter you may (if you
look hard enough) find 3 different numbers. I think it would be easy to write a question asking
you to ID the numbers, or asking what size sheath or wire you can use with the catheter.

The three numbers that you are going to see on the package are: the outer diameter size (in
French), the inner diameter size (in INCHES), and the length (in CENTIMETERS).

E xam ple Q uestio n 1: What size is this catheter?

       VANDELAY INDUSTRIES       Answer = 4F
FINE ANGIOGRAPHIC CATHETERS

                  4, 110. 0.035

Remember that the outer diameter of a catheter defines it's size (unlike the sheath which is
defined by the inner diameter), and that these sizes are given in French. 4F catheters are very
commonly used. 110 and 0.035 are not catheter sizes available for humans existing outside of
middle earth.

Remember that length of the catheter is given in centimeters. The standard lengths vary from
about 45 cm to 125 centimeters.

Lastly the inner diameter of a catheter is given in inches and will pair up with the size wire.
For example, the largest wire a 0.035 catheter will accommodate is a 0.035.

Exam ple Q uestion 2: What size sheath and guidewire can you use with this catheter?

VANDELAY INDUSTRIES                   Answer =

FINE ANGIOGRAPHIC CATHETERS  4F Sheath or Larger

V :  i V                          0.035 wire or Smaller

4 110 0 035  0.038 wire would NOT fit

It's a 4F sheath because sheaths are defined by their INNER diameter. So a 4F snake can crawl
through a 4F tube. Obviously a bigger tube (5F, 6F, etc...) will also have enough room for a 4F
snake.

It's a 0.035 wire because the inner diameter measurements are given in inches, just like the
guidewires. In this case the tube is the catheter and the wire is the snake. So a bigger snake (any
wire thicker than 0.035) wouldn't fit.

                                 353
                Catheters - Selective vs Non-Selective

Just like Guidewires can be grouped into "steerable" or "non-steerable" , catheters can be
grouped into "non-selective (flush) catheters" and "selective catheters".
 Non-Selective Catheters: These things are used to inject contrast into medium and large

  shaped vessels. This is why you'll hear them called "flush catheters."
 Selective Catheters: These things come in a bunch o f different shapes/angles with the

  goal o f "selecting" a branch vessel (as the name would imply).

Non-Selective Catheters

Pigtail: For larger vessels this is the main workhorse. It's called a "pigtail" because the
distal end curls up as you retract the wire. This curled morphology keeps it out o f small
branch vessels. The catheter has both side and end holes.

     Q: W hat m ight happen if you consistently inject through the pigtail like a pussy?
     A: All the contrast will go out the proximal side holes and not the tip. Eventually, if
     you keep flushing like a pansy you will end up with a clot on the tip.
     Q: W hat should you do prior to giving it the full on alpha male injection ?
     A: Give a small test injection to make sure you aren't in or up against a small branch
     vessel. Pigtails are for use in medium to large vessels.
     Q: What if the pigtail fails to form as you retract the wire?
    A: Push the catheter forward while twisting.

Straight Catheter: This one doesn't curl up as you retract the wire. Otherwise, it's the
same as a pigtail with side holes and an end hole. The utility o f this catheter is for smaller
vessels (with the caveat that they still need decent flow).
The classic location is the iliac.

                                                        354
Catheters - Selective vs Non-Selective cont...

Selective Catheters

Selective catheters come in two main flavors: (1) end hole only, or (2) side + end holes

{that's what she said).

End Hole Only                                                  Side + End Holes
                                                         "Girl who went to catholic school"

                   Hand Injection Only                    Works fine with Pump Injected runs
*high flow injection can displace the catheter, or  (can handle a rapid bolus without displacing)

                   cause dissection

Utility = Diagnostic Angiograms and                 Utility = Classic would be a SMA Angiogram
       Embolization Procedures

                                                                NEVER use with Embolotherapy.
                                                    The fucking coils can get trapped in the
                                                    sideholes or the particulate matter/mush may go
                                                    out a side hole and go crush the wrong vessel.
                                                    "Non-targeted" they call it.

I think the above chart is probably good enough to get most reasonable selective catheter
questions correct. Unfortunately, it's also possible that you could be asked a "read my mind,
understand my prejudices" type of question in the form of "which catheter would you use? ''

This is how I would guess - i f forced.

                                                          a

     Acute Angle ( < 60)            Angle of 60-120         Obtuse Angle ( > 120)
Example = Aortic Arch Vessels
                                     Example = Renals,    Example = Celiac, SMA, IMA
      "Angled Tip Catheter"      Maybe SMA and Celiac
  -Berenstein or l-leadhunter                                         "Recurved"
                                     "Curved Catheter"      Sidewinder (also called a
                                                           Simmons), or a "Sos Omni"
                               "RDC" Renal Double Curve,
                                        or a "Cobra"

                                                    355
                             W TF is a "R ecu rve" ?

 For whatever reason Academic Angio guys tend to spaz if residents don't
 understand why a "recurve" \s different than a regular curved catheter.

 Basically any curved catheter has a "primary" curve and a "secondary" curve.
 On a regular curved cath both are in the same direction. However, on a
 recurved cath the primary goes one way, and the secondary goes the other.

 These catheters are good for vessels with an obtuse angle. You pull the
 catheter back to drop into them.

 I trained under a guy who was always very
 impressed with himself when he could perform a
 basic catheter maneuver like this. After dropping
 into the IMA he would sometimes slowly turn to
 one of the female techs and say "that's why I 'm
 the king. "

 I was really afraid he was going to break his own
 arm, jerking himself off that hard.

 That guy (or someone like him) is probably
 writing questions for the IR section (guessing /
 not confirmed - but makes me smile to think so).

                                   Vocab

"Co-Axial Systems" - Basically one catheter inside another catheter/sheath. The most
basic example would be a catheter inside the lumen of an arterial sheath.

"Guide Catheters" - These are large catheters meant to guide up to the desired vessel.
Then you can swap them for something more conventional for distal catheterization.

"Introducer Guide" - This is another name for a long sheath. The assholes are trying to
trick you.

"IVIicrocatheter" - These are little (2-3 French). They are the weapon of choice for tiny
vessels (example "super-selection" of peripheral or hepatic branches).

"Vascular Sheath" - It's a sheath (plastic tube) + hemostatic valve + side-arm for
flushing

                                                      356
                    Flo w Rate

"Give me 20for 30"-- typical angio lingo for a run at 20cc/sec for a total of 30cc.

How do you decide what the correctflow rate is ? For the purpose of multiple choice, I'll
just say memorize the chart below. In real life you have to consider a bunch of factors:
catheter size, catheter pressure tolerance, flow dynamics, vessel size, volume of the distal
arterial bed (hand arteries can tolerate less blood displacement compared to something like
the spleen), and interest in the venous system (a common concern in mesenteric angiography
- hence the relatively increased volumes in the SMA, IMA, and Celiac on the chart).

Bigger Artery = Higher Rate. You want to try and displace 1/3 of the blood per second to get
an adequate picture.

                    Typical Rates / Volum es

  Rate 1-2mL7sec      Rate 4-8mLysec       Rate 5-7mL/sec    Rate 20-30mL/sec
  Volume 4-10 mL      Volume 8-15 mL      Volume 30-40 mL    Volume 30-40 mL

Bronchial Artery    Carotid             Celiac             Aorta,
Intercostal Artery  Subclavian          SMA                Aortic Arch,
                    Renal                                  IVC,
                    Femoral                                Pulmonary Artery
                    IMA
                                                           *Abdominal Aorta has
                    *IMA are typically                     a slightly lower rate
                    given a higher                         (15-20 mUsec) as it is
                    volume (15-30 mL)                      smaller than the
                                                           Thoracic Aorta

                              Maximum Flow Rates:

These are determined by the INTERNAL diameter, length, and number of size
holes. In general, each French size gives you about 8ml/s.

These are the numbers I would guess if forced to on multiple choice. In the real
world its (a) written on the package and (b) a range of numbers

                         3F = 8 ml/s, 4F = 16 ml/s, 5F = 24 ml/s.

                                        357
                            C atheter Flushing

Double Flush Technique - This is used in situations where even the smallest thrombus or air
bubble is going to fuck with someone's golf game (neuro IR / cerebral angiograms). The
technique is to (1) aspirate the catheter until you get blood in the catheter, then (2) you attach
a new clean saline filled syringe and flush.
Single Flush Technique - This is used everywhere else (below the clavicles). The technique
is to (1) aspirate until you get about 1 drop of blood in a saline filled syringe, and (2) tilt the
syringe 45 degrees and flush with saline only.

What i f you accidentally mixed the blood in with the saline?

Discard the syringe and double flush

What if you are unable to aspirate any blood ?

Hopefully you are just jammed against a side wall. Try pulling back or manipulating the
catheter. If that doesn't work then you have to assume you have a clot. In that case your
options are to (1) pull out and clear the clot outside the patient, or (2) blow the clot inside the
patient - you would only do this if you are embolizing that location anyway (and a few other
situations that are beyond the scope of this exam).

                                                        358
