                                       S E C T IO N 9:

                      TIPS a BRTO

TIPS (Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystem ic Shunt) -

What is this p o rta l hypertension? The portal vein gives you 70-80% of your blood flow to
the liver. The pressure ditTerence between the portal vein and IVC ("'PSG", portosystemic
gradient) is nonnally 3-6 mm Hg. Portal HTN is defined as pressure in the portal vein >
10mm Hg or PSG > 5 mm Hg. The most common cause is EtOH (in North America).

What does portal hypertension look like? On ultrasound we are talking about an enlarged
portal vein (>1.3-1.5 cm), and enlarged splenic vein (>1.2 cm), big spleen, ascites,
portosystemic collaterals (umbilical vein patency), and slow (< 16 cm/s) or reversed flow in
the portal vein.

Who gets a TIPS ? Accepted indications include:

· Variceal hemorrhage that is refractory to endoscopic treatment

· Refractory ascites.

· Budd Chiari (thrombosis of the hepatic veins) ** most authors will include this

Preprocedural stepsfo r TIPS? You need two things. (1) An ECHO to evaluate for heart
failure (right or left). (2) Cross sectional imaging to confirm patency of the portal vein.

How is a TIPS done? The real answer is do an IR fellowship.

First thing you do is measure the right heart pressure. If it is elevated (10-12 mmHg) you stop
(absolute contraindication). A nornial right heart
pressure is around 5 mmHg.

If it is normal, you proceed with the procedure.
Access the jugular vein on the right, go down the
IVC to the hepatic veins, opacify the veins, do a
wedge pressure (don't blow the capsule off), use
CO2 to opacify the portal system. Then stick
"Crotch to Crotch" from the hepatic veins to the
portal vein (usually right to right). Then put a
covered stent in and balloon it up.

Lastly check pressures and make you sure you didn't over do it (usually want a gradient
around 9-12 -- "less than 12"). LESS THAN 12 is the GOAL

                                                        389
Which direction do you       pigW
turn the catheter when
you are moving fro m the
righ t hepatic vein, to the
rig h t p o rta l vein?

You want to turn                       ,ticv/ein                           P»

anterior.                          Hep3

Posterior twisting is the incorrect form of twisting    Turn Needle Anterior

- You risk Pneumothorax

- You will also miss the portal vein and bring shame upon your ancestors

                             Keeping Score

While you are busy pretending you are a surgeon, why not pretend that you are a medicine
doctor also? For the purpose of multiple choice, anything that resembles "Real Doctor"
work is always high yield. "Score Calculation " is the poster child for the kind of fringe
knowledge board examiners have traditionally loved to ask (this was definitely true for the
old oral boards). The two highest yield scores are the MELD and the Childs-Pugh.

What is this ``M E L D " Score ? This was initially         MELD            Child Pugh
developed to predict three month mortality in TIPS
patients. Now it's used to help prioritize which        Bilirubin          Bilirubin
drunk driving. Hep C infected. Alcoholic should get     INR
a transplant first. MELD is based on liver and renal                       PT
function - calculated from bilirubin, INR,
creatinine. MELD scores greater than 18 are at                             Albumin
higher risk of early death after an elective TIPS.
                                                                           Ascities, Hepatic
W hat about this "Childs-Pugh" Score ? This is          creatinine         Encephalopathy
the "old one," which was previously used to
determine transplant urgency prior to the MELD.         --------           Class B and C are
It works for TIPS outcomes, too, but is "less                              High Risk
accurate " than a MELD. This score assesses the         Greater than 18 =
severity of liver disease by looking at the bilirubin,  High Risk Death
albumin, PT, ascites, and hepatic encephalopathy.
The trivia to know is that class B & C are risk

factors ofvariceal hemorrhage.

Trivia = "Simplest prognostic measure" = Serum Bilirubin. > 3 mg/dL is associated with an
increase in 30-day mortality after TIPS.

                                         390
What are the contraindications fo r TIPS?             TIPS Absolute Contraindications

Some sources will say there is no "absolute"            (maybe... depending on who you ask)
contraindication. Others (most) will say severe
heart failure (right or left), - but especially                   Severe Heart Failure
right. That is the whole reason you check the
right heart pressure at the beginning of the                (why you get a cardiac echo
procedure and get an echo as part of the pre­                    prior to procedure)
procedure workup.
                                                          Severe Progressive Liver Failure
Accepted (by most) "relative" contraindications
include, cavernous transformation of the portal       MELD Score > 18 or Child-Pugh Class C
vein, and severe hepatic encephalopathy.                      Total Bilirubin > 3 ml/dL
Isolated gastric varices with splenic vein
occlusion is not appropriate for TIPS.                          Severe Encephalopathy

                                                              TIPS can make this worse

                                                                     Severe Infection

                                                         (Uncontrolled Systemic Infection)

The main acute postprocedural complications o f TIPS include: Cardiac decompensation
(elevated right heart filling pressures), accelerated liver failure, and worsening hepatic
encephalopathy.

Evaluation o f a "Normal TIPS"

Early follow up (first 2 weeks) will typically be limited as air bubbles along the graft can
mimic occlusion. Ultrasounds are usually done at 1, 3, and 6 months post op. Because the
stent decompresses the portal system, you want to see flow directed into the stent. Flow
should reverse in the right and left portal vein and flow directly into the stent. Flow in the
stent is typically 90-190 cm/s.

Stenosis /Malfunction:

     Elevated maximum velocities (> 200 cm/s) across a narrowed segment.
     Low portal vein velocity (< 30 cm/s is abnormal).
    D A temporal increase (or decrease) in shunt velocity by more than 50 cm/s is also

        considered direct evidence.
     "Flow Conversion" with a change of flow in a portal vein branch from towards the

        stent to away from the stent.
     An indirect sign of malfianction is new or increased ascites.

Targeted TIPS Follow-Up                                            TIPS Revision

These things tend to fail (50% primary patent within 1                 Occlusion
year for a bare metal stent), so they need tight follow
up.                                                       (Thrombolysis + Angioplasty)

Worsening Ascites, Bleeding, Etc                              Flow - Limited Stenosis
(things that make you think the TIPS isn't working)
                                                         Angioplasty -- Goal < 12 mmHg
Next Step = Venogram with pressures
                                                              Severe Encephalopathy
PSG>I2mmHg.
                                                                  TIPS Reduction

Next Step = Treat the stenosis (angioplasty + balloon)

Trivia: The stenosis usually occurs in the hepatic vein, or within the TIPS tract.

                                                 391
Addressing Hepatic Encephalopathy - Dropping the gradient too low increases the risk of
HE. If the TIPS is too open you may need to tighten it down with another stent.

What is an alternative to TIPSf o r treatment o f refractory ascites? There is a rarely
indicated thing called a "peritoneovenous shunt." This stupid thing has a high rate of
infection and thrombosis, and can even lead to DIC. It's designed to allow drainage of the
ascites through a tunneled line all the way up to the systemic circulation (jugular).

BRTO (Balloon-Occluded Retrograde Transverse Obliteration).

TIPS and BRTO are brother and sister procedures. Where the TIPS takes blood and steers it
away from the liver (to try and help the side effects of portal hypertension), the BRTO does
the opposite - driving more blood into the liver (to try and help with the side effects of extra
hepatic shunting). The inverted indications and consequences are highly testable:

              TIPS                                               BRTO
                               Treat Gastric Varices in the presence of a gastro-renal shunt
Treat Esophageal Varices       Classically Isolated Gastric Varices with Splenic Vein Thrombosis

Place a shunt to divert blood  Embolize collaterals to drive blood into liver
around liver
                               Complication is worsening esophageal varices and worsening
Complication is worsening      ascites
hepatic encephalopathy
                               Improves hepatic encephalopathy
Improves esophageal varices
and ascites

'"The Moves" : The general idea is that you           Gasfro'^^na/
access the portosystemic gastrorenal shunt            bhunt
from the left renal via a transjugular or
transfemoral approach. A balloon is used to
occlude the outlet of either the gastrorenal or
gastro-caval shunt. Following balloon
occlusion, a venogram is performed. A
sclerosing agent is used to take the vessels
out. After 30-50 minutes you aspirate the
remaining sclerosing agent and let down the
balloons.

Trivia: The most       Gastro-Renal Shunt is REQUIRED (its absence is a contraindication)
common side effect of
BRTO is gross          - It is needed to access the varix in order to strike down upon thee with
hematuria.             great vengeance and furious anger those who attempt to poison and destroy
                       my brothers -- i.e. embolize the varix

                                                 392
