                   S E C T IO N 2:

In s t r u m e n t s o f In t e r v e n t i o n

Arterial Access

General "Next Step" Scenarios;

 You meet resistance as you thread the guidewire. Next Step ==STOP! "Resistance " is an angio
  buzzword for something bad. Pull the wire out and confirm pulsatile flow. Reposition the
  needle if necessary.

 The wire will not advance beyond the top o f the needle even after you pull the wire back and

  have normal pulsatileflow. Next Step = Flatten the needle against the skin. You are assuming
  the need to negotiate by a plaque.

 The wire stops after a short distance. Next Step = Look under fluoro to confirm correct
  anatomic pathway. If it is normal then you could put a 4F sheath in and inject some contrast.
  After that monkeying around with a hydrophilic wire is the conventional answer.

Femoral Artery Access - This is the most                             Inguinal
common arterial access route.                                        Ligament
Anatomy review = the external iliac becomes
the CFA after it gives off the inferior epigastric.

The ideal location is over the femoral head
(which gives you something to compress
against), distal to the inguinal ligament /
epigastric artery and proximal to the common
femoral bifurcation.

 If you stick too high (above inguinal
  ligament): You risk retroperitoneal bleed

 If you stick too low, you risk AV Fistula
 If you stick at the bifurcation: You risk

  occluding branching vessels with your sheath.

                 Ideal Vessel Puncture Location (white circle):

                 --  The Middle of the Medial 1/3 of the Femoral Head

                 (as seen in frontal projection)

                 Ideal Skin Puncture Location (white arrow):

                 --  About 1-2 cm below the ideal vessel puncture

                 location (needle is inserted at a 45 degree angle)

                     359
Brachial Access - Possible situations when you might want to do this:
 Femoral Artery is dead / unaccessible.
 The patient's abdominal pannus, vagina, or ball sack is really stinky.
 Upper limb angioplasty is needed

Special Testable Facts/Trivia:

 Holding pressure is often difficult. Even a small hematoma can lead to m edial brachial
  fascial com partm ent syndrome (cold fingers, weakness) - and is a surgical emergency
  which may require fasciotomy.

 The risk o f stroke is higher (relative to femoral access), if the catheter has to pass across
  the great vessels / arch.

 A sheath larger than a 7F may require a surgical cut down.

 The vessel is smaller and thus more prone to spasm. Some people like to give prophylactic
  "GTN" - glyceryl trinitrate, to prevent spasm.

Which arm ?

 Left Side if headed south (abdominal aorta or lower extremity).

 Right Side if headed north (thoracic aorta or cerebral vessels).

 All things equal = Left side (it's usually non-dominant, and avoids the most cerebral
  vessels).

 Blood pressure difference greater than 20 Systolic suggest a stenosis (choose the other
  arm).

Radial A ccess - This is also a thing. There are two pieces of trivia that I think are the most
testable about this access type.

(1) Bedrest is not required after compression.

(2) You need to perform an "Allen Test" prior to puncture. The "Allen Test" confirms
    collateral flow via the ulnar artery to the hand (just in case you occlude the radial artery).
    The test is done by manually compressing the radial and ulnar arteries. A pulse ox placed
    on the middle finger should confirm desaturation. Then you release the ulnar artery and
    saturation should improve, proving the ulnar artery is feeding the hand.

                                                        360
Translumbar Aortic Puncture - This was more commonly performed in the dark ages /
Cretaceous period. You still see them occasionally done during the full-on thrash that is the
typical type 2 endoleak repair. By using a direct lumbar stick in the prone position you can
avoid crossing organs / bowel.

Trivia:

This is done in the prone position. The patient          Prone Left Sided Approach
has to lay on his/her stomach (for hours!)                      (to avoid the IVC)
during these horrible thrashes.
                                                         *you might go right sided if

The patient "Self compresses" after the
procedure by rolling over onto his/her back.

Notice the path of the needle crosses the psoas
muscle. Hematoma of the psoas happens pretty
much every case, but is rarely a legit problem.

Complaining about a "mild backache" occurs               (drawn with a
with literally every one of these cases because          bifurcated graft)
they all get a psoas hematoma. "Don't be a
pussy" is the advice my Dad would recommend
giving these limp-wristed cry babies.

Known supraceliac aortic aneurysm is a contraindication

Typically "high" access - around the endplate of T12 - is done. Although you can technically
go "low" - around L3.

Arterial Access Pre Procedure Trivia:

Prior to an arterial stick you have to know some anticoagulation trivia.

 Stop the heparin 2 hours prior to procedure (PTT 1.2x of control or less; normal 25-35 sec)
 INR of 1.5 is the number I'd pick if asked (technically this is in flux)
 Stop Coumadin at least 5-7 days prior (vitamin K 25-50 mg IM 4 hours prior, or FFP/Cryo)
 Platelet count should be > 50K (some texts say 75)
 Stop ASA/Plavix 5 days prior (according to SIR)
 Per the ACR - diagnostic angiography, routine angioplasty, and thrombolysis are considered

  "clean procedures." Therefore, antibiotic prophylaxis is unnecessary.

Arterial Access Post Procedure Trivia:

By the book, you want 15 minutes of compression. You can typically pull a sheath with an
ACT of <150-180. Heparin can get turned back on 2 hours post (assuming no complications).
Groin check and palpate pulses should be on the post op nursing orders.

Closure Devices: Never used if there is a question of infection at the access site.

                                              361
Venous Access:

PlCC lines: Use the non-dominant arm. The preference is basihc > brachial > cephalic.
You don't place these in patients with CRF, on dialysis, or maybe going to be on dialysis.

Median Cubital Vein  Brachial V.

Central Lines/Port: The right IJ is preferred. External jugular veins can be used.
Subclavian access is contraindicated in patients with a contraindication to PICC lines.
Don't place any tunneled lines/ports in septic patients (they get temporary lines).
National Kidney Foundation-Dialysis Outcome Quality Initiative (NKF-KDOQI): Order of
preference for access: RIJ > LIJ > REJ > LEJ. '"Fistula First Breakthrough Initiative": is
the reason you don't place PICCs in dialysis patients.
What is the preferred access site fo r a dialysis catheter? The right IJ is the preferred
access, because it is the shortest route to the preferred location (the cavoatrial junction). It
will thrombose less than the subclavian (and even if it does, you don't lose drainage from
the arm - like you would with a subclavian). Femoral approach is less desirable because
the groin is a dirty dirty place.

                                                        362
Bleeding                                                        Applying Pressure
                                                               - Where dat hole be?
The word "hypotension " in the cUnical vignette after an
arterial access should make you think about high sticks /  The hole in the skin and
retroperitoneal bleeds.                                    the hole in the artery don't
                                                           typically line up.
Things that w on't help:
                                                            Antegrade Puncture =
 Yelling "Mother Fucker!!" - trust me, I've tried this      Below the skin entry point

Things that might help:                                     Antegrade Puncture on a
                                                             Fatty = Well Below the
 Placing an angioplasty balloon across the site of the      skin entry point
  bleeding (or inflow) vessel.
                                                            Retrograde Puncture =
                                                             Above the skin entry

Pseudoaneurysm Treatment: As described in the vascular chapter, you can get a
pseudoaneurysm after a visit to the cardiology cath lab (or other rare causes). A lot of the
time, small ones (< 2 cm) will undergo spontaneous thrombosis. The ones that will typically
respond to interventional therapy are those with long narrow necks, and small defects. There
are 3 main options for repair: (1) open surgery, (2) direct ultrasound compression, or
(3) thrombin injection.

Next Step: Pain disproportionate to that expected after a percutaneous stick = Get an US to
look for a pseudoaneurysm

Direct Compression  Direct compression of the              Painful for the Patient (and
                    neck (if possible avoid                the Radiologist), can take 20
                    compression of the sac).               mins to an hour.
                    Enough pressure should be
                    applied to stop flow in the            Don't compress if it's above
                    neck.                                  the inguinal ligament.

Thrombin Injection  Needle into apex of cavity             Contraindications: Local
                                                           infection, Rapid
                    (aim towards the inflow                Enlargement, Distal Limb
                                                           Ischemia, Large Neck (risk
                    defect) - inject 0.5-1.0 ml            for propagation).
                                                           Pseudoaneurysm cavity size
                    (500-1000 units).                      < Icm.

                    Do NOT aspirate blood into
                    syringe - will clot.

Surgery             May be needed if thrombin injection fails, there is
                    infection, there is tissue breakdown, or the aneurysm neck
                    is too wide.

                    363
Pseudoaneurysm Treatment Cont:
Which option do you pick? For the purpose of multiple choice I would suggest the following:

 Standard Starting Point: Cardiac Cath Lab

Surgical         Yes       I             No ,      Combined Yes     Depends -
                1                              1  AV Fistula ?      Probably a
                1     Infected                                      covered
                      Actively Bleeding                             stent
                      Skin Necrosis
                      Thrombotic Event

                                                  No

    Email                                    Cavity     > 2 cm
 Cardiology                                  S iz e ?
  Brag that
you "fixed it"        X ^<2cm ^

                                 Repeat US              Necl< Size
                                   1 Week                < 1cm ?

                                                   Yes

                                         Thrombin                  Above vs Below
                                                                        Inguinal
                                                                       Ligament

                                          Below, Above

                1     Repeat US
                1
                      2 Days                      Compression       Depends -
                                                     with US        Probably a

                                                  *mightbe worth    covered stent

                                                  a try, but wide

                                                  neck reduces

                                                  su(x:ess rate

                                                             Surgical
                                                        *if the neck is very

                                                          wide (15mm or
                                                        more), you might
                                                          consider going
                                                        straight to surgery

                                         364
Pseudoaneurysm Treatment Cont:                                           Mind Reading Strategy:

This algorithm on the p rio r p age assumes the Test Writer agrees that  Do I think the person
Thrombin is superior to Compression (it hurts less, and probably         who wrote this question
has a higher success rate). Most modernly trained guys will think        has more than 30 grey
like this. However, some conservative strategies fa\'or trying to        hairs on his ball sac ?
compress all the ones below the Inguinal ligamentfirst - then trying
thrombin second line. Simply read the test writers mind to know          Yes: Compress
his / her bias prior to answering.                                       No: Thrombin

Thrombin Injection - Where do you stick the needle ?

                                                      The needle should be placed

                                                      in the apex of the cavity (tip
                                                      directed towards the inflow
                                                      defect).

Ultrasound Com pression - Where do you compress ?

                                                              Orthogonal plane to the neck of the
                                                              pseudoaneurysm . Pressure is
                                                              directed to obliterate flow in the
                                                              neck / sac.

          Femur

Trivia - Seriously Watch the Wording Carefadly:

 Anticoagulation has no effect on tlirombin injection treatment - primary success**
 Anticoagulation does* increase the risk of recurrence (10%?) after thrombin injection treatment
 Anticoagulation is NOT a contraindication to attempting direct compression, although it DOES

  reduce success rate and most people will tell you to stop them prior to the procedure (if possible).
 Failure to respond to thrombin = Occult vascular issue (big puncture site laceration, infection)
 Untreated Pseudoaneurysm for greater than 30 days tend to resist compression and thrombin

  therapy to variable degrees. They do best if treated within 2 weeks.
 Attempted compression of a Pseudoaneurysm above the inguinal ligament can cause a RP bleed.

  It is still safe to try and thrombin inject

                                                        365
