                                                   S E C T IO N 12:

                A b s c e s s D rain age

General Tactics:

In general, there are two methods, you can use a trocar or you can use the seldinger technique
(wire guided).

   D Trocar: You nail it with a spinal needle first. Then adjacent to the needle (in tandem)

          you place a catheter.

   D Seldinger: One stick with a needle, then wire in, dilate up and place a catheter.

Drain Size: The grosser and thicker stuff will need a bigger tube. If forced I 'd go with:
 6-8 F for clear fluid
 8-10 F for thin pus
 10-12 F for thick pus
 12F+ for collections with debris or in collections that smell like a Zombie farted.
Drain Type: You pretty much always use a pigtail. I w ouldn't guess anything else.

          Trivia / Gamesmanship
   Any "next step" question that offers to turn doppler on prio r to sticking it with a needle is
   always the right answer. Trying to trick you into core needling a pseudoaneurysm is the
  oldest trick in the book.
   Decompressing the urinary bladder prior to a pelvic abscess drainage is often a good idea.
  Collection has pus. Next step = aspirate all o f it (as much as possible) prior to leaving the
  drain
  You can't advance into the cavity because it's too fibrous/thick walled. N ext Step ? I 'd try
  a hydrophilic coated
   Family medicine w ant you to put a 3 way on that 12 F drain. Next step = d o n 't do that.
   You are reducing the functional lumen to 6 F.

                                                        414
Trivia / Gamesmanship Continued

 Family medicine wants you to hold off on antibiotics till after you drain this unstable septic
   shock patient's abscess. Next step = d o n 't do that. A ntim icrobial therapy should never be
   withheld because some knuckle head is worried about sterilizing cultures. (1) Cultures
  almost never change management from the coverage they were on anyway, (2 ) the trauma
  of doing the drainage will seed the bloodstream with bacteria and make the sepsis worse.

 Family medicine wants to know how many cc to flush this complex (but small) abscess
  with? Rem ember that "flu sh in g " and "irrigation" are different. Flushing is done to keep
  the tube from clogging with viscous poop. Irrigation is when you are washing out the
  cavity (the solution to pollution is dilution) for com plete cavity drainage. Going nuts with
  the irrigation can actually cause a bacteremia. The vignette could say something like
  "waxing and waning fever corresponding to flush schedule." The next step would be to
  train the nurses / family medicine to limit the volume to less than the size of the cavity.

 You irrigate the abscess with 20 cc o f fluid but when you aspirate back you only get 5ccs.
  Next Step? Stop irrigating it! You have a big problem . The fluid (which is dirty) is being
  washed into a location that is not able to be sucked back out by the tube. So you are
  creating a new pocket of infection that isn't being drained.

 Catheter started out draining but now is stopped. N ext Step = (1) confirm that it is in the
  correct location and not kinked - might need imaging if not obvious at bedside, then (2) try
  flushing it or clearing an obstruction with a guidewire. If the catheter is clogged for real
  then you'll need to exchange it - probably for a larger size. I f the tract is m ature (older than
  a week) you can probably get a hydrophilic guidewire through the tract into the collection
  to do an easy exchange.

 Remove the catheter when: (1) drainage is less than lOcc / day, (2) the collection is
  resolved by imaging (CT, Ultrasound, e tc...), and (3) there is no fistula.

 Persistent Fever > 48 Hours post drainage. The patient should get better pretty quickly
  after you drain the abscess. If they aren't getting better it implies one o f two things (1) you
  did a shitty job draining it, or (2) they have another abscess somewhere else. Either way
  they need more imaging and probably another drain.

 The drainage am ount spikes. This is a bad sign. In a norm al situation the drainage should
  slower taper to nothing and then once you confirm the abscess has resolved you pull the
  drain. Spikes in volume (especially on multiple choice exams) suggest the formation o f a
  fistula. N ext step is going to be more imaging, possibly w ith fiuoro to dem onstrate the
  fistula (urine, bowel, pancreatic duct, bile duct, etc...).

                                                        415
Pelvic Abscess Drainage - tubo-ovahan abscess, diverticular abscess, or peri-appendiceal

General Ideas for Choosing the Correct Route:

(1) All things equal, pick the shortest route

(2) Avoid bowel, solid organs, blood vessels (inferior epigastrics are classic), nerves

(3) Try not to contaminate sterile areas

(4) Choose the most dependent position possible (usually posterior or lateral) to facilitate
     drainage

Routes

Most abscesses in the pelvis are layering in a dependent position so anterior routes are
typically not easy. In general there are 4 routes; transabdominal, transgluteal, transvaginal,
and transrectal. I'm gonna try and cover the pros/cons and testable trivia for each route.

Transabdominal - The pull o f gravity tends to cause infection to layer in the more posterior
spaces. As a result transabdominal approaches tend to be long, and therefore violate one of
the 4 general ideas. If you are shown an abscess where this would be the best, shortest route
then remember to watch out for the inferior epigastrics. For sure there will be an option to
stick the trocar right through one o f them. Make sure you ID them before you choose your
answer.

Transgluteal - The transgluteal       Gluteal               Presacral                    S c ia tic
approach is done for a variety o f    Artery                C o lle c tio n              Nerve
posterior targets. The patient is
positioned prone for targeting.         Sciatic                           G lu te a l
                                        Nerve                             A rte ry
Avoid the sciatic nerve and gluteal
arteries by:

 Access through the sacrospinous
  ligament

 Medial as possible

 Inferior to the piriformis

Disadvantages: Legit risk of artery/           Piriform is  F em oral
nerve injury. Prone to catheter                             Artery
kinking. Gotta use CT (radiation).

                                                 416
Endolum inal Routes: There is a subset o f perverts who prefer to biopsy and drain things through
the vagina (tuna purse) and/or the rectum .... Not that there's anything wrong with that. Well
actually the primary disadvantage o f both o f these "endoluminal routes" is catheter stability.
Many catheters are literally pooped out within 3-4 days. Although advocates for these routes will
argue that (a) they are more fun to do, and (b) most collections resolve within 3 days.

Transvaginal: Biopsy and/or drainage through the vagina (pink taco) has the advantage of
providing a very short safe route that can be guided by transvaginal ultrasound, allowing for no
radiation and very accurate placement. This was the classic in office route for drainage of
infected gynecologic fluid collections (PID related). The procedure is done in the lithotomy
position. Catheter size is traditionally limited to 12F (or smaller). You should never do this to a
patient under the age o f 14 - not even Jared from Subway would try that.

Although controversial, it is possible (and well described in the literature) to drain / biopsy
adnexa cysts through the vagina (penis fly trap).

Vaginal prep / cleansing prior to the procedure is controversial and unlikely to be tested.

Transrectal: O f the three routes (gluteal, vaginal, rectal) transrectal is supposedly the least
painful - although in my literature review the psychological pain was not discussed (this kinda
thing would really fuck with my machismo). Essentially this route offers all the advantages of
the transvaginal route (ultrasound guidance, very short / safe route) plus the added advantage of
pre-sacral access. Depending on what you read, people will argue this is first line (over trans-
gluteal) for pre-sacral collection but that is highly variable.

Choosing between transgluteal and trans-rectal for a pre-sacral collection would be the worst
"read my mind" question ever. If forced into that scenario I would set aside the psychologic
trauma to the alpha male ego and use ( 1) the size of the collection - do you think that will drain
before he/she poops the catheter out ?, and (2 ) is the transgluteal route safe - are the vessels
nerves obviously in the way?

Prep with a cleansing enema is not controversial and is endorsed pretty much everywhere.

Rectouterine  Pre-sacral                              Pre-sacral
              collection                              collection

                               R e c to v e s ic a l
                               pouch
                               collection

The Baby      Rectum                                        Rectum
Cannon                                                      (prison wallet)

                               *not drawn to scale

                          417
Diverticular Abscess

There are a few pearls / special considerations that we should discuss regarding the
diverticular abscess.

Size: The typical threshold for a diverticular abscess to be drained is 2 cm. Anything smaller
than that will be more trouble than it is worth.

Tube Choice: Remember the grosser and thicker stuff will need a bigger tube. Diverticular
abscesses form because o f a perforated diverticulum. Thus, you can come to the logical
conclusion that you need a tube capable of draining shit. For the purpose of multiple choice,
anything smaller than lOF is probable NOT the right answer.

Gas: If the abscess is gas producing (they would have to tell you the bulb suction fills rapidly
with gas), the correct next step is to treat the collection like a pleural drain in a patient with an
air leak (i.e. put on water seal).

Liver Abscess

Lots o f etiologies for these, but don't forget to think about the appendix or diverticulitis. The
draining o f these things is somewhat controversial with some authors feeling the risk o f
peritoneal spread out weighs the benefits and reserving the drainage for patient's with a poor
prognosis. Other authors say that everyone and their brother should get one, and consider it
first line treatment.

A pearl to draining these things is to not cross the pleura (you'll give the dude an empyema).
If there is a biliary fistula, prolonged drainage will usually fix it (biliary drainage or surgery is
rarely needed).

Trivia: Biopsy / Aspiration o f Echinococcal cysts can cause anaphylaxis. Surgical removal o f
the presumed echinococcal cysts should be discussed with surgery before attempting the
procedure in IR (you want to be able to blame it on them, if shit goes bad).

Renal Abscess

Renal abscess is usually secondary to ascending infection or hematogenous spread. The term
 "perinephric a b scess" is used when they perforate into the retroperitoneal space. W hen they
are small (< 3-5 cm) they will resolve on their own with the help o f IV antibiotics.

Indications for aspiration or drainage include a large (> 3-5 cm), symptomatic focal fluid
collection that does not respond to antibiotic therapy alone.

The strategy is to use ultrasound and stick a pig tail catheter in the thing. After a few days if
the thing is not completely drained you can address that by upsizing the tube. If you create or
notice a urine leak, you'll need to place a PCN. There are really only relative contraindication
- bleeding risk e tc ..., and the procedure is generally well tolerated with a low complication
rate.

                                                        418
Perirenal Lymphocele

This is seen in the setting o f a transplant. W hen they are small you typically just watch them.
However, on occasion they get big enough to cause local mass effect on the ureter leading to
hydronephrosis. You can totally aspirate them, but they tend to recur and repeated aspiration
runs the risk of infecting the collection. For multiple choice I would say do this: Aspirate the
fluid and check the creatinine. I f it's the same as serum it's probably a lymphocele { if i t 's
more then i t 's a urinoma). Either way you are going to drain them with a catheter. However,
if it's a lymphocele you m ight sclerose the cavity (alcohol, doxy, povidine-iodine).

*Urinomas (that are persistent) o f any size are drained.

Pancreas Drainage

Rem ember that necrotizing pancreatitis is bad, but infected necrotizing pancreatitis is a
death sentence. So, be careful draining something that is NOT infected already (otherwise
you m ight make it infected). If you aren't sure if it's infected, consider aspirating some for
culture (but not placing a tube).

Indications: General indications include infected collections or collections causing mass
effect (bowel or biliary obstruction).

Progression to surgery: If you can get 75% reduction in 10 days, the drain is good enough.
If not, the surgeons can use the tract for a video-assisted retroperitoneal debridement (which
still avoids open debridement).

Pancreatic Cutaneous Fistula: Other than pancreatic pseudocysts, most pancreatic
collections are either brown or grayish. W hen the fluid is clear, you should think about
pancreatic fluid, and send a sample for amylase to confirm. If this lasts more than 30 days
then you have yourself a "persistent pancreatic fistula. " N ice jo b idiot... you could have just
left it alone. That will teach you to let those medicine docs pressure you into doing stuff
that's not indicated. It m ay be possible to treat that with octreotide (synthetic somatostatin)
to inhibit pancreatic fluid, although in these cases extended drainage is usually needed.

 You've Been Tallied into Draining the Pseudocyst -- Which Route:

 General Rule; If the pseudocyst communicates with the pancreatic duct drainage will be prolonged
 (6-8 weeks in most cases). You can try and use somatostatin to slow it down.

 Most Cases: Transperitoneal with CT guidance -- avoid organs, avoid going through the stomach
 twice.

 Can't Avoid the Stomach or Patient has a known Duct Communication (so they gonna have a tube
 for a long time) - Transgastric Approach -- so it drains into the stomach

                                                        419
