                   S E C TIO N 15:
   R e p r o d u c t iv e I n t e r v e n t io n

uterine A rtery Embolization (UAE):

Can be used for bleeding or the bulk symptoms of fibroids. Procedure may or may not help with
infertility associated with fibroid. If you are paying cash.... it definitely helps.

Patient Selection (not all fibroids were created equal). To do this you need a pre-op MRI/MRA to
characterize the fibroids and look at the vasculature.

Subtypes:

D Degenerated leiomyoma are more likely to have a poor response

     (these are the ones that don't enhance).
D "Cellular" Fibroids - the ones with high T2 signal tend to respond well to embolization.

     Most fibroids "Hyaline Subtype" are T2 dark.

D Smaller lesions do better than larger lesions.

Location:
D Submucosal does the best. Intramural does the second best.
D Serosal does the third best (it sucks). It speaks the third most Italian -
D Cervical fibroids do NOT respond well to UAE - they have a different blood supply.

D Intracavitary Fibroids - Less than 3 cm.

               O Next Step = GYN referral for hysteroscopic resection

D Intracavitary Fibroids - Less than 3 cm , with failed hysteroscopic resection

O Next Step = IR Embo

n Large Serosal Fibroid, patient wants to be pregnant, no history of prior myomectomy

O Next Step = GYN referral for myomectomy

D Pedunculated Serosal Fibroid

O                         Next Step = GYN referral for resection

D Broad Ligament Fibroid

O Next Step = Refer to voodoo priest (these don't do well with UAE and are

   technically challenging to operate on).

                                P e d u n c u la te d  Subserosal
                                S u b sero sal
                                                                               Intracavitary
                                                                               P edunculated
                                                                               Subm ucosal

   Intra-
   L igam entary

            Subm ucosal

             Intram ural
                             C ervical

                                                       437
PreTreatment Considerations / Trivia

D Remember fibroids are hormone responsive. They grow with estrogen (and really grow during

     pregnancy). Gonadotropin-releasing medications are often prescribed to control fibroids by
     blocking all that fancy hormone axis stuff

D The testable trivia is to delay embolization for 3 months if someone is on the drugs because

     they actually shrink the uterine arteries which makes them a pain in the ass to catheterize.

D The EMMY trial showed that hospital stays with UAE are shorter than hysterectomy
D The incidence of premature menopause is around 5%
D DVT / PE is a known risk of the procedure (once pelvic vein compression from large fibroid

     releases - sometimes the big PE flies up). The risk is about 5%.

Contraindications: Pregnancy. Uterine/Cervical Cancer. Active Pelvic Infection, Prior Pelvic
Radiation, Connective Tissue Disease, Prior Surgery with Adhesions (relative)

Treatment Trivia

D Occlusion of small feeding arteries cause fibroid infarction (and hopefiilly shrinkage). Embolic

     material is typically PVA or embospheres for fibroids (targeting the pre-capillary level). If ask to
     choose an agent - I'd say "particles" - don't pick coils, or glue. For postpartum hemorrhage /
     vaginal bleeding, gel foam or glue is typically used.
D Most people will say either 500-700 micro or 700-900 micron particle sizes. As a point of trivia
     smaller particle size does not give you a better result for fibroids --but can help with
     Adenomyosis.

D Treatment of adenomyosis with UAE is done exactly the same way, and is an effective treatment

     for symptomatic relief (although symptoms recur in about 50% of the cases around 2 years post
     treatment). As above - slightly smaller particles are typically used for this (vs fibroids).
D Fibroids should reduce volume 40-60% after the procedure. If you are treating intracavitary
     fibroids they should turn to mush and come out like a super gross chunky vegetable soup period
     mix. You actually want that - if they stay ("retained") inside they can get infected.

Anatomy Trivia:

D Remember the uterine artery is off the anterior division of the internal iliac
D Regardless of the fibroid location, bilateral uterine artery embolization is necessary to prevent

     recruitment of new vessels

D In most cases, branches of the ovarian artery feed the fibroids via collaterals with the main

     uterine artery. Uterine artery can be identified by the characteristic "corkscrew" appearance of
     its more distal branches --named the Helicine branches (twisty like a helix)

O varian A.

Internal
Iliac

             Vaginal A.         Twisty "C orkscrew "
                                 Helicine Branches
                           438
uterine Artery Embolization Continued:

Post Embolization Syndrome: I mentioned this earlier but just wanted to remind you that it's
classically described with fibroid embolization. Remember you don't need to order blood cultures
without other factors to make you consider infection. The low-grade fever should go away after 3
days. Some texts suggest prophylactic use of anti-pyrexial and antiemetic meds prior to the
procedure.
 3 Days or less with low grade fever = Do nothing
 More than 3 Days with fever = "Work it up" , cultures, antibiotics, etc...

Hysterosalpingogram (HSG):

I'm 100% certain no one went into radiology to do these things. You do it like a GYN exam. Prep
the personal area with betadine, drape the patient, put the speculum in and find the cervix. There
are various methods and tools for caimulating and maintaining cannulation of the cervix (vacuum
cups, tenaculums, balloons). Insertion of any of these devices is made easier with a catheter and
wire. Once the cervix and endometrial cavity have been accessed, the contrast is inserted and
pictures are obtained.
Contraindications: Pregnancv. Active Pelvic Infection. Recent Uterine or Tubal Pregnancy.

Trivia:
 The ideal time for the procedure is the proliferative phase (day 7-14), as this is the time the

  endometrium is thinnest (improves visualization, minimizes pregnancy risk).
 It's not uncommon for a previously closed tube to be open on repeat exam (sedative, narcotics,

  tubal spasm - can make a false positive).
 Air bubbles can cause a false positive filling defect.
 Intravasation - The backflow of injected contrast into the venous or lymphatic system, used to

  be an issue during the Jurassic period (when oil based contrast could cause a fat embolus). Now
  it means nothing other than you may be injecting too hard, or the intrauterine pressure is
  increased because of obstruction.
 The reported risk o fperitonitis is 1%.

Fallopian Tube Recanalization (FTR):

Tubal factors (usually PID / Chlamydia) are responsible for about 30% of the cases in female
infertility ~ depending on what part of the country you are from sometimes much more {insertjoke
about your hometown here). Tubal obstruction comes in two flavors; proximal / interstitial, or
distal. The distal ones get treated with surgery. The proximal ones can be treated with an
endoscope or by poking it with a wire under fluoro.

Things to know:
 You should schedule it in the follicular/proliferative phase (just like a HSG) - day 6-12ish.
 You repeat the HSG first to confirm the tube is still clogged. If clogged you try and unclog it

  with a wire ( "selective salpingography ").
 Hydrophilic 0.035 or 0.018 guidewire (plus / minus microcatheter) is the typical poking tool
 Repeat the HSG when you are done to prove you did something
 Contraindications are the same as HSG (active infection and pregnancy)

                                                        439
Pelvic Congestion Syndrome

- Women have mystery pelvic pain. This is a real (maybe) cause o f it. They blame dilated
ovarian and periuterine veins in this case, and give it a name ending in the word "syndrome" to
make it sound legit. The symptoms o f this "syndrome" include pelvic pain, dyspareunia,
menstrual abnormalities, vulvar varices, and lower extremity varicose veins. The symptoms
are most severe at the end of the day, and with standing.

Diagnosis ? Clinical symptoms + a gonadal vein diameter o f 10 mm (normal is 5 mm).

Treatment ? GnRH agonists sometimes help these patients, since estrogen is a vasodilator. But
the best results for treatment of this "syndrome" are sclerosing the parauterine venous plexus,
and coils/plugs in the ovarian and internal iliac veins (performed by your local Interventional
Radiologist). This is often staged, starting with ovarian veins plugged first, and then (if
unsuccessful) iliac veins plugged second.

Trivia: M ost optimal results occur when the entire length o f both gonadal veins are embolized.

Complications ? Complications are rare but the one you worry about is thrombosis o f the
parent vein (iliac or renal), and possible thrombus migration (pulmonary embolism).

Will it get better on its own ? The symptoms will classically improve after menopause.

Varicocele

- They are usually left-sided (90%), or bilateral (10%). Isolated right-sided varicoceles should
prompt an evaluation for cancer (next step = CT Abd).

When do you treat them? There are three indications: (1) infertility, (2) testicular atrophy in a
kid, (3) pain.

Anatomy Trivia (regarding varicoceles): Remember that multiple venous collaterals
"pampiniform plexus" or "spermatic venous plexus" drain the testicles. Those things come
together around the level o f the femoral head, forming the internal spermatic vein. The left
internal spermatic vein drains into the left renal vein, and the right internal spermatic vein
drains into the IVC. Common variants include: multiple veins on the right terminating into the
IVC or renal vein, or one right-sided vein draining into the renal vein (instead o f the IVC).

Why Varicoceles Happen: The "primary factor" is right angle entry o f the left spermatic vein
into the high pressure left renal vein. Nut-cracker syndrome (compression o f the left renal vein
between the SMA and aorta) on the left is another cause (probably more likely asked).

Basic Idea: You get into the renal vein and look for reflux into the gonadal vein (internal
spermatic) which is abnormal but confirms the problem. You then get deep into the gonadal
vein, and embolize close to the varicocele (often with foam), then drop coils on the way back,
and often an Amplatzer or other occlusion device at the origin.

                                                        440
