                                     S E C T IO N 1 1:

                      L u m in a l GI

G Tubes:

A "G- Tube" is a gastric tube, placed dircctly into the stomach. They are primarily used as an
attempt to prolong the suffering of stroked out Alzheimer Patients with stage 4 sacral decubitus
ulcers.

Traditional method (Radiographically Inserted Gastrostomy - RIG): The basic idea is that you
put an NG tube down and pump air into the stomach until it smushes flat against the anterior
abdominal wall. Then you spear it and secure it with 4 "T-Tacks" to tack the stomach to the
abdominal wall in the gastric body. Then spear it again, wire in and dilate up to the size you
want. Typically, the T-Tacks are removed in 3-6 weeks. Other things that you can do is give a
cup of barium the night before to outline the colon.

If the patient has ascites. Next Step = Drain that first.

 The Ideal Target:

 Left of Midline (lateral to

 the rectus muscle to avoid
 inferior epigastric)

 Mid to Distal Body

 Equal distance from the
 greater and less curves - to

 avoid arteries

Anatomy Trivia: The cardia of the stomach is actually the most posterior portion.

There is another method often called a "PIG" because of the Perioral route. In that version you
stab the stomach and tread a wire up the esophagus. Then you grab the wire, slip the tube over
it, and advance the tube over the wire into the stomach all the way out the stabbed hole.
Then it's back to the nursing home for Grandma.

Honestly, it's probably best to do it with a scope, but since we are Radiologists my official
statement is that only a Radiologist can do this procedure well.

How long does Granny need to wait before she can have her ensure via the G-Tuhe? Depends
on who you ask. Some people will say 12-24 hours fasting post placement. Other people will
say use it right away. It depends on the brand and practitioners bias. To know the correct
answer for the exam - simply read the mind of the person who wrote the question.

                                                        408
Esophageal Stents

Probably the most common indication for one of these is esophageal cancer palliation. These
are usually placed by GI, but that doesn't mean you won't get asked about them.

In the real world, most people don't even size these things. The overwhelming majority of
lesions can be covered by one stent. Having said that, for the purpose of multiple choice you
need a stent with a length at least 2 cm longer than the lesion on each side. You do the
procedure through the mouth. I imagine it would be great fun to try and place a stent through
the nose - if you really hated the person. You give them some oral contrast to outline the
lesion. An amplatz wire is dropped down into the stomach. The stent (usually self expanding)
is deployed over the wire.

Post Angioplasty? Most people don't angioplasty after deployment of the stent. However, if
the tumor is bulky and near the carina, some sources will suggest doing a pre-stent
angioplasty test up to 20 mm to see if this invokes coughing / stridor. The concern is that a
large tumor may get displaced against the carina and cause a respiratory emergency. If the
patient doesn't cough from the test you are safe to deploy the stent (probably).

Upper 1/3 Cancer: Most esophageal cancers are in the lower 1/3. If the question specifically
tells you it's higher up (or shows you), they may be leading you towards a `Won't cover the
larynx dumbass! " question. The way to avoid this is to have endoscopy do the case so they
can identify the cords. If that isn't an option then placing a smaller device might be an
alternative.

Stent Drops into the Stomach: Most people will just leave the motherfucker alone.
However, if the patient is symptomatic, endoscopic removal is the textbook answer.

Stent Occludes. Next Step = Esophagram. The most common cause is food impaction - which
sometimes can be cleared with a soda. If that fails, the next step is endoscopy. If it's not food
but instead tumor overgrowth, sometimes you can place a second stent. It depends on a lot of
factors and asking that would be horse shit.

Gamesmanship:

 Acute obstruction is likely food

 Worsening symptoms over time is likely tumor.

                                                        409
Gl Bleed

You can split GI bleeds into two categories upper (proximal to ligament of Treitz) and lower.

Upper GI:

Some testable trivia is that 85% of upper GI bleeds are from the left gastric, and often if a
source cannot be identified, the left gastric is taken down prophylactically. If the source of
bleeding is from a duodenal ulcer, embolization o f the GDA is often performed. About 10%of
the time, an upper GI bleed can have bright red blood per rectum.

" Pseudo-Vein" Sign ~ This is a sign of active GI bleeding, with the appearance of a vein
created by contrast pooling in a gastric rugae or mucosal intestinal fold. If you aren't sure if
it's an actual vein, the "pseudo-vein" will persist beyond the venous phase of injection.

Dieulafoy's Lesion - This is a monster artery in the submucosa of the stomach which pulsates
until it causes a teeny tiny tear (not a primary ulcer). These tears can bleed like stink. It's
typically found in the lesser curvature. It's not exactly an AVM, more like angiodysplasia.
Sometimes you can treat it with clips via endoscopy. Sometimes it needs endovascular
embolization.

     When I say pancreatic arcade bleeding aneurysm, you say celiac artery stenosis.

There is a known association with celiac artery compression (median arcuate ligament)
and the dilation of pancreatic duodenal arcades with pseudoaneurysm formation.

Gamesmanship: It is    ,           Retrograde filling of the
.,, ,                              hepatic artery should
classica.lly shown with
                                   Celiac stenosis (or
                                   occlusion)

an angiographic run

through the SMA,

showing a dilated

collateral system and

retrograde filling of the

hepatic arteiy.                 ^  Injection in SMA, fills

                                   a dilated pancreatic
                                   duodenal collateral
                                   system

                           410
Upper GIBleed "Next Step"Algorithm

                               Positive        Treat with          Failed or Not
                                               Endoscopy           Possible

Upper GI Bleed                 Endoscopy                                  Angio

                               Negative        Three               Hopefully
                                               Phase CTA           Targeted, Non-
                                                                   Target if Needed

Lower GI:

The work-up for lower GI bleeds is different than upper GI bleeds. With the usual caveat that
algorithms vary wildly from center to center, this is a general way to try and answer next step
type questions regarding the workup.

                       Stable  Endoscopy                           " C on servative
Lower GI Bleed                                                     M anagem ent"

           Unstable
           *Tachycardia +
           Hypotension

                                                                   Angio

ACR Appropriateness specifically states that in a STABLE patient with lower GI bleeding that
endoscopy is first line.

                      ACR Appropriate:                             High Yield Trivia is that
          Intermittent / Obscure GI Bleeding
                                                                   nuclear scintigraphy
-- GI Bleeding that continues (or recurs) despite negative         (RBC bleeding scan) is
upper endoscopy and colonoscopy is described as "obscure GI        more sensitive than
bleeding. "The actual culprit is often fromthe small bowel         angiography.
(arteriovenous malformation).
                                                                   Bleed Scan = 0.1 mL/min
-- There is no clear consensus on the optimal study to             CTA = 0.4 ml/min
interrogate the small bowel.                                       Angiography = 1.0 mL/min

-- ACR Appropriateness Criteria rank CT angiography and
capsule endoscopy as the most appropriate choices in this
situation. Tc-99m RBC scan is considered as a "reasonable
alternative" for localization - but only in the setting of active
bleeding. Remember GI bleed scan only works if there is
active bleeding.

                                          411
Causes with Angiographic Buzzwords:

 Diverticulosis (30-50%) - Left Sided Finding (usually). More commonly venous. If
arterial, "filling the diverticulumfirst" is classic. Diverticulitis is NOT usually
associated with GI bleeding.

 Angiodysplasia (20-30%)-- Right Sided Finding. ``Early Draining Vein. "
Embolization of angiodysplasia rarely stops a re-bleed and these often need surgery.

             SliTO- eiT i|ity in y                                   "Vascular Tufts'
                                                                     or nodular
45 sca.nd ^                                                       '  opacities or the
                                                                     arterial phase
                                                                     are also

                                                                     suggestive of
                                                                     angiodysplasia.

Identification of an early tilling vein (within 45 seconds) or a
dilated tortuous slow emptying intramural vein is classic.

 Meckel's - Usually shown on Meckel's scan (^^mXc-Na-pertechnetate). The feeding
artery (vitelline) has a classic look with "extension beyond the mesenteric border, "
"no side branches " and "a corkscrew appearance "of the terminal portion.

Technical Aspects / Trivia:

You will want runs of all 3 vessels (SMA, Celiac, IMA). Some old school guys will say to start with
the IMA because contrast in the bladder will obscure that territory as the procedure continues. That's
not really an issue anymore with modem DSA and starting with the SMA will typically be the highest
yield. You have to sub select each vessel. Runs in the aorta are not good enough and that would
never be the right answer.

What ifyou don't see bleeding? You can try "provocative angiography" - which is not nearly as
interesting as it sounds. This basically involves squirting some vasodilator (nitro 100-200 meg) or
thrombolytic dmg (tR\ 4 mg) into the suspected artery to see if you can make it bleed for you.

What ifyou do see it bleeding? Administer some streetjustice. Anyone who trained in the last 30
years is going to prefer microcoils and PVA particles. Old guys might use gel-foam. Alcohol should
not be used for lower GI bleeds (causes bowel necrosis).

   Microcoils: Good because you can see them. Good because you can place themprecisely. Bad
   because they deploy right where you drop them. So you need to go right up next to that bleed to
   avoid a large bowel infarct.

   Trivia = Inability to advance the micro-catheter peripherally is the most common cause of
   microcoil embo failure

   I say "non-selective embolization of bowel with microcoils," you say "bowel infarct"

   PVA: Good because they are "flow directed." So you don't need to be as peripheral compared to
   the microcoils. Bad because you have less control.

   Trivia: Particles must be 300-500 microns. Smaller particles will/could cause bowel infarct.

                                     412
                                 But Prometheus my Geriatric Attending says to use Vasopressin?

                           Between me and you this argument was settled in 1986 by a lady
                           named Gomes. Her study showed coils stopped GI bleeds 86% of the
                           time, compared to 52% for vasopressin and the shit we have today is
                           way better making the disparity even greater. Having said that, some
                           Dinosaurs still do it.

For the purpose of multiple choice, this is what I would know;

 Vasopressin works as a vasoconstrictor

 Vasopressin does not require superselection. You can squirt it right into the main trunk of
  the artery.

 Vasopressin sucks because the re-bleed rates are high (once the drug wears off)

 Vasopressin can actually cause non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI)

 Vasopressin should NOT be used with large artery bleeding (i.e. splenic pseudoaneurysm),
  bleeding at sites with dual blood supply (classic example is pyloroduodenal bleed), severe
  coronary artery disease, severe hypertension, dysrhythmias, and after an embolotherapy
  treatment (risk of bowel infarct).

Post Embolization: You need to do angiography post                 Inferior
embolization to look for collateral flow (if there is a dual       PDA
supply). The classic example is: after perfomiing an
embolization of the GDA (for duodenal ulcer), you need to      *First branch off
do a run of the SMA to look at the inferior                    the SMA
pancreaticoduodenal (collateral to the GDA). You might
have to take that one out too, but obviously that would
increase the risk of bowel infarct.

Trivia - Risk of bowel infarct is way lower for upper GI
bleeds (because of the extensive collateral supply), relative
to bleeds distal to the ligament of Trietz.

413
