                                       S E C T IO N 13:

                U r in a r y In ter v en tio n

Percutaneous Nephrostomy (PCN) -

There are 3 main reasons you might subject someone to this:

 Relief of Urinary
 Obstruction

Urinary              ^             Urine Leak

Diversion                          Urine F istula (for p elvic CA
                                   or inflammatory process)

                                   Severe Refractory
                                   Hemorrhagic Cystitis

Access for                         Whitaker Test ( if i t 's 1970)
Diagnostic and
Therapeutic                        Access fo r Stone Removal
Procedures                         (PCNL)

                                   Dilation or Stenting o f
                                   Stricture

PCN Contraindications (Absolute):

Severe Coagulopathy       ^  !NR Should be less than 1.5
                                 . PLT>50K

Technically Not Possible           A pproach w ould cross colon,
                                   spleen, o r liver

                                   420
Technical Stuff:

Prior to the procedure, it would be ideal if you normalized the potassium (dialysis). Certainly
anything about 7 should be corrected prior to the procedure.

Hold anti-platelet drugs for at least 5 days prior to the procedure.

The lower pole o f a posteriorly oriented calyx is ideal.  30 Degrees o ff sagittal
The reason you use a posterior lateral (30 degrees)        (towards the back)
approach is to attack along Brodel's Avascular Zone
(area between the arterial bifurcation).

 Skin entry site should be 10 cm lateral to the midline (not beyond the posterior axillary line).
  You don't want to go too medial unless you want to try and dilate through the paraspinal
  muscles. You don't want to go too lateral or you risk nailing the colon.

 Choosing a lower target minimizes the chance o f pneumothorax. Additional benefit of the
  posterior calyces approach is that the guidewire takes a less angled approach (compared to an
  anterior calyces approach).

 Direct stick into the collecting system without passing through renal parenchyma is NOT a
  good move (high risk o f urine leak).

 Dilated System = Single Stick: Ultrasound and stick your ideal target (low and posterior), then
  use fluoro to wire in, dilate up, and then place the tube. Alternatively you can do the whole
  thing under CT.

 Non-Dilated System = Get your partner to do it (these blow). If forced to do = Double Stick.
  Ultrasound and stick anything you can. Opacify the system. Then stick a second time under
  fluoro in an ideal position (low and posterior), then wire in, dilate up, and then place the tube.
  Alternatively you can do the whole thing under CT.

 The posterior calyces (your target) will be seen "end on" if you use contrast. The anterior ones
  should be more lateral. If you use air, you should just fill the posterior ones (which will be
  non-dependent with the patient on their belly. Air is useful to confirm.

 You place the drain and get frank pus back. Next Step = Aspirate the system
                                      10 O'" Lateral to M/dline

                  targeted side

                         421
Special Situations:

Nephrostomy on Transplant - The test writer will likely write the question in a way to
make you think it's crazy to try one o f these. Transplant is NOT a contraindication. In fact
it's technically easier than a posterior / native kidney.
Testable Transplant Trivia:
 Anterolateral Calyx Should be Targeted {instead o fposterior)
 Entry site should be LATERAL to the transplant to avoid entering the peritoneum
 Middle to Upper Pole {instead o f a lower pole)

Percutaneous Nephrostolithotomy - This is done to remove stones in conjunction with
urology. The idea is very similar with a few differences. The m ost testable difference is
that the site is often the upper pole (instead of lower pole) to make stone access easier.
The tube / hole is bigger and there is more risk o f bleeding.

" Tube F e ll O ut" - The trick to handling these scenarios is the "freshness" o f the tube. If the
tract is "fresh, " which usually means less than 1 week old, then you have to start all over
with a fresh stick. If the tract is "mature," which usually means older than 1 week, you can
try and re-access it with a non-traumatic wire.

Catheter Maintenance: Exchange is required every 2-3 months because o f the
crystallization o f urine in the tube. Some hospitals / departments will do exchanges more
frequently than 2 months and that is because o f how well this p a y s... uh I m ean they do it
for excellent patient care.
"Encrusted Tube" - If this thing gets totally gross it can be very difficult to exchange in the
normal fashion. The most likely "next step" is to use a hydrophilic wire along the side o f
the tube (same tract) to maintain access.

Ureteral Occlusion - Sometimes urology will request that you just kill the ureters all
together. This might be done for fistula, urine leak, or intractable hemorrhagic cystitis.
There are a bunch o f ways to do it. The m ost com mon is probably a sandwich strategy
with coils. The sandwich is made by placing large coils in the proximal and distal ends o f
the "nest", and small coils in the middle. Big Coils = Bread, Small Coils = Bacon.

                                                        422
Nephroureteral Stent (NUS)

This is used when the patient needs long-term drainage. It's way better than having a bag o f
piss strapped to your back.

Benign ureter strictures                        LONG TERM          NUS
Malignant ureteral obstruction (byfa r          Relief of Urinary
the most common indication)                     O b stru ction
Ureteric injury
Ureteric calculus undergoing lithotripsy.

Technically they can be placed in a retrograde (bladder up) or an antegrade (kidney down)
fashion. You are going to use the antegrade strategy if (a) y o u 've got a nephrostom y tube,
or (b) retrograde failed.

Can you go straight fro m N ephrostom y to N U S ? Yes, as long as you did n 't fuck them up
too bad getting access. If they are bleeding everywhere or they are uroseptic you should
wait. Let them cool down, then bring them back to covert to the NUS.

Who should N O T g et a N U S ? Anyone w ho doesn't have a bladder that works (outlet
obstruction, neurogenic bladder, bladder tumors, etc..). It makes no sense to divert the urine
into a bladder that can't empty.

                                                                   Obstruction

Bag o Piss  NUS - with External and Internal Drainage.       Double J

      PCN   Allows urine to pass from the kidney to bladder  The Ultimate Goal
            through the obstruction                          (for those that can get one)

                                           423
Internal NUS > Double J: This is the ultimate goal for the patient. The testable

stipulation is that this will require the ability to do retrograde exchanges (via the bladder).
" The Safety" - A safety PCN - is often left in place after the deploym ent o f a double J PCN.
The point is to make sure the stent is going to work.
The typical protocol:
1. Place the double J and the safety
2. Cap the safety - so that the internal NUS is draining the patient
3. Bring the patient back in 24-48 hour and "squirt the tube" (antegrade nephrostogram).

     The system should be non-obstructed.
4 . If it's working you pull the safety.
5. If it's NOT working you uncap the safety and ju st leave it as a PCN.

Suprapubic Cystostomy -

Done to either (a) acutely decompress the bladder or (b) decompress long-term outflow
obstruction (neurogenic bladder, obstructing prostate cancer, urethral destruction, etc..)
The best way to do it is with ultrasound in the fluoro suite. The target is midline just above the
pubic symphysis at the junction o f the mid and lower thirds o f the anterior bladder wall. You
chose this target because:
 The low stick avoids bowel and the peritoneal cavity
 The low 1/3 and mid 1/3 junction avoids the trigone (which will cause spasm).
 The vertical midline is chosen to avoid the inferior epigastric.
Use ultrasound and stick it, confirm position with contrast, wire in and then dilate up. Use a
small tube for temporary stuff and a larger tube for more long-term stuff. You can always
upsize to a foley once the tract is mature. A 16F foley is ideal for long-term drainage.
Contraindications:
  Buncha Pelvic Surgeries - Extensive scar
  Being a Big Fat Pig/Cow
  Coagulopathy
  Inability to distend bladder
  Inability to displace overlying small bowel

                                                        424
Don't be shocked by the tone of my voice

Check Out My N ew W eapon, W eapon Of Choice

Rapid Review o f the Various Weapons o f Urinary Diversion

Scenario 1:                     Scenario 2:                      Scenario 3:

Dude with a ureteral stricture  Dude with a ureteral TC C        Dude with an outflow
                                PLUS a Bladder Mass              obstruction (horrible
                                                                 prostate cancer)

If you can cross the lesion,    This guy has obstruction at      This guy has obstruction
and the bladder works then      the ureter and the bladder       at the bladder He
internal D ouble J NUS is idea  The only option is to divert at  doesn't need to cross
                                the level of the kidney. He      the ureter He gets a
                                gets a PCN.                      C ysto stom y

                                425
Renal Biopsy - This can be done for two primary reasons:

( 1) renal failure or (2 ) cancer biopsy.

Non-Focal: The renal failure workup "non-focal biopsy" is typically done with a 14 - 18
gauge cutting needle , with the patient either prone or on their side (target kidney up). The
m ost obvious testable fact is that you w ant tissue from cortex (low er pole if possible) to
maximize the yield o f glomeruli on the specimen and minimize complications by avoiding
the renal sinus. The complication rate is relatively low, although small AV fistulas and
pseudo-aneurysm s are relatively com mon (m ost spontaneously resolve). Some hem aturia is
expected. In a high risk for bleeding situation a transjugular approach can be done but that
requires knowing what you are doing.

Focal: It used to be thought that focal biopsy should NEVER be done because o f the
dreaded risk of upstaging the lesion and seeding the track. This has been shown to be very
rare (<0.01%). Having said that I think it's still the teaching at least in the setting o f
pediatric renal masses. This procedure is probably better done with CT. The patient is
placed in w hatever position is best, but the lateral decubitus with the lesion side down is
"preferred" , as it stabilizes the kidney from respiratory motion, and bowel interposition.
Just like with ultrasound, not crossing the renal sinus is the way to go. Just put the needle in
the tumor. If it's cystic and solid make sure you hit the solid part. Some texts recom m end
both fine needle and core biopsy. The core biopsy is going to give a higher yield. A testable
pearl is that if lym phoma is thought likely, a dedicated aspirate should be sent for flow
cytometry. As with any renal procedure hematuria is expected (not gross - just a little).
Renal colic from blood clots is rare.

               ACR Appropriate/SIR Practice Guidelines: Renal Biopsy

      Renal Bx is a procedure with "significant bleeding risk, difficult to detect or c o n tro l'

 -- SIR guidelines recommend holding aspirin for 5 days prior to the procedure.

 -- Why 5 D ays 7 Aspirin irreversibly inhibits platelet function and since platelet lifespan is
 about 8-10 days, patients with normal marrow will replenish 30-50% o f their platelets
 within 5 days of withholding the willow bark (aspirin).

                                                        426
Renal RFA: Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is an alternative to partial nephrectom y and

laparoscopic nephrectomy. It can be used for benign tumors like AMLs, renal AVMs, and
even for RCCs. Angiomyolipomas (AMLs) are treated at 4cm because o f the bleeding risk.
Sort o f a general rule is that things that are superficial you can bum with RFA. Things that
are closer to the collecting system it may be better to freeze (cryoablation) to avoid scaring
the collecting system and making a stricture. Pyeloperfusion techniques (cold D5W
irrigating the ureter) can be done to protect it if you really wanted to RFA. If anyone would
ask, RFA has no effect on GFR (it w on't lower the GFR).
Things that make you think recurrent/residual disease after therapy.
(1) Any increase in the size beyond the acute initial increase,
(2) Areas of "nodular" or "crescentic" enhancement, or
(3) A new or enlarging bright T2 signal.
There is a paper in A JR (2009) that says that lesions that are < 3cm will appear larger in 1-2
months and lesions >3cm do not grow larger - when successfully treated. So, smaller lesions
may initially get bigger but after that - any increase in size should be considered tum or
recurrence.

Renal Arteriography:

You should always do a non-selective aortogram first to see how many arteries feed the
kidney, where they are , etc. Sometimes the aortogram will show you an obvious ostial
problem which you can then select down on and address. Otherwise, you need to do
selective angiography and look at each vessel. LAO is the projection o f choice for looiiing
at the renals. Sometimes the stenosis is further out, in fact branch artery stenosis is a cause
of hypertension in kids.

                                     LAO M inim izes Angiographic O verlap from the Aorta

                                                        427
Angioplasty of Renal Arteries:

This is a controversial subject so w e are again entering the territory w here m ind reading
(guessing how many grey hairs the question writer has on his balls) will probably be
necessary.

CORAL Trial: Before the New England Journal was publishing articles about how
biological sex should be removed from birth certificates they were busy publishing articles
bashing procedures. Remember, the NEJM is run by a bunch o f family medicine doctors
who hate all procedures. In 2014 they pubhshed a thing called the CORAL trial, that showed
no added benefit from angio + stenting in the setting o f renal vascular stenosis compared to
high quality medical therapy. This remains controversial and several prominent IR guys still
like to stent, especially if they can measure a pressure gradient in the renal artery.

For the purpose o f multiple choice:

 Atherosclerosis at the Ostium = "High Quality Medical Therapy"
       - If this isn 't a choice, I w ould pick A ngioplasty + Stent

 FMD = Angioplasty Alone (no stent) -- if there is a pressure gradient.
       - Renal angiograms are performed with simultaneous pressure measurement in the distal
          renal artery and aorta. If there is a Pressure Gradient o f 10% (i.e. Distal Renal /A orta <
          0.90) then treatment w ith angioplasty only is done. The initial balloon diam eter is
          typically based on the normal distal renal artery and the size is incrementally increased by
          0.5mm until the gradient is gone (or the patient starts screaming in pain).
       - Stenting is reserved for complications (flow limiting dissection or arterial rupture).
       - Surgery is indicated in rare cases w ith com plex lesions o f the arterial bifurcation or
          complex aneurysms.
        Medical Therapy: Basically all the patients will be on aspirin 75-100 mg daily (to
          prevent em bolic events). If there is the need for antihypertensives ACE inhibitors or the
          related ARB (angiotensin receptor blockers) are usually first line.
        Walnut Therapy: Eating walnuts helps (seriously, there is a paper on it). Eating cashews
          does not help (same paper), which is too bad because cashews are delicious... and walnuts
          taste like shit.

Renal Angioplasty Risks: Thrombosis, and vessel spasm. Calcium channel blockers can be
given to decrease the risk of spasm. Heparin should be on board to reduce thrombosis risk.
Most people take daily aspirin the day before and every day after for 6 months, to reduce the
risk o f restenosis. Dissection or Rupture can occur - those are typically treated with stenting
(if possible).

                                                        428
Renal Hemorrhage:

Trauma to the kidney (usually iatrogenic from biopsy or diversion procedure) can typically be
embolized. The renal arteries are "end arteries," which means that collaterals are not an
issue. It also means that infarction is a legit issue so if you w ant to salvage the kidney you
need to try and get super selective. H aving said that, d o n 't be an idiot and fiick around trying
to get super selective w hile the patient is bleeding to death. Rem ember m ost people have two
of these things, plus in a worst case scenario there is always dialysis. Bottom line; if you get
into trouble and the patient is crashing, ju st trash the whole thing.

Next Step'. Arterial traum a from the nephrostom y tube placem ent. Bleeding source is occult
on angio. Next step ? Remover the nephrostomy tube (over a guidewire), then look again.
Often the catheter tamponades the bleed, making it tougher to see.

Gamesmanship: Oral boards guys used to be sticklers for the phrase "over a wire. " In other
words if you ju st said " I'd rem ove the PCN " they w ould ding you. You have to say " I'd
remove the PCN over a wire.'" The only reason I bring this up is the use o f possible
distractors / fuckery.

Maybe something like this:

Q: The highly skilled Interventionalist grants the Fellow the great privilege o f performing a
fresh stick nephrostomy. The clumsy, good for nothing Fellow manages to place the tube, but
now there is a large volum e o f bright red blood in the tube and the Patient's blood pressure is
dropping rapidly. You start fluids and perform an emergent renal arteriography. The source of
bleeding is not seen. What is the best next step?

A: Remove the PCN and repeat another angio run                  Just like a M idget using
B: Kick the fellow in the shin for using too m uch fluoro time  a urinal... you gotta
C: Call Urology and admit you need help from a "real doctor"    stay on your toes.
D: Remove the PCN over a wire and repeat another angio run.
                                                                Read all the choices!
Renal Aneurysms

"Look, man. 1 only need to know one thing: where they are " - Private Vasquez

 Small Segmental Arteries = coils

 Main Renal Artery = Covered Stent to exclude the aneurysm. Alternatively, you could place
  a bare metal stent across the aneurysm and then pump detachable coils into the sac.

                                    429
