H EP A TIC                                   S E C T IO N lO :

                                            8c B I L I A R Y I N T E R V E N T I O N

Biliary Duct Anatom y Trivia:

The ductal anatomy mimics the segmental anatomy. The simple version is at the hilum.
There are two main hepatic ducts (right and left) which join to make the common hepatic
duct. The right hepatic duct is made of the horizontal right posterior (segment 6 & 7) and
vertical right anterior (segment 5 & 8). The left duct has a horizontal course and drains
segment 2 and 4.

For whatever reason, IR guys love to grill residents about ductal variants (of which there are
many). There was a dinosaur GI guy where I trained who also obsessed over this stuff.
Apparently, obscure anatomic trivia tickles a psychopathology common to Academic
Radiologists. As a result, I would know the 2 most common variants. The right posterior
segment branch draining into the left hepatic duct is the most common. The second most
common is trifiircation of the intrahepatic radicles.

Right Anterior                              Right     Right       Right
Duct                                        Anterior  Posterior   Anterior
                                            Duct      Duct        Duct

   Right Posterior                                    (16%)       Right
   Duct                                                           Posterior
                                                                  Duct
                  C o m m o n Hepatic Duct
                                                                                   (12%)
"Normal" Duct Anatomy (57%)

                                                             393
Biliary Drainage:

The role of PTC (Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiogram) and PTBD (Percutaneous
Transhepatic Biliary Drainage) is centered around situations when ERCP and endoscopy
have failed or are not possible (Roux-en-Y).

Things to do before the procedure:

· Check the coags - correct them if necessary (vitamin K, FFP, etc...).
· Most institutions give prophylactic antibiotics (ascending cholangitis is bad).
Approaches:

There are two approaches: right lateral mid axillary for the right system, or subxyphoid for
the left system. Realistically, diagnostic cholangiogram and PTBD is usually done from
the right. The left is more technically challenging (although better tolerated by the patient
because the tube isn't in-between ribs) and usually there is a hilar stricture that won't
allow the left and right system to communicate.

"The M oves"- Right-Sided Approach

Line up on the patient's right flank / mid axillary line.  When 1 say "Below the 10th
Find the 10th rib. Don't go higher than the 10th rib -     Rib," I mean caudal to the 10th
always below (avoiding the pleura can save you a ton       rib, not actually under the rib.
of headaches). Prior tojamming the needle in, most         Always puncture at the TOP
reasonable people put metal forceps (or other metal        EDGE OF A RIB to avoid the
tool) over the target and fluoro to confirm you are over   intercostal artery (which runs
the liver and below the pleural reflection.                under the rib).

Now the fun begins. The basic idea is to pretend the patient is a voodoo doll of the
Attending (or childhood tormentor) that you hate the most. Proceed to blindly and
randomly jam a chiba needle in and inject slowly under fluoro as you pull back (but not all
the way out). Obviously less sticks is better and it's ideal to do in less than 5 (most places
will still consider less than 15 ok). Once you get into a duct the system will opacify. You
then can pick your target (posterior is best for best drainage). You stick again, wire in, and
place the catheter into the duodenum.

A non-dilated system can be very difficult and                          In the Duct?
there is an old school trick where you stick the
gallbladder (on purpose) and retrograde fill the           Ducts = Flow Towards the Hilum
system. The problem with that is you have to               Vein - Flow Cranially towards the
keep a drain in the gallbladder as well.                   Heart
                                                           Artery = Flow Towards the Periphery

                                    394
The Moves" - Left Sided Approach

This time you use a sub-stemal / subxyphoid approach with ultrasound. Most people aim
for the anterior inferior peripheral ducts. Otherwise the moves are pretty much the same.

Catheter / Stent Choice - Bare Bones o f Trivia:

Most stent placement is preceded by a period of biliary decompression with an internal-
external drain. Plastic stents are cheaper but have a short patency period. Metal stents will
stay patent longer but can't be removed. Metal stents are not usually used in benign disease
unless the patient has a long life expectancy.

Internal-External drains are the standard for crossing lesions. They have superior stability
to a straight drain or pigtail. They offer the advantage of possible conversion to an internal
only drain (save those bile-salts).

Some testable                                     Side
trivia is that many                               Holes
centers will
manually punch                                         IS
some additional
side holes in the
proximal portion of
the tube to make
sure that drainage
adequate.

The key is to NOT

position any side    Do NOT Put the
holes outside the

liver (proximal to   Side Holes Here              the

liver parenchyma).

                                  395
 c ``N e x t S te p " - T e s ta b le S cen ario s / Trivia:

· There is extensive ascites. Next Step = Drain it prior to doing the PTC.
· There is a small amount of ascites. Next Step = Opinions are like assholes (everyone has

  one), so you'll hear different things for this. I think most people would look to make sure
  the liver still abuts the peritoneum at the puncture site. If it does, then they will do a right
  sided approach. If it doesn't then they will use ultrasound and go substemal on the left.
· Right Approach with no filling o f the left ducts. Next Step = Slowly and carefully roll
  the patient on their side (right side up). The right ducts are dependent - so this is actually
  fairly common. Now obviously if there is a known obstruction you don't need to roll
  them. The rolling is to prove it's not a real obstruction.

· You do your contrast run and the patient instantly goes into a full rigor.

  Next Step = Look around the room for the person you are going to blame for injecting too
  forcefully. "Rigor" is a multiple choice buzzword for cholangitis. Yes... full on bihary
  sepsis can happen instantly with a forceful injection. This is actually pretty easy to do if
  the patient has strictures or an obstructive neoplastic process. In those cases you will want
  to have your Scapegoat / "Not Me" (tech, med student, resident, fellow, drug rep, non-
  english-speaking international observer) do the injection. For the purpose of multiple
  choice some good next step options would be: aggressive resuscitation, place a drain, and
  inform the primary team / ICU that the Scapegoat gave the patient biliary sepsis.

                                 Forceful Injection = ICU Visit for Cholangitis
                                       Buzzword = "Rigors after Injection"

  You encounter (or expect stones). Next Step = Dilute contrast to 200-250 mg/ml to
  avoid obscuring filling defects.
  You can 't cross the obstruction with a wire. Next Step = Place a pigtail drain and let the
  system cool down for like 48 hours. Try again when there is less edema.

                                                        396
C h o lecysto sto m y :

This is done when you have a super sick patient you can't take to the OR, but the patient has
a toxic gallbladder. In cases of acalculous cholecystitis (with no other source of sepsis), 60%
of the time cholecystostomy is very helpful. It's a "temporizing measure." You have to give
pre-procedure antibiotics. There are two approaches:

D Transperitoneal - This is preferred by many because it's a direct approach, and avoids
    hitting the liver. The major draw back is the wire / catheter often buckles and you lose
    access (and spill bile everywhere). This is typically not the first choice. However in
    patients with liver disease or coagulopathy it may be preferred (depending on who you
    ask). I f the question writer specifically states (or irifers) that the patient has an increased
    risk o f bleeding this is probably the right choice. Othei*wise, if forced to choose, pick the
    Transhepatic route

D Transhepatic - The major plus here is that when

    you cross the liver it stabilizes the wire and
    minimizes the chance o f a bile leak. This is the
    route most people choose.

    o Trivia = Typically you go through segments 5
        and 6 on your way to the gallbladder

    o Trivia = This route transverses the "bare area" /
        upper one third of the gallbladder
        (hypothetically).

Important Trivia:

D Prior to the procedure, make sure the bowel isn't interposed in front of the liver/
    gallbladder. If a multiple choice writer wanted to be sneaky he/she could tell you the
    patient has "Chilaiditi Syndrome " - which just means that they have bowel in front of
    their liver. Some sources will list this as a contraindication to PC.

D Even if the procedure instantly resolves all symptoms, you need to leave the tube in for

    2-6 weeks (until the tract matures), otherwise you are going to get a bile leak.

D After that "at least 2 w eek" period you should perform a cholangiogram to confirm that

    the cystic duct is patent before you pull the tube.

D Most places will clamp the tubefo r 48 hours prior to removal. This helps confirm
    satisfactory internal drainage.

Managing Bile Leak - Bile leak is bad as it can lead to massive biliary ascites and chemical
peritonitis. Most people will try and place a tube within the bile ducts to divert bile from the
location of the leak (this usually works).

                                                        397
                             General Biopsy Pearls

There are two primary techniques for samphng tissue:
(1) Fine Needle Aspiration -- Cytology
(2) Cutting Needle ("Core") -- Biopsy

Fine Needle Aspiration:

This is for situations when you only need a few cells. It is typically performed through a 21 or
22G Chiba needle. Vacuum aspiration with a 20 cc syringe is applied as you pass the needle back
and forth through the target.

Trivia: Apply "gentle" suction as you remove the needle. If you suck too hard a tiny sample
could get lost in the syringe. If you forget to apply suction the sample will stay in the patient.

The needle is small so the risks are small.

Cutting / Core Needle:

This is for situations when you need a larger sample. There are lots of devices but the most basic
mechanism involves a needle with two parts; an outer shaft for cutting, and an inner stylet.

Trivia: For the purpose of multiple choice,   outers*'''®* Inner stylet
the target is "cut" where the outer shaft is
advanced.

Trivia: The general rule is pick the
shortest length needle that will reach the
target.

Trivia: "Automated Systems" fire both the     Outer Stylet Closes To Cut Sample
inner and outer components to take the
sample. The key point is that with these
systems the sample is taken from tissue
10-20 mm in front of the needle.

Formalin Safety / Trivia:

Formalin - the shit that you usually stick biopsy samples into is actually toxic and linked to
respiratory tract / skin irritation immediately after exposure. Additionally, it has been shown to
increase the risk for myeloid leukemia, nasopharyngeal, and sinonasal cancers.
Trivia:
· Wearing gloves (duh) and splash guard / face shield is probably a good idea.
· Histopathological specimens are usually fixed in formalin
· Bacteriological specimens are usually sent in saline for culture
· Testable exception = lymphoma samples intended for flow cytometry are placed in saline

  solution instead of formalin

                                                     398
Conventional Liver Biopsy -

You can do targeted approaches             This path might                 ) This path might
(for a specific lesion) or you            be ok - if it's thick                 be ok - if it's thick
can do non-targeted approaches            enough                                enough
(sampling). General pearls
include: trying to cross the         This direct path into         > 2 cm
capsule only once, biopsy the        lesion will "bleed like       would be
subcapsular masses through an        stink"                        ideal
area of uninvolved liver, and
avoid the diaphragm.

If given the choice, you want to
biopsy peripheral lesions
through 2-3 cm of normal liver
prior to hitting the target.

This is done to avoid a blood bath.

l\ext Step: There is ascites = Drain it prior to doing the biopsy

Trivia: Mild shoulder pain (referred pain) is common after liver biopsy.

Trivia: Prolonged Shoulder Pain (> 5 mins) = Possible Bleed "Kehr Sign

Next Step. Prolonged Shoulder Pain (> 5 mins) = Re-evaluation with ultrasound. Always
look behind the liver (Morrison's pouch) to see if blood is accumulating. Bleeding after
liver biopsy occurs more from biopsy of malignant lesions (compared to diffuse disease).

Contraindications: Uncorrectable coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia (< 50,000), infections in
the right upper quadrant - are contraindications for a conventional biopsy.

Trivia: Biopsy of carcinoid mets is controversial and death by carcinoid crisis has occurred
after biopsy.

Next Step: Massive ascites or severe coagulopathy = Transjugular approach

                                     399
Transjugular Liver Biopsy

The rationale is that the liver                   Specific Indications:
capsule is never punctured, so   · Severe Coagulopathy
bleeding is less of a risk.      · Massive ascites
Obviously this is a non­         · Failure of prior percutaneous liver biopsy
targeted biopsy for the          · Massive obesity ("Fat Even By West Virginia Standards ")
diagnosis of infectious,         · Patients on mechanical ventilation
metabolic, and sometimes         · Need for additive vascular procedures like TIPS
neoplastic processes
(classic example = grading
chronic hep C).

Procedural Trivia:

The general technique is to access the hepatic veins via the IVC {via the rightjugular vein).
Most people will tell you to biopsy through the right hepatic vein while angling the sheath
anterior. The reason this is done is to get the biggest bite of tissue, and avoid capsular
perforation (which was the entire point of this pain in the ass procedure).

Trivia: Right Sided Jugular Route
is the superior route (better than left
IJ, or femoral)

Trivia: Biopsy via the Right
Hepatic Vein by angling anterior.
Never perform an anterior biopsy
from the middle hepatic vein.

Trivia: This procedure has the
added benefit of allowing you to
measure hepatic venous pressures 
which can guide therapy or assess
varix bleeding risk.

                                 400
Hepatic I Splenic Traum a -                                       Indications

Embolization is a potential method for dealing                   *agreed upon by most:
with significant trauma to the hepatic or
splenic arteries. Opinions on the exact role of       · Continuous hemorrhage (active extrav)
angiography vary between institutions, so               in a patient who is borderline stable
"read my mind" questions are likely.                   post resuscitation

I think the most likely type of indication            · Early ongoing bleeding after a surgical
question might actually be who does NO T go            attempt to gain primary hemostasis
to angio?
                                                      · Rebleeding after successful initial
The most accepted contraindication in a                embolization
bleeding patient is probably a very busted-up
unstable dude who needs to go straight to the         · Post traumatic pseudo-aneurysm and
OR for emergent laparotomy.                             AVFs (even if they aren't currently
                                                       bleeding).

Tools and Strategy - Hepatic Considerations:

Gelfoam, pledgets, particles, and/or microcoils are typically used.

Massive non-selective hepatic artery embolization is usually avoided to reduce the risk of
large volume tissue necrosis.

What's the main issue with tissue necrosis? Hepatic abscess development (which is fairly
common in a major liver injury anyway).

Trivia: Coils should NOT be placed in the

pseudoaneurysm sac. This can lead to a

late rupture. The strategy is to occlude                                    Distal End First
                                                                            Then Pull Back
the distal and proximal parent vessels.

You'll want to perform "completion

angiography" to prove the thing is         "Sandwich Technique" \o exclude
occluded prior to catheter removal.        arterial pseudo aneurysm

Hepatic surface is bleeding from more
than one spot. Next Step = Gelfoam or particles.

'Hepatic Pseudoaneurysms can be treated at the site of injury (with the sandwich technique)
because they are not end arteries (no collaterals). Plus the liver has a dual blood supply.

                                                 401
                  Tools and Strategy Continued - Spleen Considerations:
· Splenic laceration (without active extravasation) is NOT considered an indication to angio

 (by most people). Remember to use your mind reading powers to confirm the question
 writer agrees.
· The spleen does not have a dual blood supply, and is considered an "end organ" unlike the
  liver. So if you go nuts embolizing it you can infarct the whole fucking thing.
· Focal Splenic Abnormality. Next Step = Selective Embolization treatment
· Multiple Bleeding Sites. Next Step = Use a proximal embolization strategy, and drop an
 Amplatzer plug into the splenic artery proximal to the short gastric arteries. The idea is to
 maintain perfusion but reduce the pressure to the spleen (slower blood will clot), with the
 benefit of preserved collateral supply and less infarction risk.
· Trivia: Even with this proximal embolization strategy the patient usually does not require
 vaccination post embolization, as a lot of functional tissue should remain.

                                      Short

                                                       402
HCC Treatm ent:                                                  ACR Appropriate: Liver

You will read in some sources that transplant is the only way              Transplant
to "cure" an HCC. Others will say transplant, resection, or
ablation are "curative" if the tumor is small enough. Arterial  --Transplantation should be
embolization (TACE) is typically used in situations where       considered ONLY in patients
the tumor burden is advanced and the patient cannot undergo     < 65 years of age with limited
surgery.                                                        tumor burden (1 tumor < 5
                                                                cm or up to 3 tumors < 3 cm).

Transarterial Chem oem bolization (TACE) - Most people will consider this first line for
palliative therapy in advanced cases. The mechanism relies on HCC's preference for arterial
blood. High concentration of chemotherapy within Lipiodol (iodized oil transport agent) is
directly delivered into the hepatic arterial system. The tumor will preferentially take up the oil
resulting in a prolonged targeted chemotherapy. The Lipiodol is usually followed up with
particle embolization, with the goal of slowing down the washout of the agent.

Absolute Contraindication = Decompensated (acute on chronic) Liver failure.

Trivia: Some sources will list portal vein thrombosis as a contraindication (because of the risk
of liver infarct). Others say portal vein thrombosis is fine as long as an adjustment is made to
limit the degree of embolization and you can document sufficient hepatic collateral flow.
Simply read the mind of the question writer to know which camp they are in.

Trivia = TACE in Patients with a biliary stent, prior sphinctertomy, or post Whipple are all
high risk for biliary abscess.

Trivia = "Sterile cholecystitis" or "chemical cholecystitis" are buzzwords that when used in
the setting of TACE should lead you to believe that the agent was injected into the right
hepatic artery prior to the takeojf of the cystic artery (artery to the gallbladder) .

Trivia - TACE will prolong survival better than systemic chemo

Trivia: Unfortunately, repeat TACEs can result in a ton of angio time and therefore a ton of
radiation. Patient do sometimes get skins burns (usually on their left back because of the
RAO camera angle).

RFA: Tumor is destroyed by heating the tissue to 60 degrees C (140 F). Any focal or nodular
peripheral enhancement in the ablated lesion should be considered residual / recurrent disease.
Sometimes, on the immediate post treatment study you can have some reactive peripheral
hyperemia - but this should decrease on residual studies. Important trivia is that RF ablation
is indicated in patients with HCC and colorectal mets (who can't get surgery).

TACE + RFA: As a point of trivia, it has been shown that TACE + RFAfor HCC lesions
larger than 3cm, will improve survival (more so than either treatment alone). This is still not
curative.

403
Yttrium-90 Radioem bolization - An alternative to      W hat is this Y ttriu m ?
TACE is using radioactive embolic materials
(Y-90). The primary testable trivia regarding Y-90  Yttrium-90 is a high-energy beta
therapy is understanding the pre-therapy work up.   emitter with a mean energy of
There are basically two things to know:             0.93MeV. It has no primary gamma
                                                    emission. Yttrium-90 has a half-life of
    {\)Lung Shunt Fraction - You give Tc-99         64 hours. After administration, 94% of
        MAA to the hepatic artery to determine how  the radiation is delivered over 11 days
        much pulmonary shunting occurs. A shunt     (4 half-lives). The maximum range of
        fraction that would give 30 Gy in a single  irradiation from each bead is 1.1 cm.
        treatment is too much (Y-90 is
        contraindicated).

{2)The take o ffo f the right gastric. The fear is that you get non-targeted poisoning of
    the stomach, leading to a non-healing gastric ulcer. To help prevent reflux of the
    Y-90 (poison) into places you don't want (basically anywhere that's not liver)
   prophylactic embolization of the right gastric and the GDA is performed. The right
    gastric origin is highly variable, and can come off the proper hepatic or the left
   hepatic.

Trivia Review:

· Shunt Fraction > 30 Gy to the Lungs = No Y-90

· Before you give the poison, embo the right gastric (which has a variable take off) and
  GDA - so you don't put a hole in the stomach.

If you inject the Y-90 here, you can
imagine it refiuxing into the right
gastric or GDA

                                        404
Generalized Tumor Treatment Trivia (Regardless of the Organ)

RFA

· Tumors need to be less than 4 cm or you can't "cure" them. You can  · Cure = < 4 cm
  still do RFA on tumors bigger than 4 cm but the buzzword you want   · Debulk = > 4 cm
  for this is "debulking".

· You always need a bum margin of 0.5-1.0 cm around the tumor. So your target is the tumor
  + another 1 cm of healthy organ.

· A key structure (something you don't want to bum up) that is within 1 cm of the lesion is
  considered by most to be a contraindication to RFA. Some people won't cook lesions near
  the vascular hilum, or near the gallbladder. Be on the look out for bowel. It is possible to
  cook bowel adjacent to a superficial lesion. If they are asking you if a lesion is appropriate
  for RFA and it's superficial look for adjacent bowel - that is probably the trick.

· RFA requires the application of a "Grounding pad" on the patient's leg. Blankets should be
 jammed between the arms/body and between legs to prevent closed circuit arcs/bums.

· "Hot Withdrawal" supposedly can reduce the risk of tumor seeding. Basically you leave
  the cooker on as you remove the probe to bum the tract.

· "Heat Sink" - this is a phenomenon described exclusively with RFA. Lesions that are near
  blood vessels 3mm or larger may be difficult to treat (without getting fancy) because the
  moving blood removes heat away from the lesion.

· You can overcook the turkey. Temperatures at 100 C or greater tend to carbonize the tissue
  near the probe, reducing electrical conductance (resulting in suboptimal treatment). Around
  60 C is the usual target.

"Post Ablation Syndrome" - Just like a tumor embolization you can get a low grade fever
and body aches. The larger the tumor, the more likely the syndrome (just like
embolization).

  · Low Grade Fever and Body Aches Post Ablation. Next Step = Supportive Care
  · Persistent Fever x 2-3 weeks post ablation. Next Step = Infection workup.

                                                     405
M icrow ave
Similar to RFA in that it cooks tumors. The testable differences are that it can generate more
power, can cook a bigger lesion, requires less ablation time, it's less susceptible to heat sink
effect, and it does NOT require a ground pad.

Cryoablation
Instead of burning the tumors, this technique uses extreme cold in cycles with thawing. The
freeze-thaw cycles fuck the cells up pretty good. The cold gun is generatedby the
compressing argon gas. I actually knew a guy who constructed a similardeviceshortly after
an industrial accident left him unable to survive outside of subzero environments.
Trivia = Thawing is what actually kills the cancer cells
Trivia = If you are planning on treating immediately after biopsy, most sources will advise
you to place the probes first, then biopsy, then treat. If you try and place the probes you
make a bloody mess then you might not get accurate probe placement. Just don't biopsy the
probe. Seriously, if you crack the probe and the high pressure gas leaks out - shit is gonna
explode (better have your medical student ready as a shield).
Trivia: It hurts less than RFA - so patients need less sedation
Trivia: The risk of bleeding is higher than with RFA - because you aren't ablating the small
vessels

                                                        406
                             Treatment Response

RFA Treatment Response:

Size:

· Week 1-4: It's ok for the lesion to get bigger - typically it is a reactive change related to edema, tissue
  evolution , etc... so on and so forth

· Month 3: The lesion should be the same size (or smaller) than the pre-treatment study.
· Month 6: The lesion should be smaller than pre-treatment.

Contrast Enhancement;
· Central or Peripheral Enhancement is NEVER normal in the lesion post treatment.
· You can have "benign peri-ablational enhancement" - around the periphery of the ablation zone. This

  should be smooth, uniform, and concentric. It should NOT be scattered, nodular, or eccentric (those are
  all words that mean residual tumor).

Time Interval
· Multiphase CT (or MR) at 1month. If residual disease is present at this time. Next Step = Repeat

  treatment (assuming no contraindications)
· Additional follow up is typically at 3-6 months intervals.

TACE Treatm ent Response

On follow up CT, you need to have pre and post contrast imaging including washout. The iodized oil is
going to be dense on the pre-contrast. The more dense oil is in the tumor the better outcome is likely to
be. The necrotic tissue should not enhance. If there is enhancement and/or washout in or around the
tumor, then you have viable tumor that needs additional treatment. Beam hardening from the iodized oil
can cause a problem.

``Zone o fAblation" is the preferred nomenclature for the post-ablation region on imaging.

Also, Dude, "Chinaman" is not the preferred nomenclature. Asian-American

Cryoablation Treatm ent Response                                     Preferred Nomenclature:

Post therapy study is typically performed at 3 months, with          · "Residual tumor "or
additional follow ups at 6 months and 12 months. A good result
should be lower in density relative to the adjacent kidney. On         "Incomplete Treatment " =
MR, a good resuh is typically T2 dark and T1 iso or hyper.
                                                                       Vocab words used when you
Size: Just like RFA, ablated lesions can initially appear that they    see focal enhancement in the
grew in size relative to the pre-treatment study. With time they       tumor ablation zone of a
should progressively shrink (usually faster than with RFA). An         patient for their first post
increase in size (after the baseline post treatment) should be         therapy studv.
considered recurrent tumor.
                                                                     · "Recurrent tumor" =
Enhancement: Any nodular enhancement ( >10HU change
from pre-contrast run) after treatment should be considered            Words used when you see
cancer.                                                                focal enhancement in the
                                                                       tumor ablation zone that is
                                                                       new from the first post
                                                                       therapv studv.

407
