PROMETHEUS LIONHART, M.D.

   MAMMO

                     451
                     A Brief Overview - For the complete novice:

Many foreign graduates have had httle or no experience with mammography. I 'll try and give you a
very brief overview before I get into the testable trivia.

In America, women are told they need to have screening mammograms done once a year. Because
breast cancer is common (and scary), most women will get this done, and will continue to get it
done into their 90s. They will literally take people from the ICU who are in cardiogenic shock
down to x-ray to keep them up to date on their screening mammograms (usually at the patient's
request).

I want you to think about mammograms in two categories: (a) the screener - these are the people
who are coming in once a year, and have no symptoms other than being female, and (b) the
diagnostic - these people have a symptom (palpable lump, nipple discharge, breast pain, etc..).
These two are handled totally different.

Nomenclature is rigidly controlled with regard to reporting. "BI-RADS" is a book o f approved
vocabulary words for describing the findings, and a system for reporting results based on a
percentage o f risk. The basic idea is that you use scary words like "spiculated" to describe things
you think are cancer, and benign words like "fat density" to describe things you think are not cancer.

Here are some basic scenarios - I'll explain all the stuff in the chapter and we can revisit some more
scenarios at the end o f the chapter. This is just for you to get a feel for how this works if you have
never been around it before. Don't spaz if you are lost, it will be clear by the end o f the chapter and
then we will do them again with some quizzing.

(1a) A 50 year old women comes in for a nornial annual screening mammogram. She has no
symptoms, and is just following the recommendation. She gets two standard views - a cranial caudal
view "CC" and a medial lateral oblique view "MLO." The Radiologist is in a hurry because he has
200 o f them to read, so he just calls it normal (Bi-Rads 1). The patient returns to the screening pool
- and will get imaged again in 1 year. She is relieved to know she doesn't have cancer.

(lb ) The same 50 year old returns 1 month later after she feels a lump. This is no longer a screening
study but instead a "diagnostic" because she has a symptom. She gets another mammogram - this
time with a palpable marker on the image. She also gets compression spot views (smaller paddle)
over the palpable area. In the area o f the palpable finding, there is a cluster o f calcifications. They
were present in retrospect on the mammogram performed 1 month prior, but are new from the year
before. Because they are calcifications you need magnification views to fully characterize them. On
the mag views you describe them as "coarse heterogeneous." Because they are new from the prior
year they must be biopsied, but you aren't done yet. Diagnostic mammogram usually includes an
ultrasound - not because o f the calcifications but because there was a palpable finding. Just
remember no FEMALE with a palpable gets out the door without an ultrasound. You ultrasound the
area and find no mass. The next step is to biopsy the calcs (which are BR-4, for intermediate
suspicion). You recommend stereo to biopsy them (NOT ultrasound) because you couldn't see
them with ultrasound. The results yield fibrocystic change, which you agree is a possibility given
the BR-4. When you agree that the biopsy results make sense with the imaging / clinical scenario
you use the word "concordant " "The results were concordant" said the Resident to his Attending.
You inform the patient o f the results. She is relieved to know she doesn't have cancer.

                                                        452
(2) A 60 year old women comes in for a normal annual screening mammogram. She has no
symptoms, and is just following the recommendation. She gets two standard views - a cranial
caudal view "CC" and a medial lateral oblique view "MLO." The Radiologist is in a hurry
because he has 200 o f them to read, but still manages to see a new mass in the medial breast on
the CC view. The breasts are pretty dense and it's hard to find it in on the MLO. So the
Radiologist calls it an "asymmetry" and BR-0 (BR-0 because more work up is needed). The
patient returns in a week for a diagnostic study - she is convinced that she's gonna die o f breast
cancer. You can hear her crying in the waiting room. She gets a diagnostic study with spot
compression over the mass on the CC view, as well as M L and MLO views. You do manage to
see the mass on the CC and in the superior breast on the M L view. The mass is well
circumscribed, round, and equal density. Because she is getting a diagnostic work up, she gets an
ultrasound too. Before you go in the ultrasound room you guess about where the mass is going to
be. Since it's medial and superior on the right breast you guess 2 o 'clock. You locate it quickly,
and find it to be an anechoic cyst - common in women going into menopause. You tell her it's
consistent with a benign cyst. She cries with joy and thanks you repeatedly for "saving her life."
She sends you cookies and brownies every year at Christmas with very long letters about how you
saved her. She uses a lot o f religious references that make you uncomfortable. Some years you
throw the food away without eating it, other years you give it to the techs. The simple cyst was
reported as a BR-2 (essentially 0% chance o f cancer).

(3) A 45 year old woman comes in for a normal annual screening mammogram. She has no
symptoms and is just following the recommendation. She gets the two standard views - "CC" and
"MLO." The Radiologist is in a hurry because he has 200 o f them to read, but still manages to see
a new mass in both the MLO and CC views. Because this is a screener he still has to give it a
BR-0 (you never BR-4 or BR-5 off a screener). She returns for additional imaging as a diagnostic
patient with spot compression views. A spiculated, irregular, high density mass is seen. She is
placed in an ultrasound room for further characterization. The ultrasound shows an irregular,
circumscribed, anti-parallel, hypoechoic mass, with posterior shadowing and an echogenic halo
(all the scary bad words). You are certain the mass is a cancer based on these features so you scan
the rest o f her breast looking for other tumors, and you look in her axilla for abnormal nodes. You
find several enlarged lymph nodes in her axilla. You recommend ultrasound guided biopsy of
both the mass and the most suspicious lymph node. You give her a BR-5 (>95% chance of
cancer). The biopsy results come back as fibrocystic change. This result is not "'concordanf with
the findings you made on mammography and ultrasound so you instead use the word
"discordant" and recommend surgical excision. "The results were discordanf' said the Resident
to his Attending. Gross path shows a high grade invasive lesion.

                                                        453
