                                    S E C TIO N 9:

                             A r c h it e c t u r a l D is t o r t io n

AD: We're talking about unchecked aggression here, Dude. We are talking about distortion
of the normal architecture without a visible mass. This manifests in a few ways, including
focal retraction, distortion of the edge of the parenchyma, or radiation o f the normal thin
lines into afocal point.
Architectural Distortion vs Summation Artifact: This is the primary differential
consideration, with summation of normal vessels, ducts, and ligaments being much more
common. The difference is summation should NOT radiate to a central point (AD will).

                                                Summation - Lines continue past each other

Surgical Scar vs Something Bad: Scars should progressively get lighter and harder to see.
Some people say that in 5-10 years a benign surgical scar is often difficult to see.
Lumpectomy scars tend to stick around longer than a benign biopsy. Basically, look at the
priors; if it is a surgical scar, it better be getting less dense. If it's increasing, you gotta stick
a needle in it.
Work Up o fAD: If you see it on a screener you will want to BR-0 it, and bring it back for
spot compression views. If it persists just know you are either going to BR-4 or BR-5 it
(unless you know it's a surgical scar). You should still ultrasound it for further
characterization (may help you decide between a 4 and a 5).

                                                        489
Ultrasound Trivia: The use of harmonic tissue imaging can make it easier to see some
lesions. Be aware that compound imaging can make you lose your posterior features,
especially when they are soft to start with - like the shadowing of an ILC. Remember, even
if you see nothing, this gets a biopsy. Harmonics can also make not so simple cysts look
simple by reducing superficial reverberation.
Things to Know fo r AD:

          ORadiating lines to a single point = AD
          Dad + Calcifications = IDC + DCIS
          Dad without Calcifications = ILC
          QEven with no ultrasound or MRI correlate, AD gets a biopsy.
          Qsiever ever ever ever ever BR-3 an area of AD.
          DEven if it has been there a while, it still needs to be worked up.
          [kemember ILC can grow slowly.
          DSurgical scars should get less dense with time... not more dense.

                                                        490
