                                    S E C TIO N 8:

                             S y m p t o m a t ic D ir t y P il l o w s

Breast Pain: This is super common and typically cyclic (worse during the luteal phase of
the menstrual cycle). Pain in both breasts that is cyclical does not need evaluation. Instead it
needs a family medicine referral for some "therapeutic communication." Focal non-cychc
breast pain may warrant an evaluation.

Trivia: The negative predictive value of combined mammogram and US for "focal pain" is
right around 100%. When breast cancer is found it's usually elsewhere in the breast
(asymptomatic).

Symptoms that are actually worrisome for cancer include: sl<in dimpling, focal skin
thickening, and nipple retraction.

Non-Focal Skin Tiiickening I Breast Edema: This is usually the result of
benign conditions (congestive heart failure, renal failure). For multiple choice tests it will
always be bilateral (in the real world you can sleep on one side and have asymmetric edema).
As long as the breast isn't red, you can feel confident that it will be benign. On
mammography you will see trabecular thickening (diffuse, and favoring the dependent
portions of the breast).

Breast inflam m ation: The swollen red breast. This finding has a differential of two
things: (1) mastitis / abscess, (2) inflammatory breast cancer.

D Mastitis / Abscess: This is a swollen red breast which is painful (Inflammatory breast CA
    is often painless). Patients are usually sick as a dog. Obviously it's associated with
    breast feeding, and is more common in smokers and diabetics. Abscess can develop
    (usually Staph A.).

D Inflammatory Breast Cancer: As previously discussed, this has a terrible prognosis.
    The general rule is that a breast that doesn't respond to antibiotics gets a skin biopsy to
    exclude this. The typical age is 40s-50s. You are going to have an enlarged, red breast
    with a "peau d'orange" appearance. The breast is often NOT painful, despite its
    appearance. Mammogram might show a mass (or masses), but the big finding is diffuse
    skin and trabecular thickening. The treatment is fair game for multiple choice because it
    is different than normal breast cancer. Instead of going to surgery first, inflammatory
    breast cancer gets "cooled down" with chemo and/or radiation - then surgery.

                                                        487
                  The Leaky Tit

Women present with nipple discharge all the time, it's usually benign  Multiple Ducts
(90%). The highest yield information on the subject is that:           (Benign)
spontaneous, bloody, discharge from a single duct is your most
suspicious feature combo. Serous discharge is also suspicious.         Single Ducts
The risk of discharge being cancer is directly related to age (very    (Maybe Malignant)
uncommon under 40, and more common over 60).                           · Papilloma
                                                                       . DCIS

*  Discharge is Bad when if s - Spontaneous, Bloody, andfrom a Single Duct

M ilky D ischarge: Milky discharge is NOT suspicious for breast cancer but can be
secondary to thyroid issues or a pituitary adenoma (prolactinoma). Any medication that messes
with dopamine can stimulate prolactin production - (antidepressants, neuroleptics, reglan).

   Causes of Discharge (Not Milicy)

   Benign Causes                        Worrisome Causes

Pre-Menopausal Woman = Fibrocystic Change Intraductal Papilloma (90%) - single intraductal mass near nipple

Post Menopausal Women = Ductal Ectasia  DCIS (10%) - multiple intraductal masses

D uctal E c tasia - The most common benign cause of nipple discharge in a post menopausal
woman. On galactography you will see dilated ducts near the subareolar region, with
progressive attenuation more posteriorly.

Papillom a - Discussed previously- this is the most common cause of bloody discharge.
As before they can be single or multiple, and carry a small malignant risk (5%).

                                               G a la c to g ra p h y

   Ugh... you take a 27 or 30 gauge blunt tipped needle and attempt to cannulate the duct
   which is leaking. To determine which duct you want - you'll need to have the patient
   squeeze the breast to demonstrate where it's coming from.
   If you manage to cannulate the duct - gently inject 0.2 - 0.3 cc contrast (rare to need more
   than 1 cc). You then do mammograms (magnification CC and ML). Filling defect(s) get
   wire localization.
   Contraindications: Active infection (mastitis), inability to express discharge at the time of
   galactogram, contrast allergy, or prior surgery to the nipple areola complex.

                                                        488
