 S E C TIO N 6:

B e n ig n P a th

Mondor Disease: This is a thrombosed vein that presents as a tender palpable cord. It
looks exactly like you'd expect it to with ultrasound. You don't anticoagulate for it (it's not
a DVT). Treatment is just NSAIDS and warm compresses.

Fat C ontaining Lesions: There are five classic fat containing lesions, all of which
are benign: oil cyst / fat necrosis, hamartoma, galactocele, lymph nodes, and lipoma. Of
these 5, only oil cyst/fat necrosis and lipoma are considered "pure fat containing" masses.

D Hamartoma - The buzzword is "breast within a
    breast." They have an Aunt Minnie appearance on
    mammography, although they are difficult to see on
    ultrasound (they blend into the background).

D Galactocele - Seen in young lactating women.              Hamartoma
    This is typically seen on cessation of lactation. The
    location is typically sub-areolar. The appearance is    - "Breast within a
    variable, but can have an Aunt Minnie look with a
    fat-fluid level. It's possible to breast abscess these
    things up.

D Oil Cyst / Fat Necrosis - These are areas of fat necrosis walled off by fibrous tissue.
    You see this (1) randomly, (2) post trauma, (3) post surgery. The peripheral
    calcification pattern is typically "egg shell." I f you see a ton o f them you m ight think
    about steatocystom a m ultiplex (some zebra with hamartomas).

Lipoma - These are typically radiolucent with no calcifications. Enlargement of a
lipoma is criteria for a biopsy.

Intramammary Lymph node: These are normal and typically located in the tissue
along the pectoral muscle, often close to blood vessels. They are NOT seen in the
fibroglandular tissue.

Practice Point: D oes she need an ultrasound i f i t 's p a lpable? Usually a palpable finding
is going to get an ultrasound. If you are under 30, most people will skip the mammo and
go straight to ultrasound. One of the exceptions is a fat containing lesion definite benign
BR-2er on diagnostic mammography.

478
Pseudoangiom atous S tro m al H y p e rp la s ia (PASH): This is a benign
myofiibroblastic hyperplastic process (hopefully that clears things up). It's usually big (4-6
cm), solid, oval shaped, with well defined borders. Age range is wide they can be seen
between 18-50 years old. Follow up in 12 months (annual) is the typical recommendation.

A Pseudoangiomatous Stromal H yperplasia = Benign thing with a scary sounding name

Fibroadenom a - This is the most common palpable mass in young women. The typical
appearance is an oval, circumscribed mass with homogeneous hypoechoic echotexture, and a
central hyperechoic band. If it's shown in an older patient, it's more likely to have coarse
"popcorn" calcifications - which is a buzzword. On MRI, it's T2 bright with a type 1
enhancement (progressive enhancement).

Phyilodes: Although 1clumped this in benign disease, this thing has a malignant
degeneration risk of about 10%. They can metastasize - usually hematogenous to the lungs
and bone. This is a fast growing breast mass. They need wide margins on resection, as they
are associated with a higher recurrence rate if the margin is < 2 cm. It occurs in an older age
group than the fibroadenoma (40s-50s). Biopsy of the sentinel node is not needed, because
mets via the lymphatics are so incredibly rare (if it does met - it's hematogenous).

Distinguishing Features o f Phyilodes  Tumor

    D Rapid Growth
    D Hematogenous Mets
    D M iddle-Age to O lder Women
    D Mimics a Fibroadenoma

NF1 - N eurofibrom as: This has a classic "Aunt Minnie"
appearance of numerous skin nodules -- classically peri-areolar
in location, but they tend to just be everywhere.

                                              479
