                                                     S E C T IO N 1

                                       A natom y

Nipple: The nipple is a circular smooth muscle that overlies the intercostal space. There
are typically 5-10 ductal openings. Inversion is when the nipple invaginates into the breast.
Retraction is when the nipple is pulled back slightly. They can both be normal if chronic. If
they are new, it should make you think about underlying cancers causing distortion. The
nipple is supposed to be in profile so you d o n 't call it a mass. The areola will darken
norm ally with puberty and parity. Nipple enhancem ent on contrast enhanced breast MRI is
n o rm a l, d o n 't call it Pagets!

Fibroglandular Tissue: The breast mound is fibrous
tissue with fat, ducts, and glands laying on top o f the
anterior chest wall. The axillary extension is called the
"to;7 o f Spence." The upper outer quadrant is more
densely populated with fibroglandular tissue, which is
why most breast cancers start there. There is usually no
dense tissue in the medial/ inferior breast and
retroglandular regions. These are considered "danger
zones" and are often where the cancer hides.

                                                                                   Danger Zones - where there is
                                                                                   usually no dense fibroglandular
                                                                                   tissue

C ooper's Ligaments: These are thin sheets o f fascia
that hold the breasts up. They are the tiny white lines on mammography and the echogenic
lines on US. Straightening and tethering o f the ligaments manifests as "architectural
distortion" which occurs in the setting o f surgical scars, radial scars, and IDC.

Breast Asym m etry: This is com mon and normal (usually), as long as there are no other
findings (lumps, bumps, skin thickening, etc..). For multiple choice, an asymmetric breast
should m ake yo u think about the "shrinking b rea st" o f invasive lobular breast cancer. I f the
size difference is new or the parenchyma looks asymmetrically dense, think cancer.

                                                        454
Lobules: The lobules are the flower shaped milk makers o f the breast. The terminal duct
and lobule are referred to as a "terminal duct lobular unit" or TDLU. This is where most
breast cancers start.

Ducts: The ductal system branches like the roots or branches o f a tree. The branches overlap
wide areas and are not cleanly segmented like slices o f pie. The calcifications that appear to
follow ducts ("linear or segmental") are the ones where you should worry about cancer.
Lactiferous Sinus: Milk from the lobules drains into the major duct under the nipple. The
dilated portion o f the m ajor duct is som etim es called the lactiferous sinus. This thing is
normal (not a mass).
Blood Supply / Lymphatic Drainage: The majority (60%) o f blood flow to the breast is via
the internal mammary. The rest is via the lateral thoracic and intercostal perforators. Nearly
all (97%) o f lymph drains to the axilla. The remaining 3% goes to the internal mammary
nodes.

                                                        455
Axillary N ode Levels: The axilla is sub-divided into three separate levels using the
pectoralis minor muscle as a landmark. Supposedly drainage progresses in a step wise
fashion - from level 1 -> level 2 -> level 3 and finally into the thorax.
Rotter Nodes: These are the nodes between the pec minor and major. They have a fancy
name which usually makes them high yield. However, Rotter was German and test writers
tend to prefer French sounding trivia. The only exception to this is Nazis. Germ an sounding
medical vocab words named after Nazis are fair game. To save you the trouble o f looking it
up - Rotter died before Hitler took pow er so he w asn't a Nazi (probably). Since they
probably aren't gonna ask the vocab word, the only other conceivable piece o f trivia I can
imagine being asked w ould be that these are at the sam e level as level 2.

                  Axillary Lymph Node Levels

                                      Level 1: Lateral to Pec Minor
                                      Level 2: Deep to the Pec Minor
                                      Level 3: Medial and Above Pec Minor
                                      Rotter Node: Between the Pec Minor and Major

Metastasis to the Internal Mammary Nodes: If you can see them on ultrasound they are
abnormal. Isolated mets to these nodes is not a com mon situation (maybe 3%). W hen you
do see it happen, it's from a m edial cancer. M ore commonly, mets in this location occur after
disease has already spread into the axilla (in other words - it's spreading everywhere).

                                                        456
Sternalis M uscle: This is an Aunt Minnie. It's a non-functional m uscle next to the sternum
that can simulate a mass. A bout 5% o f people have one and it's usually unilateral.

                        Sternalis - Only on CC, Never on MLO

The main testable trivia is:
1. WTF is that ?- Recognize the Aunt M innie, and don't get tricked into doing a biopsy on

     it, etc...
2. H ow You See It? It is ONLY SEEN ON THE CC VIEW .
Handling this in real life is all about the old gold. Find that thing on the priors (even better is
a C T ), CC only, never on the MLO.

                                                        457
Breast Development:

The "m ilk strea k" is the em bryologic buzzw ord to explain the location o f the norm al breast
and location o f ectopic breast tissue. Just know that the most common location for ectopic
breast tissue is in tlie axilla (second m ost com m on is the infram am m ary fold). Extra
nipples are most commonly in the same locations (but can be anywhere along the "milk
streak"). At birth, both males and females can have breast enlargem ent and produce milk
(maternal hormones). As girls enter puberty, their ducts elongate and branch (estrogen
effects), then their lobules proliferate (progesterone effects). If you biopsy a breast bud
(why would you do that?) you could damage it and potentially fuck up breast
development.... and then get sued.

      Follicular Phase (day 7-14): Estrogen Dominates. Best time to have both
          mammogram and MRI.

          Luteal Phase (day 15-30): Progesterone Dominates. This is when you get some
          breast tenderness (max at day 28-30). Breast density increases slightly.

      Pregnancy: Tubes and Duct Proliferate. The breast gets a lot denser (more
          hypoechoic on US), and ultrasound may be your best bet if you have a mass.

      Perimenopausal: Shortening o f the follicular phase means the breast gets more
          progesterone exposure. More progesterone exposure means more breast pain, more
          fibrocystic change, more breast cyst formation.

      M enopause ( "The Floppy Stage "): Lobules go down. Ducts stay but may become
          ectatic. Fibroadenomas will degenerate (they like estrogen), and get their "popcorn"
          calcifications. Secretory calcifications will develop (*but not for 15-20 years post
          menopause).

      Hormone Replacement Therapy: Breasts get more dense (especially estrogen-
          progesterone combos). Breast pain can occur, typically peaking in the first year.
          Fibroadenoma (who like to drink estrogen) can grow.

                                                        458
         High Yield Trivia Regarding Breast Anatomy / Physiology

톂 he nipple can enhance with contrast on MRI. This is norm al (not Pagets).
 M ost cancers occur in the upper outer quadrant.
 M ost cancers start in the term inal duct lobular unit (TDLU).
 M ajority (60%) o f blood flow is via the internal mammary.
 Mets to the Internal M ammary Nodes are uncom m on (3 % )- seen in medial cancers.
 Axillary N odeL evels(l, 2, 3 - lateral to medial)
 Sternalis is u su ally u n ilateral,an d o n ly on the CC, N EV ER on MLO.
 Breast Tendernessis max aroundday 27-30.
 M ammography and MRI are best perform ed in the follicular phase (days 7-14).
 D on't Biopsy a prepubescentbreast - you can affect breast developm ent
 Perim enopause (5 0 's) is the peak tim e for b reast pain, cyst form ation
 Fibroadenom as will degenerate (buzzw ord popcorn calcification)in m enopause
 Secretory Calcifications (buzzw ord "rod-like) w ill develop 10-20 years post

    menopause

                             Whatcha Know About Lactation?

              Ay, don't you know I got key by the three? When I chirp, shawty, chirp back

Density: As mentioned above, the breast gets a lot denser in the 3rd trimester.
Mammograms might be worthless, and ultrasound could be your only hope. In other
words, ultrasound has greater sensitivity than mammo in lactating patients.

Density Trick: Pituitary Prolactinoma, or meds (classically antipsychotics) can create a
similar bilateral increased density.

Biopsy: You can biopsy a breast that is getting ready to lactate / lactating - you just need
to know there is the risk o f creating a m ilk fistula. If you make one, they will have to
stop breast feeding to stop the fistula. The fistula can get infected, but th at's not very
common.

Galactocele: This is one o f those "benign fat containing lesions" that you can BR-2.
This is typically seen on cessation o f lactation. The location is typically sub-areolar. The
appearance is variable, but can have an A unt M innie look with a fat-fluid level. It's
possible to breast abscess these things up.

Lactating Adenoma: These things look like fibroadenomas, and may actually be a
charged up fibroadenoma (they like to drink estrogen). Usually these are multiple. If
you get pressed on follow up recommendation for these I would say 4-6 months
postpartum, post delivery or after cessation o f lactation -via ultrasound. They usually
rapidly regress after you stop lactation.

                                                      459
