                                                     S E C T IO N 5:

                                 C a l c if ic a t io n s

Calcifications can be an early sign o f breast cancer. "The earliest sign," actually, according
to some. Calcifications basically come in three flavors: (1) artifact, (2) benign, and (3)
suspicious.

Artifacts Simulating Calcifications:

Deodorant: High density material seen in the
axilla is the typical appearance. A nother trick
is to show a speck o f high density material
that doesn't change position on different
views (inferring that it's on the image
receptor).

                                                                                    Deodorant Artifact

Z in c Oxide: This is in an ointment old ladies like to put on their floppy sweaty breasts. It
can collect on moles and mimic calcifications. If it disappears on the follow up it was
probably this (or another dermal artifact).
M etallic A rtifact: It's possible for the electrocautery device to leave small metallic
fragments in the breast. These will be very dense (metal is denser than calcium). It will also
be adjacent to a scar.

                                                        472
                            Benign vs Suspicious:

The distinction between benign and suspicious is made based on morphology and distribution
(those BI-RADS descriptors). Since most breast cancers start in the ducts (a single duct in most
cases), a linear or segmental distribution is the most concerning. The opposite of this would be
bilateral scattered calcifications.

Segmental  Linear          Grouped  Regional Scattered/ Diffuse

M o re Evil than Ursula                                                     B e n ig n
(villainous sea w itch)
from th e Little Mernnaid

                                    Benign:

D erm al C alcification s: These are found anywhere women sweat (folds, cleavage,
axilla). Just think folds. They are often grouped like the paw of a bear, or the foot of a baby.
The trick here is that these stay in the same place on CC, and MLO views. This is the so
called "tattoo sign. " If you are asked to confirm these are dermal calcs. I'd ask for a
"tangential view."

                                    Tangential
                           Benign - Continued

V a s c u la r C alcificatio n s: These are parallel linear calcifications. It's usually obvious,
but not always.

Popcorn C alcification s: This is an immediate buzzword for degenerating fibroadenoma.
The typical look is they begin around the periphery and slowly coalesce over subsequent images.

S e c re to ry (Rod-Like) C alcificatio n s: These are
big, easily seen, and point toward the nipple. They are
typically bilateral. The buzzword is "cigar sh aped with a
lucent center. " Another buzzword is "dashes but no dots. "
The buzz age is ''10-20ye a rs after menopause. " Don't be
an idiot and call these in a premenopausal patient, they
happen because the duct has involuted.

     Secretory Calcifications

Eggshell C alcificatio n s: "Fat necrosis" I call them. It can be fi-om any kind of trauma
(surgical, or accidental - play ground related). If they are really massive you may see the word
"liponecrosis macrocystica." As I've mentioned many times in this book, anything that sound
Latin or French is high yield for multiple choice. "Lucent C en tered" is a buzzword.

D ystrophic C alcificatio n s: These are also seen after radiation, trauma, or surgery. These
are usually big. The buzzw ord is "irregular in shape. " They can also have a lucent center.

Round: The idea is that these things develop in lobules, are usually scattered,     _ .
bilateral, and benign. When benign (which is most of the time) they are going to
be due to fibrocystic change (most of the time). The best way I've heard to think           
about these is the same as a mass.
                                                                                   ·' 

When masses are bilateral, multiple, and similar they are considered benign (BR-2). When a
mass is by itself or different it's considered suspicious. Round calcifications are the same
way. They are usually bilateral and symmetric (and benign). If they are clustered together,
by themselves, or new, they may need work up (just like a mass). Remember that if grouped
round calcs are on the first mammogram you can BR-3 them.

474
Benign - Continued

M ilk of Calcium:                                                               "te a -c u p p e d "

This has a very characteristic look, and because of                        appearance on
that, questions can only be asked in one of two                           true lateral view.
ways: (I) what is it? - shown as CC then ML,
(2) what is it due to ?                              Fluid-Fluid in
                                                     a lobule
rmOn the CC view the calcifications look powdery
    and spread out, on the MLO view they may
    layer. 1 suspect they will show you a ML view
    because they should layer into a more linear
    appearance, with a curved bottom "tea-cupped.'

     For the purpose o f gamesmanship if they show
    you a ML view on a calcs question - look hard
    fo r anything that resembles tea-cupping.

UOIt's fluid-fluid in a lobule - due to fibrocystic
    change.

                                       M ilk o f C alciu m - Tea Cups on ML

                             No Calcifications on the Biopsy?
This is a common trick. Apparently Milk of Calcium needs to be viewed with polarized
light to assess birefringence. Otherwise, you can't see it. I imagine there are several ways to
get at that via multiple choice.

                                                        475
                   Suspicious

      A m orphous - These things look like powdered sugar, and you should
      not be able to count each individual calcification.

      Distribution is key with amorphous calcs (like many other types before). If
      the calcs are scattered and bilateral they are probably benign, if they are
      segmental they are probably concerning.

      C oarse H etero g en eo u s - These calcifications are countable, but
      their tips are dull. If you picked one up it would not be poke you.

      They are usually bigger than 0.5 mm. Distribution and comparison to
      priors is always important. They can be associated with a mass
      (fibroadenoma, or papilloma).

       Fine Pleom o rphic - These calcifications are countable, and their tips
       appear sharp. If you picked one up it would poke you. They are usually
       smaller than 0.5 mm. This pattern has the second highest likelihood of
      malignancy... p ro b a b ly -- see discussion on the follow ing page.

' I Fine L in ear / Fine L in e a r B ranching - This is a distribution

 ' I

       that makes fine pleomorphic calcifications even more suspicious. The
       DDx narrows to basically DCIS or an atypical look for secretory calcs or
       vascular calcs. This pattern has the highest likelihood of malignancy.

DDx Amorphous Ca+^     DDx Coarse Heterogeneous Ca+2                DDx Fine
                                                              Pleomorphic Ca+2
  Fibrocystic Change              Fibroadenoma
                                     Papilloma            Fibroadenoma (less likely)
        (most likely)                                       Papilloma (less likely)
                               Fibrocystic Change             Fibrocystic Change
 Sclerosing Adenosis    DCIS (low - interm ediate grade)      DCIS (high grade)
Columnar Cell Change

   DCIS (low grade)

                       476
                        Suspicious-Continued

Calcifications Associated w ith Focal Asymmetry/IVIass:
When you see increased tissue density around suspicious calcifications, the chance of an
actual cancer goes up. This is sometimes called a "puff of smoke" sign , or a "warning
shot." This is a situation where ultrasound is useful, for extent of disease.

                                   Gamesm anship - Next Step:
 Ultrasound is NOT typically used to evaluated pure calcification findings. Exceptions
 would be (a) if the patient had a mass associated with the calcifications, or (b) if the patient
 had a palpable finding - then they would get additional evaluation with ultrasound.

       Gamesmanship "Highest Suspicion for iVlaiignancy"

Depending on what you read and who you ask. Fine Linear Branching and Fine Pleomorphic
Calcifications have the Highest Suspicion for Mahgnancy. So which one is it?
For sure fine linear branching is the worst. Morphologically it mimics the ductal
proliferation of suspicious calcifications (DCIS). The confusion is that some people use
fine pleomorphic as an umbrella term under which linear and branching forms exist.

So how to handle this on multiple choice?

· If the answer choices include fine linear branching then that is the correct answer.
· If the answer choices do NOT include fine linear branching but instead have you pick fine

  pleomorphic vs coarse heterogenous or some other obviously benign calcs (egg shell,
  etc...) then for sure pick fine pleomorphic.

                                                        477
