           SE C TIO N 7:

                C an c er

                     IDC - Invasive Ductal Carcinoma

DC - Invasive Ductal Carcinoma is by far the most common invasive breast cancer, making
up about 80-85% of the cases. This cancer is ductal in origin (duh), but unlike DCIS is not
confined to the duct. Instead it "invades" through the duct and if not found by the heroic
actions of Mammographers it will progress to distal mets and certain death. Clinically, the
most common story is a hard, non-mobile, painless mass. On imaging, the most common
look is an irregular, high density mass, with indistinct or spiculated margins, associated
pleomorphic calcifications, and an anti-parallel shadowing mass with an echogenic halo on
ultrasound.

Invasive D u ctal NOS - By far the most common type of breast cancer is the one that is
undifferentiated and has no distinguishing histological features. "Not Otherwise Specified"
or NOS they call it. These guys make up about 65% of invasive breast cancer.

           Less Common (but still testab le) IDC Subtypes

           IDC Types - (O ther than NOS)

Tubular    Small spiculated slow    Often conspicuous on ultrasound. Associated
Mucinous   growing mass with a      with a Radial Scar. Contralateral breast will
Medullary  favorable prognosis.     have cancer 10-15% of the time.

Papillary  Round (or lobulated) and Uncommon. Better outcomes than IDC-NOS
           circumscribed mass

           Round or Oval            Axillary nodes can be large even in the
           circumscribed mass,      absence of mets. Typically younger patient
           without calcifications.  (40s-50s). Better outcome than IDC-NOS
                                    -25% have BRCA 1 mutation

           Complex cystic and       Axillary nodes are NOT common. Typically
           solid.                   seen in elderly people, favors people who are
                                    not white, and is the 2"^^most common (behind
                                    IDC-NOS).

                                    480
       M ultifocal Breast Cancer               M ulticentric Breast Cancer

Multiple primaries in the same quadrant  Multiple primaries in different quadrants
(classically same duct system)
                                         Think o f this like "m u lti-cen ter" clinical
Less than 4-5 cm apart from one another  trial; m ultiple discrete un-related sites.

Synchronous B ila te ra l B re as t C a n c e r - This is seen in 2-3% of women on
mammography, with another 3-6% found with MRI. The risk of bilateral disease is increased
in infiltrating lobular types, and multi-centric disease.

DCIS - This is the "earliest form of breast cancer." In this situation the "cancer" is confined
to the duct. Histologists grade it as low, intermediate, or high. Histologists also use the terms
"comedo", and "non-comedo" to subdivide the disease. If anyone would ask, the comedo
type is more aggressive than than the non-comedo types.

Testable Trivia:

     10% of DCIS on imaging may have an invasive component at the time biopsy is done
    25% of DCIS on core biopsy may have an invasive component on surgical excision.
     8%) of DCIS will present as a mass without calcifications
     Most common ultrasound appearance = microlobulatedmildly hypoechoic mass with

        ductal extension, and normal acoustic transmission

If a test writer wants you to come down on this they will show it in 1 of 3 classic ways:
(1) suspicious calcifications (fine linear branching or fine pleomorphic - as discussed above),
(2) non mass enhancement on MRI, or (3) multiple intraductal masses on galactography.

Pagets - Paget's disease of the breast is a high yield topic. It is basically a carcinoma in
situ of the nipple epidermis. About 50% of the time the patient will have a palpable finding
associated with the skin changes.

Things to know about B reast Pagets:

    D Associated with high grade DCIS (96 %)
    D Wedge biopsy should be done on any skin lesion that affect the nipple-areolar

        complex that doesn't resolve with topical therapy.
    D Pagets is NOT considered T4. The skin involvement does not up the stage in this

        setting.

                                         481
                                 Lobular - ILG

Lobular (IL C ): This is the second most common type of breast cancer (IDC-NOS being the
most common). It makes up about 5-10% of the breast CA cases.
This pathophysiology lends itself well to multiple choice questions:
Cell decides to be cancer -> Cells lose "e-cadherin" -> Cells no longer stick to one another and
begin to infiltrate the breast "like the web of a spider" -> This infiltrative pattern does not cause
a desmoplastic reaction so it gets missed on multiple mammograms -> Finally someone (you)
notices some architectural distortion without a central mass, on the CC view only. You get
fancy and call it a ''dark star.''

On Ultrasound: The typical look is an
ill-defined area of shadowing without a
mass.

                                                      ILC - Shadowing without discrete mass

"Shrinking Breast" -

This is a buzzword for
ILC. The breast isn't
actually smaller, it just
doesn't compress as much.
So when you compare it to
a normal breast, it appears
to be getting smaller. On
physical exam, this breast
may actually look the
same size as the other one.

                                                        482
                        Lobular - ILC - Continued

       THIS vs THAI: ILC VS IDC:ILC is more often multifocal. ILC less often mets to

the axilla. Instead, it likes to go to strange places like peritoneal surfaces. ILC more often has
positive margins, and is more often treated with mastectomy although the prognosis is similar to
IDC.
Things to know about ILC:
D It presents later than IDC
D Tends to occur in an older population
D It often is only seen on one view (the CC - as it compresses better)
D Calcifications are less common than with ductal cancers
D Mammo Buzzword = Dark Star
D Mammo Buzzword = Shrinking Breast
D Ultrasound Buzzword = Shadowing without mass
D On MRI - washout is less common than with IDC
D Axillary mets are less common
D Prognosis of IDC and ILC is similar (unless i t 's a pleomorphic ILC - which is bad)
D More often multifocal and bilateral (compared to IDC)- up to 1/3are bilateral

                                         Dark Star

                                "Dark S tar" - Distortion w ithout a central mass

                           Architectural distortion without a central mass.
        The DDx includes: lobular carcinoma, radial scar, surgical scar, and IDC-NOS.

                                                        483
                               Inflammatory Breast Cancer ( IBC);

IBC an asshole with a notoriously terrible prognosis (at presentation -30% will have metastases).

Clinical Scenario: The classic clinical scenario is a hot swollen red breast that developed rapidly
over 1-3 months. They may even deploy the French sounding word "peau d'orange," - which
basically means skin that looks like a delicious ripe grapefruit. Although there may be a mass on the
mammogram, in the most classic scenario there isn't a focal palpable mass.

"Skin Thickening" is a mammography buzzword (non-specific). Skin thickening is not (by itself)
specific and lots of stuff including CHF can also cause skin thickening. In the case of inflammatory
breast cancer the skin thickening is the result of tumor emboli obstructing the lymphatics.

Probably Fuckery: It is likely the question writer will try to make you think mastitis - even though the
scenario isn't really classic for that. Remember - mastitis is seen in breast feeding women -- that is
the most common scenario. If it isjust "randomwoman with ahot swollen breasf'- you 100%should
think cancer first. Even if they put themon antibiotics, and she has ahistory of recurrent infections
or whatever -- that is all probably bullshit.

         Mind Map:              Swollen, Red Breast, Thick         Confirming the diagnosis of IBC requires: Both
                                Skin -- looks like the peel       (1) Tissue Diagnosis and (2) Clinical Evidence of
                      ___ Ilf  jofa Grapefruit - rapid
              Vr ^              clinical presentation                              inflammatory disease
Evaluate for                    (< 3 months) +/- fever
a focal lump
    or skin
fluctuance to
 help target
your US scan

 Hypoechoic                    I : Solid mass with            Skin thickening   Punch Biopsy      Consider
Multiloculated                  : suspicious                 but no focal mass                    MR! for
                               : i features ^                                    (usually works,   biopsy
  Collection                                                                1^   but not always)  targeting
                                                V

Drain it under Ultrasound                             Biopsy the   Antibiotics ^         Incomplete response to
    & Give Antibiotics                              Mother Fucker  to see if it        antibiotic treatment within
                                                                   gets better         1-2 weeks -Presume IBC-
  (send culture & gram)

Trivia:                                                            The inflammation associated with
                                                                   inflammatory breast cancer can actually
 IDC is the most common subtype to result                         improve with antibiotics, but does NOT
  in IBC (although any subtype of primary                          resolve. So, don't befooled (in the real
 breast CA can)                                                    world or on a multiple choice test).

 IBC is stage 4                                                   This vs That = IBC vs LABC

Treatment: They will try and do                                   Inflammatory Breast     Locally Advanced
chemotherapy prior to surgery because the                              Cancer (IBC)    Breast Cancer (LABC)
chance of a positive margin is so high. The
standard mastectomy is done for "local                             Rapid onset         Prolonged onset
control" , which just sounds awful.
                                                                  Younger (mid 50s)    Older (mid 60s)

                                                                  30% mets at presentation 10% mets at presentation

                                                             484
                         High Risk Lesions:

There are 5 classic high risk lesions that must come out after a biopsy; Radial Scar, Atypical
Ductal Hyperplasia, Atypical Lobular Hyperplasia, LCIS, and Papilloma.

Radial Scar: This is not actually a scar, but does look like one on histology. Instead you
have a bunch of dense fibrosis around the ducts giving the appearance of architectural
distortion (dark scar).

Things to know:
    D This is high risk and has to come out
    D I t 's associated with DCIS and/or IDC 10%-30%
    D Its associated with Tubular Carcinoma*

Atypical Ductal Hyperplasia (ADH): This is basically DCIS but lacks the
quantitative definition by histology (< 2 ducts involved). It comes out (a) because it's high risk
and (b) because DCIS burden is often underestimated when this is present. In other words,
about 30% of the time the surgical path will get upgraded to DCIS.

Lobular Carcinoma in Situ (LCIS): This is classically occult on mammogram. "An
incidental finding" is sometimes a buzzword. The best way to think about LCIS is that it can
be a precursor to ILC, but isn't obligated to be. The risk of conversion to an invasive cancer is
less when comparing DCIS to IDC. Just like pleomorphic ILC is worse than regular ILC, a
pleomorphic LCIS is mo' badder than regular LCIS.

Atypical Lobular Hyperplasia (ALH): This is very similar to LCIS, but histologists
separate the two based on if the lobule is distended or not (no with ALH, yes with LCIS). It's
considered milder than LCIS (risk of subsequent breast CA is 4-6x higher with ALH, and 1Ix
higher with LCIS). For the CORE, the answer is excision. In the real world, some people do
not cut these out, and it's controversial.

Papilloma: A few most commons come to mind with this one. Most common intraductal
mass lesion. Most common cause of blood discharge. You typically see these in women in
their late reproductive years / early menopausal years (average around 50). The classic
location is the subareolar region (1cm from the nipple in 90% of cases).

--Mammogram: Often noraial - occasionally just showing calcifications.
--US: Well-defined smooth walled hypo-echoic mass. Maybe cystic with solid components.
Also, tends to have associated duct dilation.
--Galactography: Solitary filling defect, with dilated duct.

Multiple Papillomas: These tend to be more peripheral. On mammography it's gonna be a
mass(es) or a cluster of calcifications without a mass.

                                                        485
Phyllodes: Yes... I mentioned this already under benign disease. Ijust wanted to bring it
up again to make sure you remember that this thing has a mahgnant degeneration risk of
about 10% (some texts say up to 25%). This is a fast growing breast mass. It occurs in an
older age group than the fibroadenoma (40s-50s).

     M ultiple Masses: Sounds Bad But A ctu ally BR-2

  To call multiple masses you need to have
  multiple (at least 3) bilateral well
  circumscribed masses without suspicious
  features. This gives you a BR-2.

  One common trick is to show multiple
  unilateral masses, that doesn't fly - they
  have to be bilateral.

Lymphoma:

                         Breast Lymphoma

Primary Breast Lymphoma                       Primary Lymphoma             Secondary Lymphoma

                                              Less Common                  More Common

Always , for the purpose of multiple choice,                               most common secondary
Non Hodgkin (Diffuse Large B-Celi)                                         malignancy or mets to
                                                                           involve the breast
Usually a hyperdense mass                     Typical Look;
{Architectural distortion is rare)                                         Typical Look:
                                               Usually Solitary
" IHC" staining is need to confirm lymphoma                                 Inflammatory
                                               Usually Larger               thickening without a
                                                (compared to                 mass (but can look
                                                secondary) and most          like anything)

                                                 l iri U I I l U tMUt llU

Do axillary nodes = lymphoma? Bro.... anything can give you axillary nodes

                                              486
