                                        S E C T IO N 4:

                                          BI-RADS

                                ,>  q. BI-RADS Assessittetit CatesoHes'.
BI-RADS IS an acronym for

Breast Imaging-Reportmg and         j . Negative

Data System. It was developed           findmg(s)

by the ACR to keep eve^one on       3.                 _ < 2 /,, chance of CA

the same page m a similar way       4 . Suspicious abnormality - 2 - 95% Chance of CA

the    developed for                Some people use 4a (low suspicion), 4b (intermediate

                                    suspicion), and 4c(moderate suspicion).

You cmi t have people just calling  5: Highly suggestive of malignancy -- > 95% Chance of CA
stuff breast nodules .                                                malignancy

B I-R A D S 0 : This is your incomplete workup. They come in for a screener, you find something
suspicious. You give it a BI-RADS 0, and bring them back for spots, mags, or ultrasound. You would
also BI-RADS 0 anything that required a technical repeat (blur, inadequate posterior nipple line,
camel nose, etc....).

B I-R A D S 1: It's normal.

B I-R A D S 2 : Benign findings. Examples would be cysts, secretory calcifications, fat containing
lesions such as oil cysts, lipomas, galactoceles and mixed-density hamartomas.

 Multiple bilateral well circumscribed, similar appearing masses - This is BR-2 unless one is
  growing or different than the rest. The general rule is: no ultrasound unless one is palpable.

 Multiple Foci - This MRI finding is also a classic BR2.

B I-R A D S 3 : A key point is that BR-3 by definition means it has less than 2% chance of being
cancer. This is often a confusing topic. You can only use BR3 on a baseline. You can't call anything
BR3 that is new. The typical BR3 scenario: 45 year old comes in for screening and has a focal
asymmetry. She gets called back for diagnostic work up with spots and ultrasound. She is found to
have mass with imaging features classic for fibroadenoma. This can get a BR-3, and be followed
(some places follow for 2 years, in 6 month intervals). Any change over that time ups it to BR-4 and it
gets a biopsy.

Things you can BR-3:
D Finding consistent withfibroadenoma
D Focal asymmetry that looks like breast tissue (becomes less dense on compression).
D Grouped Round Calcifications

What i f it's palpable? This is a controversial topic. Classic teaching is that palpable lesions can not be
BR3. However, recent papers have shown that a palpable lesion consistent with a fibroadenoma has less
than 2% chance of cancer. Some people think the new BI-RADS will change this rule. I really doubt
they will paint you into a comer on this one - given the controversy.

B I-R A D S 4 : These have a 2-95% chance of malignancy. Some will subdivide this into 4A, 4B, 4C
depending on the level o f suspicion. You are going to biopsy it, but you can accept a benign result.

B I-R A D S 5 : This is defined as > 95% chance of malignancy. When you give a BR-5, you are saying
to the pathologist "if you give me a benign result, I'll have to recommend surgical biopsy." In other
words, you can't accept benign with a BR-5.

B I-R A D S 6 : This is path proven cancer.

                                                  468
Basic Flow - These are essentially your choices in a work up.

Screening Mammogram   BR 0 - You m ade a suspicious finding
(no symptoms)
                      and they need a diagnostic workup

                      BR 0 - Technical R epeat for Blur,

                      inadequate positioning etc...

                      BR 1 - Totally Normal

                      BR 2 - Multiple bilateral, well circumscribed,
                      similar appearing masses

                      BR 2 - Redemonstration o f an unchanged
                      previously worked up thing - a cyst etc...

Diagnostic Mammogram  B R 2 - You work it up and it's a benign thing -
(either a call back,  fat containing lesion, cyst, e tc... This returns to
or someone with       screening
a symptom)
                      B R 3 - Very specific situation where you
                      are dealing with a baseline screener, now
                      called back. Findings meet one o f the
                      three things described above;
                      (fibroadenoma, fat with breast tissue,
                      group o f round calcs). This gets 2 years
                      o f follow up.

                      B R 4 - Suspicious finding, but you aren't
                      convinced it's cancer. In other words,
                      you would accept a benign result. - This
                      gets a biopsy.

                      B R 5 - Suspicious finding, that you are
                      convinced is cancer. In other words, you
                      would NOT accept a benign result. - This
                      gets a biopsy.

                      469
                            BI-RADS Terminology

In addition to the "0-6" babysitting, the various regulatory bodies have decided there are only
a few words they will trust you with, depending on what modality you are using.

Plain Mammography:

"M ass" - This is a space occupying lesion seen in two different projections

D escribing the mass: You need to cover (1) Shape, (2) Margin, (3) Density
     (1) Shape: Round, Oval, Irregular - "R O I "
     (2) Margin: Circumscribed, Obscured, Microlobulated, Indistinct, Spiculated - " C O M IS"
     (3) D ensity (relative to breast parenchyma: Fat Density (radiolucent). Low Density, Equal
          Density, High Density

Trivia: O f all the possible descriptors - margin is the most reliable feature for determining
benign vs malignant.

"A sym m etry" - Unilateral deposition o f tissue that doesn't quite look like a mass.

   D Asym m etry - This is a density (only seen in one view) that may or may not be a mass,

          and is often a term used in screeners for BR-0 prior to call back.

   D Global Asym m etry - "greater volume o f breast tissue than the contralateral side",

          around one quadrants worth (or more). It's gonna get a call back, and then BR -2'd on
          a baseline.

   D Focal Asym m etry - This is seen in two projections, might be a mass - needs a spot

          compression.

   D D eveloping Asym m etry - Wasn't there before, now is ... or bigger than prior.

Ultrasound:

Describing the mass: You need to cover : (1) Shape, (2) Orientation, (3) Margin, (4) Echo
pattern, (5) Posterior acoustic feamres

     (1) Shape: Round, Oval, Irregular (not round or oval)
     (2) Orientation: Parallel (wider than tall), Not-Parallel (taller than wide)
     (3) Margin: Circumscribed, Indistinct, Angular, Microlobulated, Spiculated
     (4) Echo Pattern: Anechoic, Hyperechoic, Hypoechoic, Isoechoic, or Complex (cystic/

          solid)
     (5) Posterior Features: None, Enhancement, Shadowing

                                                        470
MRI:

There has recently been a vocabulary change in the Lexicon, and I'm going to briefly cover the
changes.

Background Parenchymal Enhancement:
 This is a newly added BI-RADS "feature." In the literature, they specify that this description is

  based off the first post contrast sequence (sounds testable to me). The
 Categories are : none, minimal, mild, moderate, and marked.

Lesion Analysis: There are 3 basic categories for this:
   Foci ( < 5 mm): You don't need to describe shape and margin on these. They are too small.
   Mass (> 5 mm): This will have shape, margin, internal enhancement characteristics, & T2.
   Non-Mass Enhancement: Distribution, Internal Enhancement, T2

Describing Masses:
 Shape: Round, Oval, and Irregular. The word "lobulated" has been removed from the lexicon, so

  expect that to be a distractor.
 Margin: Circumscribed, Irregular, and Spiculated. The word "smooth" has been removed from the

   lexicon, so expect that to be a distractor.
 Internal Enhancement Patterns: Homogenous, Heterogenous, Rim, and Dark Internal

   Septations. "Enhancing Internal Septations" and "Central Enhancement" are NOT terms in the new
  vocab - and will likely be distractors.

T2 Signal - This is a new "feature" of the lexicon
 Hyperintense:

      Greater than parenchyma (on T2)
      Greater than or equal to fat (on T2)
      Greater than or equal to water (on T2 Fat Sat)

NME - "Distribution "
 Focal, Linear, Segmental (triangle shaped pointing towards nipple - suggestive o f a duct). Regional

  (large area - not a duct). Multiple Regions (two or more regions) and Diffuse.

NME - Internal Enhancement
 Homogenous, Heterogenous, Clumped (looks like cobblestone), Clustered Ring {this is a buzzword

  for DCIS or IDC). "Reticular" and "Dendritic" have been removed and will likely be distractors.

Kinetic Curves are also described. I'll talk about this more in the Breast MRI Section.

Associated Findings'. You are allowed to talk about nipple retraction, skin thickening, edema,
invasion o f the pec muscles, pre contrast signal, and artifacts.

Implants'. When you talk about implants you have to describe the type (silicone vs saline),
location (retroglandular vs retropectoral), and luminal features like radial folds, keyhole,
linguine, e tc... I'll cover this more in the Breast MRI section.

                                                        471
