            SEC TIO N 13:
POST O p / P o s t T h e r a p y

Reduction M am m oplasty and M astopexy

Reduction Mammoplasty - Yes, there        Typical Changes from M am m oplasty
is actually a subpopulation of women
who want SMALLER breasts. I know,
it sounds impossible to believe , but
Mammoplasty is actually done to
reduce breast size. I can only pray that
the sadistic bastard who developed this
procedure has received appropriate
punishment (in this life or the next).

Mastopexy - This is a "breast lift,"
Essentially, just a removal of skin.
Women get this done to address floppy,
saggy, pancake, or "ptotic" boobs.

Normal Findings Post Mastopexy:
     ·Swirled AppearanceAffecting
         Inferior Breast
     · Fat Necrosis/Oil Cysts
     · Isolated IslandsofBreast Tissue

Keyhole Incision - This is done for       Mammoplasty Keyhole Incision Mastopexy Keyhole Incision
both mammoplasty and mastopexy,
creating a "swirled" appearance in the
inferior aspect of the MLO.

                                          497
                   Surgical Biopsy / Radiation

Term in o lo g y:
    D Lumpectomy - Surgical Removal of Cancer (palpable or not)
    D Excisional Biopsy - Surgical Removal of Entire Lesion
    D Incisional Biopsy - Surgical Biopsy of a Portion of the Lesion

Post Biopsy Changes:

The first post operative mammogram is usually obtained around 6-12 months after biopsy. The
key is that distortion and scarring are worst on this film, and should progressively
improve. On ultrasound, scars are supposed to be thin and linear. If they show you a focal
mass like thickening in the scar - you've gotta call that suspicious for local recurrence.

Fat necrosis and benign dystrophic calcifications may evolve over the first year or two, and are
the major mimics of recurrence. Fat necrosis can be shown on MR (T1 / T2 bright, and then fat
sat drops it out).

Recurrence / Residual Disease:

Numerical Trivia: Local recurrence occurs 6-8% of the time when women have breast
conserving therapy. The peak time for recurrence is 4 years (most occur between 1-7).
Without radiation local recurrence is closer to 35%. Tumors that recur early (< 3 years)
typically occur in the original tumor bed. Those that occur later are more likely to be in a
different location than the original primary.

What gets recurrent disease ? Risk of recurrence is highest in the premenopausal woman
(think about them having an underlying genetic issue). Other risks include: having an
extensive inarticulate component, a tumor with vascular invasion, multi centric tumors,
positive surgical margins, or a tumor that was not adequately treated the first go around.

Residual Calcs: Residual calcifications are not good. Supposedly, residual calcifications near
or in the lumpectomy bed correlates with a local recurrence rate of 60%.

New Calcs: When it does reoccur, something like 75% of DCIS will come back as
calcifications (no surprise). The testable pearl is the benign calcifications tend to occur early
(around 2 years), vs the cancer ones which come back around 4 years.

Sentinel Node Failure: Sentinel node biopsy works about 95% of the time (doesn't work 5%of
the time). So about 5 times in 100 you are going to have a negative node biopsy that presents
later with an abnormal armpit node.

Tissue Flap: The cancer is not going to start in the belly fat / muscle. The cancer is going to
come from either the residual breast tissue or along the skin scar line. Screening of the flaps is
controversial - with some saying it's not necessary. The need for screening of tissue flaps is not
going to be asked. If you get asked anything it's "where the recurrence is coming from / going
to be?"

                                                        498
Specimen Radiography

If the path report says "close margins" or "positive   Specimen Radiograph - Cancer at the Margin
margins," there is a very high chance you are          -High chance of positive margin
going to have cancer still in the breast. If you are
shown a specimen radiograph, there are two things
you need to look at in real life and on multiple
choice: (1) is the mass / calcifications on the
sample, and (2) is the mass / calcifications near
the edge or touching the edge. I f the mass is at the
edge, the chance o f incomplete excision is going to
he near 80%. The "next step " would he to call the
surgeon in the OR and tell him/her that.

Post Radiation Changes:

Practical Point (the before picture): The pre-radiation mammogram is very important. If
you can identify residual disease on it, the patient has many more treatment options. If you
discover the residual disease after the radiation therapy has been given, you've forced the
patient to undergo mastectomy.

Radiation Changes: You are going to see skin thickening and trabecular thickening. This is
normal post radiation, and should peak on the first post-RT mammogram.

This would he a classic testable scenario:
    ·Film 1 PostRT: You see skin thickening/trabecularthickening
    ·Film 2: Skin thickening/trabecularthickening is better
    ·Film 3: Skin thickening / trabecularthickening is worse * - this is recurrent disease
        (maybe inflammatory breast CA).

                         Secondary Angiosarcoma

The primary type is so rare I won't even mention it. The secondary type is seen after
breast conservation therapy / radiation therapy. It takes around 6 years post radiation
therapy to develop one of these things. Clinically the classic presentation is "red plaques
or skin nodules." The challenge with these is that the skin thickening due to the cancer is
often confused with post therapy skin thickening. They're usually T2 bright.

                      499
staging/ Surgical Planning

Breast Cancer Staging: The staging is based on size from T1-T3, then invasion for T4.
· T 1 = < 2 cm.
· T2 -2 -5 cm
· T3 = > 5 cm
· T4 = "Any size"with chest wall fixation, skin involvement, or inflammatorybreast CA.

     *Rememher that Pagets is NOT T4.
Trivia: Axillary Status is the most important predictor o f overall survival in breast cancer
Trivia: Lymphoma and Melanoma are the most common tumors to met to the breast.
The contraindications for breast conservation are high yield.

                        Contraindications for Breast Conservation
Inflammatory Cancer,
Large Cancer Size Relative to Breast
Multi-centric (multiple quadrants)
Prior Radiation Therapy, to the same breast
Contraindication to Radiation Therapy (collagen-vascular disease).

                                                        500
