                                    S E C TIO N 14:

                                                      B r east M RI

Breast MRI can be used for several reasons: High risk screening, extent of disease (known
cancer), axillary mets with unknown primary, diagnostic dilemmas, and possible silicone
implant rupture. The big reason is for high risk screening.

I'll just briefly go over how it's done, and how it's read.

You need a special breast coil and table set up to make it work. The patient lies belly down
with her breasts hanging through holes in the table. You have to position them correctly
otherwise they get artifact from their breasts rubbing on the coil. Basic sequences are going
to include a T2, and pre and post dynamic (post contrast) fat saturated Tl. Remember the
breast is a bag of fat - so fat sat is very important. Dynamic imaging is done to generate
wash out curves (similar to prostate MRI).

My basic algorithm fo r reading them is to:

(1) Look at the background uptake. I use this to set my sensitivity when I compare it to prior
    studies. Ideally you used the same kind of contrast, and imaged at the same time of the
    month. As I'll mention below, hormone changes with female cycles cause changes in
    how much contrast gets taken up (less early, and more later).

(2) I look for masses or little dots (foci). MIPS (maximum intensity projections) are helpful
    just like looking for a lung nodule. If I see a mass or dot I try and characterize it - first by
    seeing if I can make it T2 bright. Most T2 bright things are benign (lymph nodes, cysts,
    fibroadenoma). If it's not T2 bright, I look at the features - is it a mass? is it spiculated,
    etc? These features are more important than anything else. Is it new? Nipple
    enhancement is ok - don't be a dumb ass and call it Pagets.

(3) Finally I'll look at the wash out curve, but honestly I've made up my mind before I even
    look at that. I will never let a benign curve back me off suspicious morphology.

(4) I deal with the findings similar to mammo. New masses get BR-4 or BR-5. NMLE (non­
    mass enhancement) gets BR-4'd if new. T2 bright stuff for the most part (there is one
    exception of mucinous cancer) gets BR-2'd. Anything with a 4 or a 5 gets biopsy - via
    MR guided stereo. I never pussy foot out and BR-0 something on MRI - unless it's a
    technical problem (example inadequate fat sat).

                                                        501
Who gets a screening M R l ?

    · People with a lifetime risk greater than 20-25%
    · Includes people who got 20 Gy o f radiation to the chest as a child

How do you estimate this risk, to decide who is 20-25%?

    · You use one o f the risk models that includes family history (NOT the Gail model). I f the
       question is which o f thefollowing is Not one to use ? The answer is Gail. I f the
       question is which o f thefollowing do you pick? I 'd chose Tyrer-Cuzick, its probably the
       best one out now.

Parenchyma Enhancement:

· Is it normal ? - Yes
· Where is it most common ? - Posterior Breast in the upper outer quadrant, during the later

  part of the menstrual cycle (luteal phase - day 14-28)
· How do you reduce it? - Do the MRI during the first part of the menstrual cycle (day 7-14).
· What does Tamoxifen do? - Tamoxifen will decrease background parenchyma uptake.

  Then it causes a rebound.

Foci:

    · How is it defined? Round or oval, circumscribed, and less than 5mm,
    · Are they high risk? Usually not. Usually they are benign (2-3% have a chance of being

      a bad boy).
    · What would make you biopsy one? Seemed different than the rest, ill-defined borders,

      or suspicious enhancement.
    · Can you Bl-RADs 3 one? If you have a solitary focus (< 5mm) with persistent kinetics

      on a baseline exam - you can BI-RADS 3 it.
NME (Non-Mass Enhancement):

    · What is NME ? It's not a mass - but more like a cloud or clump of tissue enhancement.

    · What are the distributions ? Segmental (triangular blob pointing at the nipple, indicates a
      single branch), Regional (a bigger triangle), and Diffuse (sorta all over the place).

    · Which one is more suspicious - homogenous or heterogeneous enhancement of NME ?
      Heterogeneous is much more suspicious.

                                                        502
Masses:
    · These are defined as being 5 mm or larger. They have definable vocabulary for their
      features (round, oval, indistinct, etc...)
    · When are these had? They are bad when you call them bad words. Irregular shape,
      speculated margins, heterogeneous enhancement, or rim enhancement. Once you say
      those words you are going to have to biopsy them, because morphology trumps
      kinetics. It doesn't matter what the kinetics shows, you must biopsy suspicious
      morphology.
    · When is kinetics helpful? When you are on the fence. If you have benign morphology
      and you have suspicious kinetics - you probably are going to need to biopsy that also.

Kinetics:
    H Breast kinetics are performed in two portions:
             o (1) Initial upslope phase that occurs over the first 2 minutes. This is graded as
                 slow, medium, or rapid (fast),
             o (2) The washout portion which is recorded sometime between 2 minutes and 6
                 minutes (around about). These are graded as either continued rise "type 1",
                 plateau "type 2", or rapid washout "type 3".

                                                                                                                                       Persistent "1"

                                                        503
Classic Looks:
    J Fibroadenoma: These things are classically T2 bright, round, with "non-enhancing
        septa", and a type 1 curve.
    J DCIS: Clumped, ductal, linear, or segmental non-mass enhancement. Kinetics are
        typically not helpful for DCIS.
    D IDG: Spiculated, irregular shaped masses, with heterogeneous enhancement and a
        type 3 curve.
    D ILC: Doesn't always show enhancement.

T2 Bright Things:
    D Usually T2 Bright = Benign.
    D Things that are T2 Bright include: Cysts, Lymph nodes, fat necrosis. Fibroadenoma.
    D The exceptions (anytime I say the word "except "you need to think high yield!):
        Colloid Cancer, and Mucinous Cancer can be T2 bright.

                                                        504
           Pure Trivia:
D I f you have a patient with known breast CA, how often do youfind a contralateral breast

    CA? - Answer is 0.1-2% by mammogram, and 3-5% by MRI.
D Never BR-0 an MRI case. This is as much workup as you are going to get, so just call it

    benign or biopsy it. You can actually BR-0 something if you really want to prevent a
    biopsy - possible lymph node - US and mammo to confirm benign sorta situation. This
    is still kinda weak. For the purpose of multiple choice, think twice before you BR-0 a
    MRI case.
D Spiculated margins = 80% malignancy. This is the single most predictive feature of
    malignancy.

                                                        505
