                      S E C TIO N 17:

                      PR O C ED U RES

             i|>i  _
The most common procedures are going to be ultrasound guidetfS31d~sTerSS!a2TI2rt)iSpsy of

masses and calcification. I'll try and touch on the testable points.

Ultrasound:

 Overall ultrasound is faster and easier than stereo. If you can see the mass under US - you
  should do the biopsy under US.

 Usually a 14 gauge automatic spring loaded device is used for masses

 You should put the mass on the far side of the US screen - lets you see the length of the
  needle better

 Ideally 4 things should line up during the biopsy: the lesion, the transducer, the skin nick,
  and the biopsy needle

 The needle angle should be parallel to the chest Vk'all (pneumothorax is an embarrassing
  complication of a breast biopsy)

 Anesthetic should be placed right up to but not into the lesion (especially when the lesions
  is small).

 You should try and biopsy the deeper part of a lesion first. If you obscure it from bleeding
  at least you can still get the superficial part.

 If you have two lesions to biopsy, try and hit the smaller one first. If the bigger one bleeds
  it may obscure the smaller one -- it's less likely the other way around.

 If you have a solid and cystic lesion - you should biopsy the solid part.

 About 90% of the time you can make a diagnosis off 1 or 2 passes (though most texts still
  recommend doing 5).

Next Step Scenario - Like an idiot you injected a bunch of air around the mass, while you were
trying to give lidocaine. Now you can't see the mass. What do you do? You have to reschedule.
Don't try to biopsy it blind.

                      514
A x illa :
 When you biopsy an axillary lymph node you should target the node's cortex.
 Core biopsy is preferred over FNA if you have no clue what it is. If you have known breast

  cancer and you are nearly certain you are dealing with a met - FNA works fine.

Special Scenario - The Cyst Aspiration
 Indications - Anxiety, pain, uncertain diagnosis.
 Size is NOT an indication for aspiration
 Cysts recur about 70% of the time (this drops to around 15%if you inject air after you

  aspirate).

                           The Hypoechoic Mass vs Dirty Cyst Scenario
                                             -Classic "Next Steps" -

 Next Step Scenario #1 - You suspect a hypoechoic mass is a debris filled cyst rather than
 a solid mass... but you aren't totally sure. What should you dofirst ? Aspirate it.
 Next Step Scenario #2 - Same hypoechoic mass vs cyst - you aspirate it and you get non-
 bloody fluid. You also notice the lesion disappeared. What do you do ? You should pitch
 it, no need for cytology. You are done.
 Next Step Scenario #3 - Same hypoechoic mass vs cyst - you aspirate it and you get
 bloody fluid. You also notice the lesion disappeared. What do you do ? Send it to
 cytology and then place a clip.
 Next Step Scenario #4 - Same hypoechoic mass vs cyst - you aspirate it and you get
 purulent "poop like" fluid. The fluid smells like a zombie farted. You also notice the
 lesion disappeared. What do you do ? Send it to the microbiology lab for culture and
 sensitivity.
 Next Step Scenario #5 - Same hypoechoic mass vs cyst - you aspirate it and you get fluid.
 You also notice the lesion does NOT disappear. What do you do ? Proceed to core biopsy
 of the residual solid mass.

                                                        515
s te re o ta c tic Biopsy (using a m am m ogram to localize an d target the lesion).

This is the preferred move for calcifications. Typically the specimen   Gauge Size vs
is x-rayed after the sample to confirm there are calcifications within      Samples:
the biopsied tissue.
                                                                        - 10-11 Gauge
Vacuum assisted devices are typically used for calcifications.             Needle = 12
                                                                           Samples
The biopsy is performed in compression - with slightly less pressure
than a normal mammogram. Compressibihty of the breast tissue can        - 7-9 Gauge
NOT be less than 2-3cm (some texts say 28 mm). Otherwise you risk          Needle = 4
throwing the needle through the other side of the breast into the          Samples
digital receptor. This is called a "negative stroke margin."

Next Step Scenario: What if the breast compresses too small (<20 mm) ? You should do a
wire localization for excisional biopsy.

A marker (tiny piece of metal) should be placed after each biopsy. Clip migration can occur
(accordion effect). You will need a mammogram in the orthogonal view to evaluate for this
post placement.

QC "Localization and Accuracy Test" to verify system ahgnment and performance is
performed Daily before patient exams.

516
