               S E C T IO N 1 1:

               M ale B reast

There is no more humiliating way to die for a man than breast cancer. The good news is male
breast cancer is uncommon. The bad news is that when it occurs it is often advanced and
invasive at the time of diagnosis - Valar Morghulis.

The male breast does NOT have the elongated and branching ducts, or the proliferated lobules
that women have. This is key because men do NOT get lobule associated pathology (lobular
carcinoma, fibroadenoma, or cysts).

G ynecom astia: This is a non-neoplastic enlargement of the epithelial and stromal elements
in a man's breast. It occurs "physiologically" in adolescents, affecting about 50% of adolescent
boys, and men over 65. If you aren't 13 or 65 it's considered embarrassing and you should hit the
gym. If you are between 13-65 it's considered pathology and associated with a variety of
conditions (spironolactone, psych meds, marijuana, alcoholic cirrhosis, testicular cancer). There
are three patterns (nodular is the most common). Just think flame shaped, behind nipple,
bilateral but asymmetric, and can be painful. Things that make you worry that it's not
gynecomastia include not being behind the nipple, eccentric location, and calcification.

Patterns of G ynecom astia

Nodular        "Flame Shaped" centered behind
(most common)  the nipple, radiating posterior as it
               blends into the fat. Breast is often
               tender. Usually lasts less than 1
               year.

Dendritic      Resembles a branching tree. This
               is a chronic fibrotic pattern.
               Usually not tender.

Diffuse        Mammographic pattern looks like
Glandular      a woman's breast (diffuse
               increase in density). You see this
               in men receiving estrogen
               treatment.

                                                      Gynecomastia

                            492
P seu do gyn eco m astia "Bitch Tits "- This is an increase in the fat tissue of the breast
(not glandular tissue). There will NOT be a discrete palpable finding, and the mound of
tissue will not be concentric to the nipple.

Lipom a - After gynecomastia, lipoma is the second most common palpable mass in a man.

M ale B reast C ancer: It's uncommon in men, and very uncommon in younger men
(average age is around 70). About 1 in 4 males with breast cancer have a BRCA mutation
(BRCA 2 is the more common). Other risk factors include Klinefelter Syndrome, Cirrhosis,
and chronic alcoholism. The classic description is eccentric but near the nipple. It's almost
always an IDC-NOS type. DCIS can occur but is very rare in isolation. On mammography it
looks like a breast cancer, if it was a woman's mammogram you'd BR-5 it. On ultrasound
it's the same thing, it looks like a BR-5. Having said that, nodular gynecomastia can look
suspicious on ultrasound.

Things that make you think i t 's breast cancer:
    D Eccentric to Nipple
    D Unilateral
    D Abnormal Lymph nodes
    D Calcifications
    D Looks like breast cancer
    D Fixed/immobile

                                                                      Male Breast CA

Some trivia on calcifications: Micro-calcifications alone are uncommon in men. When you
see them they are less numerous, coarser, and associated with a mass (25% of male breast
cancers have calcifications).

Should men get screening mammograms? Honestly, women shouldn't even get them
(according to the New England Journal of Medicine). This remains controversial, with the
bottom line being this; only Klinefelter patients approach the screening range with regards to
risk.

As a point of trivia: males with gynecomastia from gender reassignment on hormone
therapy are not high enough risk for screening mammograms. Obviously, if they have a
palpable finding, they can get a diagnostic work up.

                                                        493
