                                   SEC TIO N 12:
                                       Im plants

Basic O verview : There are two types , saline and silicone. They both can rupture, but no
one really gives a shit if saline ruptures. Saline does not form a capsule, so you can't have
intracapsular rupture with saline. There is no additional imaging past mammo for saline
rupture, and you just follow up with primary care / plastic surgeon. You can tell it's saline
because you can see through it. For silicone you can have both intra and extra capsular rupture.
You can only see extra on a mammogram (can't see intra). Extra creates a dense "snow storm "
appearance on US. Intra creates a "step ladder" appearance on US and a "linguine sign "on
MRI. MRI is done with FS T2 to look at implants.

Big Points:
    D You CAN have isolated intracapsular rupture.
    D You CAN NOT have isolated extra (it's always with intra).
    D If you see silicone in a lymph node you need to recommend MRI to evaluate for
        intracapsular rupture

Im p lant Location: There are two subtypes:
    D Siibglandular (retromammary'): Implant behind breast tissue, anterior to pectoral
        muscle
    D Subpectoral (retropectoral): Implant between pectoralis major and minor muscles

Silicone Implants

The body will forni a shell around the foreign body (implant), which allows for both
intracapsular and extracapsular rupture (an important distinction from saline). About 25% of
the time you will see calcifications around the fibrous capsule.

Things to know:
    D Implants are NOT a contraindication for a core needle biopsy
    D Implants do NOT increase the risk for cancer.

Saline Implants

There are also subglandular and subpectoral subtypes. You can tell the implant is saline
because you can see through it. Implant folds and valves can also be seen. If it ruptures no one
really cares (other than the cosmetic look). The saline is absorbed by the body, and you have a
collapsed implant. A practical point of caution, be careful when performing a biopsy in these
patients - even a 25g FNA needle can burst a saline implant.

Trivia: Some sources say that "physical exam" is the test of choice for diagnosing saline
implant mpture - this is variable depending on what you read / who you ask.

                                                        494
                      Implant Complications:

Generally speaking, MRI is the most accurate modality for evaluating an implant.

C ap sular C o n tra c tu re : This is the most common complication of implants. It
occurs secondary to contraction of the fibrous capsule, and can result in a terrible cosmetic
deformity. You see it in both silicone and saline implants, but is most common in
subglandular silicone implants. On mammo it looks like rounding or distortion of the
implant (comparisons will show progression).

Gel Bleed: Silicone molecules can (and do) pass through the semi-permeable implant
shell coating the exterior of the surface. This does NOT mean the implant is ruptured. The
classic look is to show you silicone in the axillary lymph nodes (remember I showed a case
o f this under the lymph node section). Even with axillary lymph nodes, this does NOT mean
it has ruptured.

Rupture: As a point of testable trivia, the number one risk factor for rupture is age of the
implant. Rupture does not have to be post traumatic, it can occur spontaneously. Rupture
with compression mammography is actually rare.

    D Saline: Saline rupture is usually very obvious (deflated boob). It doesn't matter all
        that much (except cosmetically), as the saline is just absorbed. On mammo, you will
        see the "wadded up" plastic wrapper. They could easily write a question asking you
         what modality you need to see a saline rupture. The answer would be plain mammo
         (you don't need ultrasound or MRI).

    D Silicone: This is a more comphcated matter. You have two subtypes; isolated
        intracapsular and intracapsular with extracapsular.

             O Isolated Intracapsular: This will be occult on physical exam, mammography
                 and possibly ultrasound. You might see a stepladder on Ultrasound. MRI is
                 way more sensitive.

             O Intracapsular with Extracapsular Rupture: This is usually obvious on
                 mammogram with dense silicone seen outside the capsule. The contour of a
                 normal intact implant is smooth. Silicone outside the implant can go to lymph
                 nodes. On ultrasound you want to know the buzzword "snow storm" pattern
                 - which is really echogenic with no posterior shadowing. A sneaky trick is
                 to show a lymph node with a snow storm appearance on ultrasound. On MRI
                 extracapsular silicon is T1 dark, and T2 bright. Lastly, a very important
                 concept is that cannot have isolated extracapsular rupture. I f it 's
                  extracapsular, then it s also intracapsular.

                                                        495
Radial Folds - The Mimic of Rupture:

Radial folds are the normal in-foldings of the elastomer shell. They are the primary mimic
for the linguine sign of intracapsular rupture. To tell them apart ask yourself "do thefolds
connect with the periphery o f the implant? " Radial folds should always do this (linguine
does not).

                            Silicone Implant Rupture Summary

                                                                                      Intracapsular Rupture:

                                                                      - Remember the "capsule" is not part
                                                                         of the implant. It's the fibrous coat
                                                                         your body makes around the implant
                                                                         (the outer black line in my diagram).

                                                                      - Silicone can rupture through the
                                                                         shell of the implant, but stays
                                                                         confined inside the fibrous coat - this
                                                                         is intra-capsular rupture.

                                                                       The classic sign is the floating
                                                                         "linguine" - as in this case.

                                                                                      Extra & Intracapsular:

                                                                       This is when the rupture goes
                                                                         through the "capsule" (the thing your
                                                                         body made).

                                                                       You can NOT have isolated extra
                                                                         capsular silicone. It has to make it
                                                                         through the implant shell first.

                                                                       Silicone outside the capsule can
                                                                         create a "snow storm" look on
                                                                         ultrasound. It can also infiltrate lymph
                                                                         nodes and do the same (snow storm
                                                                         nodes). Remember gel bleed can
                                                                         also give you a node like this.

                                                                                      Radial Folds

                                                                       Guys like squishy boobs. The bigger
                                                                         and the squishier the better.

                                                                       Therefore, implants are not bound
                                                                         tightly - so they can be squishy.

                                                                      - Because they are loosely bound the
                                                                         shell in-folds creates radial folds

                                                                                      The folds always attach to the
                                                                                          shell*

                                                                       The folds are thicker than a rupture,
                                                                         because they represent both layers.

                                                        496
