                                     S E C TIO N 16:
                       ACR Appro pria ten ess

These all make great "next step questions."
 Remember scoring is 1-9, with 9 being the most appropriate and 1 being the least.

Breast Cancer Screening;

Variant 1: High Risk Women. BRCA(plus untested first degree relatives), History of Chest
Radiation, Risk Model Showing 20% or greater lifetime risk

 Mammo (Highly Appropriate "9"):
   Beginning at age 25-30 or 10 years before age of first-degree relative with breast cancer
   8 years after radiation therapy, but not before age of 25.
   Mammography + MRI ? They are complementary examinations, both should be performed.

 Tomosynthesis (Highly Appropriate "9"):
   Beginning at age 25-30 or 10 years before age of first-degree relative with breast cancer
   8 years after radiation therapy, but not before age of 25.
   Mammography + MRI ? They are complementary examinations, both should be performed.

 MRI (Highly Appropriate "9"):
   Mammography + MRI ? They are complementary examinations, both should be performed.

Variant 2: Medium Risk Women. Women with personal history of Breast CA, lobular
hyperplasia. Atypical Ductal Hyperplasia, or Risk Model Showing 15-20% life time risk
 Mammo and Tomo are "9s"
 MRI is a 7. Mammography + MRI ? They are complementary examinations, MRI should NOT replace

  mammography.
Variant 3: Average Risk Women. Women with < 15 %Lifetime Risk
 Mammo and Tomo are "9s"
 MRI is a "3" which means it is NOT appropriate.

                                                        510
 Screening for Transgender W om en

  Screening Annual M am m ogram IF:
   Past or Current Hormones (Estrogen & Progestin for > 5 years)
   > 50 years old
  Trivia: BMI > 35 = increases Risk

 S c re e n in g fo r T r a n s g e n d e r iVlen

  Screening Annual M am m ogram IF:
   They still have breast tissue (even if they had a reduction mammoplasty)

Breast Pain:

Variant 1: Cyclical, Unilateral or Bilateral. Age < 40.
 No imaging is appropriate.
 Ultrasound is the least inappropriate and it's rated at a "2"
Variant 2: Cyclical, Unilateral or Bilateral. Age > 40.
 No imaging is appropriate.
 Ultrasound, Mammo, and Tomo are the least inappropriate and all rated at a "2"
Variant 3: NON-Cyclical, Unilateral or Bilateral. Age < 40.
 Ultrasound Might Be Appropriate and is rated as a "5."

Stage 1 Breast CA - Initial Workup and Surveillance (No Symptoms)

Newly Diagnosed - rule out mets to the bones, chest, liver, and/or brain
 No imaging is appropriate. (CT, MRI, PET etc... not indicated with initial stage 1)

Surveillance / Rule Out Local Recurrence
 Diagnostic Mammo or Tomo is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."
 Ultrasound might be appropriate and is rated as a "5."
 MRI might be appropriate and is rated as a "5."

                                                        511
Symptomatic Male Breast:

Variant 1: Any Age with Physical Exam and History Consistent with
Gynecomastia or Pseudogynecomastia (bitch tits).
 No imaging is appropriate.

Variant 2: Younger than 25 years old with indeterminate palpable.
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as an "8."
 Mammo is in the "May Be Appropriate" category as a "5." I would only do this if the ultrasound

  doesn't answer your question. ** Page 441, Scenario 4A - has suggested multiple choice strategy.

Variant 3: Older than 25 years old with indeterminate palpable.
 Mammo is Appropriate and is rated as an "8"
 Ultrasound is in the "May Be Appropriate" category as a "5."

Variant 4: Older than 25 years old with indeterminate palpable. The
mammogram was indeterminate or suspicious.
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."

Variant 5: Physical exam is highly concerning for cancer. Dude has an
ulcerative mass, axillary nodes, nipple retraction, etc...
 Mammo is Appropriate and is rated as an "9"
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as an "8" - to stage the breast and axilla just like a female breast

  CA workup.

                                                        512
Random Situations - First/Next Step:

Women > 40 with Palpable
 Mammo is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."
Women > 40 with Mammo Suspicious for CA
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."
Women > 40 with Mammo findings of a Lipoma at the Site of a Palpable.
 No additional imaging is appropriate.
Women > 40 with Palpable Findings and a Negative Mammo
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."
Women < 30 Initial Evaluation
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."
Women 30-39 Initial Evaluation
 Ultrasound is Appropriate and is rated as a "8."
 Mammo is Appropriate and is rated as a "8."
Women < 30 Ultrasound is Suspicious for CA
 Core Biopsy is Appropriate and is rated as a "9."
 Mammo is Appropriate and is rated as a "8."
Women < 30 Ultrasound is Negative
 No imaging is appropriate.
Women < 30 Ultrasound has a B9 finding (like a cyst)
 No imaging is appropriate.
Women < 30 Ultrasound is BR3 able - example fibroadenoma
 Short interval followup - usually Q6 months x 2 years.

                                                        513
