                                    S E C TIO N 18:
                                            M QSA

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration Mammography Quality Standards Act (MQSA) - yes that
is a real thing - demands a medical audit and outcome analysis be perfonned once a year. You are
forced to follow up patients with positive mammos, and correlate with biopsy pathology results (so
you can see how much benign disease you biopsy and how much fear / anxiety you generate). You
have to grade the biopsy with the risk category (you can't accept benign resuhs with a BR-5).

MQSA and Other Crap they could ask:

        3 months of mammography is required during residency training
        The recall rate should be less than 10%
        Mammography facilities are required to provide patients with written results of their
        mammograms in language that is easy to understand. Also known as a "lay report," and
        must be given within 30 days of the study.
        A consumer complaint mechanism is required to be established in mammography
        facilities to provide patients with a process for addressing their concerns.
        Patients can obtain their original mammograms, not copies, when they are needed.
        For cases in which a facility's mammograms are determined to be substandard and a
        risk to public health, facilities will notify the patients and their doctors and suggest an
        appropriate plan of action.
        The "Interpreting Physician" is ultimately responsible for the Quality Control program.
        The required resolution of line pairs is 13 Ip/mm in the anode to cathode direction and
         11 line pair / mm in the left right direction
        To make it pass image quality; must show 4 fibers, 3 microcalcification clusters, and 3
        masses, plus "acceptable artifacts".
        The dose phantom is 50% glandularity, 4.2 cm thick, and is supposed to have a dose
        less than 3 mGy per image (+ grid).
        Don't get it twisted; there are no patient dose limits in mammography, only a phantom
        dose. A dense breast can result in a higher patient dose, which could easily exceed 3
        mGy/view.
        Typical patient and phantom doses are about 2 mGy per view, or 8 mGy for a bilateral
        two view (Left CC + MLO, Right CC + MLO) screening examination.
        The typical (average) compressed breast is 6 cm, glandularity of 15 to 20%.
        Digital systems generally uses higher beam qualities which results in lower doses;
        Digital mammography does not use fixed dose (screen-film); can use as much (or little)
        radiation as deemed appropriate.
        Male Residents must urinate in the sitting position while on the mammography service
        (standing urination is not allowed per MQSA).

                                                        517
                                       ·
                                       Specific QA Tasks

............................................... ........:............  Daily
Processor QC

Darkroom Cleanliness                                                   Daily

Viewbox Conditions                                                     Weekly

Phantom Evaluation                                                     Weekly

Repeat Analysis                                                        Quarterly

Compression Test                                                       Semi-Annually

Darkroom Fog                                                           Semi-Annually

Screen-Film Contrast                                                   Semi-Annually

Evil Overlord behind MQSA ?                                            FDA

                    A p p ro p ria te                                  Hange for M edical Audit
Recall Rate                                                                                                     5-7%
Cancers/ 1000 Screened                                                                                            3-8

                          The Privilege to Read a M am m ogram                           240
                        ............. ........ ...................... .........M..    3 months
During the last two years of training you have to read
                                                                                         60
Formal Training Requirement

Documented Hours of Education

How Long Can You Let T h at Pile of Screeners Sit
          There on The Edge of The Counter ?

The FDA sets a time limit on providmg the patient with a "lay                         30 Days
summaQ'" of their mammogram results.

Male Resident Mammography Specific Trivia

              *enforceineiit may vary per instNutton

Male residents may urinate in the following                            jSeated only. Standing urination is prohibited.
position(s) while on the mammo service ?
                                                                       Tucked posterior and secured with tape*
The penis of the male resident should be in                            (Glue - ifperforming a 3 monthfocus time)
what orientation while on the mammo
service ?

                                                                       518
                                   SE C TIO N 19:
                             S c e n a r io / R e v ie w

As I promised in the first pages of the chapter, I want to finish by roUing through some
scenarios. This is mainly to demonstrate the work flow process and how you handle "next
step" type questions.

Scenario 1: A 40 year old woman presents for her baseline screening mammogram. You have the
great pleasure of reading it. While conducting your normal reading pattern you notice the posterior
nipple line is 9cm on the MLO, but only 6 cm on the CC.
What do you do ? - The would be a technical call back
WhatBR ,?-This isaBR-0

Scenario 2a: A 50 year old woman presents for her annual screening mammogram. You have the
great pleasure of reading it. You notice a mass on tvi'o views in the lateral left breast.
What BR ? - This is also BR-0.
Next Step ? Return for diagnostic mammogram, including spot compression views and likely an
ultrasound.
Scenario 2b: Same patient returns for the diagnostic mammogram. You can clearly see the mass in
two views.
Next Step ? Ultrasound to further characterize
Scenario 2c: You put her in ultrasound and see an obvious shadowing angry, pissed off, mass that is
ulcerating through the skin etc.... It 100%for sure cancer.
Next Step? You need to stage. Scan the rest of the breast for multi-focal masses, AND scan the axilla
for pathologic nodes.

Scenario 3a: A 50 year old woman presents for her annual screening mammogram. You have the
great pleasure of reading it. You notice what looks like a mass in the CC view only (can't find it in
the MLO). You call it an "asymmetry" because you can only see it in one view.
Next Step ? BR-0, and bring it back with spot compression views

                                                        519
Scenario 3b: Same patient returns for the diagnostic mammogram. After the paddle is applied there
does not appear to be any mass. It just looks like normal breast tissue. You look at prior imaging and
it looks pretty similar to the priors now.
Next Step? BR-1, and return to screening. This is the classic scenario of a "does not persist" callback.

                          But Prometheus!? ACR Criteria says....
 A common source of confusion is the distinction is between variant 1 and variant 2 ACR criteria for
 male breasts. The overwhelming majority of male breast path is gynecomastia which will look like
 a BR-5 mass on ultrasound. The ACR actually says you need no imaging to work it up.

 This is how I would handle multiple choice on this:
 (Scenario A) If the question specifically says "ACR criteria" and describes a palpable lesion in a
 male, less than 25, with no other information in the question header to make you believe its gyno;
 You need to pick Ultrasound.

 (Scenario B) if the question does NOT say "ACR criteria" and describes a palpable lesion in
 someone with risk factors for gyno (anabohc steroid use, pot smoking, etc....)
 Then you should either do no imaging, (if physical exam is a choice pick that), or start with a plain
 film (mammogram).

 (Scenario C) The third possible scenario, which would be the sneakiest way to do this, would be to
 show you a study obtained at another hospital of a breast ultrasound showing a suspicious lesion in
 a male around this age and ask you what to do next.
 The answer here is always going to be x-ray (mammogram). A work up for cancer on a male
 breast is NEVER EVER EVER complete without a mammogram ("man" o gram) - with the
 teaching point being that gynecomastia looks like cancer on ultrasound, but is easily identified as
 benign on a mammogram

                                                        520
Scenario 4a: A 24 year old MALE presents as with a palpable mass in his left breast.
Next Step ? Mammogram (never ultrasound a male breast before you get a mammogram).
Scenario 4b: A mammogram is obtained, and shows a flame shaped density under the nipple,
correlating with the palpable marker.
Next Step ? Interview the patient to see if you can come up for a reason for his gynecomastia (psych
meds, marijuana use, etc...). You don't want to miss a pituitary tumor. He tells you he smokes pot
every day. You tell him that he is a very bad boy - even though there is no evidence that marijuana
causes real harm and it's criminalization was based on false propaganda from the hemp industry.
Scenario 4c: After you tell him he is a bad boy for smoking the sticky icky, he still seems worried.
He tells you that he got an ultrasound at the outside hospital and they told him he had breast cancer.
He pulls a CD out of his pocket and asks you to look at it. You look at the outside images and sure
enough there is a shadowing mass in the area of the palpable finding.
Next Step ? BR-2 Gynecomastia. This is the oldest trick in the book - gynecomastia looks like a scary
mass on US - that's why you always start with the mammogram.

Scenario 5a: Screening mammogram is performed on a 70 year old woman, who has a history of
prior lumpectomy 4 years ago. You read in her chart that she refused radiation therapy. She
heard on the news that radiation was bad, so she decided on a more holistic approach (bananas)
-- she also gets yearly thermograms. The area of scarring in the resection bed looks more dense.
Next Step ? BR-0, and recall for spot compressions.
Scenario 5b: The spot compressions show small calcifications in the area of the lumpectomy
bed, and the scar is definitely more dense.
Next Step ? Mag views to fiirther characterize the calcifications. You decide they look pointy so
you call them fine pleomorphic.
Scenario 5c: You stick her in ultrasound to be complete - it looks like a small mass. You stage
the remainder of the breast and axilla - and it looks pretty clean.
Diagnosis ? BR-5 - local recurrence.

                                                        521
   fROMETHEUS

   Liohhart, M.'D.

522
