T he  S E C T IO N 4:
      S led g eha m m er

      BD RKUUTI Et rf Uo Kr cC et tI Aa Lc. ItI iUcS s>

Pulmonary Interstitial Emphysema (PIE) - put the bad side down
Bronchial Foreign Body - put the lucency side down (if it stays that way, it's positive)
Papillomatosis has a small (2%) risk of squamous cell CA
Pulmonary sling is the only variant that goes between the esophagus and the trachea. This is associated
with trachea stenosis.
Thymic Rebound - Seen after stress (chemotherapy) - Can be PET-Avid
Lymphoma - Most common mediastinal mass in child (over 10)
Anterior Mediastinal Mass with Calcification - Either treated lymphoma, or Thymic Lesion (lymphoma
doesn't calcify unless treated).
Neuroblastoma is the most common posterior mediastinal mass in child under 2 (primary thoracic does
better than abdo).
Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis - NOT at birth, NOT after 3 months (3 weeks to 3 months )
Criteria for HPS - 4 mm and 14 mm (4mm single wall, 14mm length).
Annular Pancreas presents as duodenal obstruction in children and pancreatitis in adults.
Most common cause of bowel obstruction in child over 4 = Appendicitis
Intussusception - 3 months to 3 years is ok, earlier or younger think lead point
Gastroschisis is ALWAYS on the right side
Omphalocele has associated anomalies (gastroschisis does not).
Physiologic Gut Hernia normal at 6-8 weeks
AFP is elevated with Hepatoblastoma
Endothelial growth factor is elevated with Hemangioendothelioma
Most Common cause of pancreatitis in a kid = Trauma (seatbelt)
Weigert Meyer Rule - Duplicated ureter on top inserts inferior and medial
Most common tumor of the fetus or infant - Sacrococcygeal Teratoma
Most common cause of idiopathic scrotal edema - HSP
Most common cause of acute scrotal pain age 7-14 - Torsion of Testicular Appendages
Bell Clapper Deformity is the etiology for testicular torsion.
SCFE is a Salter Harris Type 1
Physiologic Periostitis of the Newborn doesn't occur in a newborn - seen around 3 months
Acetabular Angle should be < 30, and Alpha angle should be more than 60.
Most Common benign mucosal lesion of the esophagus = Papilloma
Esophageal Webs have increased risk for cancer, and Plummer-Vinson Syndrome (anemia + web)
Dysphagia Lusoria is from compression by a right subclavian artery (most patients with aberrant rights
don't have symptoms).
Achalasia has an increased risk of squamous cell cancer (20 years later)
Most common mesenchymal tumor of the GI tract = GIST
Most common location for GIST = Stomach
Abscesses are almost exclusively seen in Crohns (rather than UC)
Nodes + UC = Common in the setting of active disease
Nodes (larger than 1cm) + Crohns = Cancer

      573
Diverticulosis + Nodes = Cancer (maybe) -> next step endoscopy.
Krukenberg Tumor = Stomach (GI) met to the ovary
Menetrier's involves flindus and spares the antrum
The stomach is the most common location for sarcoid (in the GI tract)
Gastric Remnants have an increased risk of cancer years after Billroth
Most common internal hernia = Left sided paraduodenal
Most common site of peritoneal carcinomatosis = retrovesical space
An injury to the bare area of the liver can cause a retroperitoneal bleed
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis associated with Ulcerative Colitis
Extrahepatic ducts are nornial with Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
Anti-mitochondrial Antibodies - positive with primary biliary cirrhosis
Mirizzi Syndrome - the stone in the cystic duct obstructs the CBD
Mirizzi has a 5x increased risk of GB cancer.
The most common cause of a benign bile duct stricture is iatrogenic trauma during a lap
cholecystectomy
The most common treatment for a benign bile duct stricture caused by iatrogenic trauma during a lap
cholecystectomy is endoscopic dilation
Dorsal pancreatic agenesis - associated with diabetes and polysplenia
Hereditary and Tropical Pancreatitis - early age of onset, increased risk of cancer
Felty's Syndrome - Big Spleen, RA, and Neutropenia
Splenic Artery Aneurysm - more common in women, and more likely to rupture in pregnant women.
Insulinoma is the most common islet cell tumor
Gastrinoma is the most common islet cell tumor with MEN
On T2, a normal liver should always have a signal higher than muscle.
Chemotherapy is a classic cause of fatty liver
In an adult, the most common cause of a persistent small bowel intussuception is a mucosal mass
In a kid, the most common cause of a persistent small bowel intussuception is lymph node hypertrophy
(usually from a prior viral infection)
Ulcerative Colitis has an increased risk of colon cancer (if it involves colon past the splenic flexure).
UC involving the rectum only does not increase risk of CA.
Calcifications in a renal CA - are associated with an improved survival
RCC bone mets are "always" lytic
There is an increased risk of malignancy with dialysis
Horseshoe kidneys are more susceptible to trauma
Most common location for TCC is the bladder
Second most common location for TCC is the upper urinary tract
Upper Tract TCC is more commonly multifocal (12%) - as opposed to bladder (4%)
The cysts in acquired renal cystic disease improve after renal transplant, although the risk of renal CA in
the native kidney remains elevated. In fact, the cancers tend to be more aggressive because of the
immunosuppressive therapy needed to not reject a transplant.
Weigert Meyer Rule - Upper Pole inserts medial and inferior
Ectopic Ureters are associated with incontinence in women (not men)
Leukoplakia is pre-malignant; Malakoplakia is not pre-malignant
Extraperitoneal bladder rupture is more common, and managed medically

                                                     574
Intraperitoneal bladder rupture is less common, and managed surgically

Indinavir (HIV medication) stones are the only ones not seen on CT.

Uric Acid stones are not seen on plain film

Endometrial tissue in a rudimentary horn (even one that does NOT communicate) increases the risk of
miscarriage

Arcuate Uterus does NOT have an increased risk of infertility (it's a normal variant)

Fibroids with higher T2 signal respond better to UAE

Hyaline Fibroid Degeneration is the most common subtype

Adenomyosis - favors the posterior wall, spares the cervix

Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colon Cancer (HNPCC) - have a 30-50x increased risk of endometrial cancer
Tamoxifen increases the risk of endometrial cancer, and endometrial polyps
Cervical Cancer that has parametrial involvement (2B) - is treated with chemo/radiation. Cervical Cancer
without parametrial involvement (2A) - is treated with surgery
Vaginal cancer in adults is usually squamous cell
Vaginal Rhabdomyosarcoma occurs in children / teenagers
Premenopausal ovaries can be hot on PET (depending on the phase of cycle). Post menopausal ovaries
should Never be hot on PET.
Transformation subtypes; Endometrioma = Clear Cell, Dermoid = Squamous
Postpartum fever can be from ovarian vein thrombophlebitis
You see an endometrioma on MRI. Next Step = Look for more endometriomas in the deep pelvis and
along the c-section scar.
The most common gynecological malignancy in the united states = Endometrial carcinoma
Fractured penis = rupture of the corpus cavemosum and the surrounding tunica albuginea.
Prostate Cancer is most commonly in the peripheral zone, - ADC dark
BPH nodules are in the central zone
Hypospadias is the most common association with prostatic utricle
Seminal Vesicle cysts are associated with renal agenesis, and ectopic ureters
Cryptorchidism increases the risk of cancer (in both testicles), and the risk is not reduced by orchiopexy
Immunosuppressed patients can get testicular lymphoma -hiding behind blood testes barrier
Most common cause of correctable infertility in a man is a varicocele.
Undescended testicles are more common in premature kids.
Membranes disrupted before 10 weeks, increased risk for amniotic bands
The earliest visualization of the embryo is the "double bleb sign"
Hematoma greater than 2/3 the circumference of the chorion has a 2x increased risk of abortion.
Biparietal Diameter - Recorded at the level of the thalamus from the outermost edge of the near skull to
the inner table of the far skull.
Abdominal Circumference - does not include the subcutaneous soft tissues
Abdominal Circumference is recorded at the the level of the junction of the umbilical v. and left portal v.
Abdominal Circumference is the parameter classically involved with asymmetric lUGR
Femur Length does NOT include the epiphysis
Umbilical Artery Systolic / Diastolic Ratio should NOT exceed 3 at 34 weeks - makes you think pre­
eclampsia and lUGR
A full bladder can mimic a placenta previa
Nuchal lucency is measured between 9-12 weeks, and should be < 3 mm. More than 3mm is associated
with Downs.
Lemon sign will disappear after 24 weeks
Aqueductal Stenosis is the most common cause of non-communicating hydrocephalus in a neonate

The tricuspid valve is the most anterior
The pulmonic valve is the most superior
There are 10 lung segments on the right, and 8 lung segments on the left
If it goes above the clavicles, it's in the posterior mediastinum (cervicothoracic sign)

                                                      575
Azygos Lobe has 4 layers of pleura
Most common pulmonary vein variant is a separate vein draining the right middle lobe
Most common cause of pneumonia in AIDS patient is Strep Pneumonia
Most common opportunistic infection in AIDS = PCP.
Aspergilloma is seen in a normal immune patient
Invasive Aspergillus is seen in an immune compromised patient
Lung Cancer Screening CTs have a minimum size thickness of 2.5mm (although most everyone says
1.5mm or thinner is preferred).
AIDS + Bilateral Ground Glass Opacities + Thin Walled Cysts + Pneumothorax = PCP
Prevascular Lymph nodes can NOT easily be reached by mediastinoscopy.
Fleischner Society Recommendations do NOT apply to patient's with known cancers
The most common location for an echinococcal cyst is the liver
The second most common site of involvement for echinococcus is the lung
Eccentric calcifications in a solitary pulmonary nodule pattern is considered the most suspicious.
A part solid nodule with a ground glass component is the most suspicious morphology you can have
Most common early presentation of lung CA is a solitary nodule (right upper lobe)
Lung Fibrosis patients (UIP, etc...) more commonly have lower lobe CA
Stage 3B lung CA is unresectable (contralateral nodal involvement; ipsilateral or contralateral
scalene or supraclavicular nodal involvement, tumor in different lobes).
The most common cause of unilateral lymphangitic carcinomatosis is bronchogenic carcinoma lung
cancer invading the lymphatics
There is a 20 year latency between initial exposure and development of lung cancer or pleural
mesothelioma
Pleural efifiision is the earliest and most common finding with asbestosis exposure.
Silicosis actually raises your risk of TB by about 3 fold.
Nitrogen Dioxide exposure is "Silo Filler's Disease," gives you a pulmonary edema pattern.
Reticular pattern in the posterior costophrenic angle is supposedly the first finding of UIP on CXR
Sarcoidosis is the most common recurrent primary disease after lung transplant
Pleural plaque of asbestosis typically spares the costophrenic angles.
Pleural effusion is the most common manifestation of mets to the pleura.
There is an association with mature teratomas and Klinefelter Syndrome.
Injury close to the carina is going to cause a pneumomediastinum rather than a pneumothorax
Hodgkin Lymphoma spreads in a contiguous fashion from the mediastinum and is most often
unilateral.
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma is typically bilateral with associated abdominal lymphadenopathy
MRI is superior for assessing superior sulcus tumors because you need to look at the brachial plexus.
Leiomyoma is the most common benign esophageal tumor (most common in the distal third).
Esophageal Leiomyomatosis may be associated with Alport's Syndrome
Bronchial / Tracheal injury must be evaluated with bronchoscopy
If you say COP also say Eosinophilic Pneumonia
If you say BAC also say lymphoma
Bronchial Atresia is classically in the LUL
Pericardial cysts MUST be simple, Bronchogenic cysts don't have to be simple
PAP follows a rule of I/3s post treatment; 1/3 gets better, 1/3 doesn't, 1/3 progresses to fibrosis
Dysphagia Lusoria presents later in life as atherosclerosis develops
Carcinoid is COLD on PET
Wegener's is now called Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis - Wegener was a Nazi. Apparently he was
not just a Nazi, he was a real asshole. I heard the guy used to take up tw'o parking spots at the grocery
store on Sunday afternoons.
The right atrium is defined by the IVC.
The right ventricle is defined by the moderator band.
The tricuspid papillary muscles insert on the septum (mitral ones do not).
Lipomatous Hypertrophy of the Intra-Atrial Septum - can be PET Avid (it's brown fat)
LAD gives off diagonals

                                                      576
 RCA gives off acute marginals
 LCX gives off obtuse marginals
 RCA perfuses SA and AV nodes (most of the time)
 Dominance is decided by which vessel gives off the posterior descending - it's the right 85%
 LCA from the Right Coronary Cusp - always gets repaired
 RCA from the Left Coronary Cusp - repaired if symptoms
 Most common location of myocardial bridging is in the mid portion of the LAD.
 Coronary Artery Aneurysm - most common cause in adult = Atherosclerosis
 Coronary Artery Aneurysm - most common cause in child = Kawasaki
 Left Sided SVC empties into the coronary sinus
 Rheumatic heart disease is the most common cause of mitral stenosis
 Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension is the most common cause of tricuspid atresia.
 Most common vascular ring is the double aortic arch
 Most common congenital heart disease is a VSD
 Most common ASD is the Secundum
 Infracardiac TAPVR classically shown with pulmonary edema in a newborn
 "L" Transposition type is congenitally corrected (they are "L"ucky).
 "D" Transposition type is doomed.
 Truncus is associated with CATCH-22 (DiGeorge)
 Rib Notching from coarctation spares the 1st and 2nd Ribs
 Infarct with > 50% involvement is unlikely to recover function
 Microvascular Obstruction is NOT seen in chronic infarct
 Amyloid is the most common cause of restricted cardiomyopathy
 Primary amyloid can be seen in multiple myeloma
 Most common neoplasm to involve the cardiac valves = Fibroelastoma
 Most commonly the congenital absence of the pericardium is partial and involves the pericardium
 over the left atrium and adjacent pulmonary artery {the left atrial appendage is the most at risk to
 become strangulated).
 Glenn shunt - SVC to pulmonary artery (vein to artery)
 Blalock-Taussig Shunt - Subclavian Artery to Pulmonary Artery (artery - artery)
 Ross Procedure - Replaces aortic valve with pulmonic, and pulmonic with a graft (done for kids).
 Aliasing is common with Cardiac MRl. You can fix it by: (1) opening your FOV, (2) oversampling
 the frequency encoding direction, or (3) switching phase and frequency encoding directions.
 Giant Coronary Artery Aneurysms (> 8mm) don't regress, and are associated with Mis.
 Wet Beriberi (thiamine def) can cause a dilated cardiomyopathy.
 Most common primary cardiac tumor in children = Rhabdomyoma.
 2"d most common primary cardiac tumor in children = Fibroma
 Most common complication of MI is myocardial remodeling.
 Unroofed coronary sinus is associated with Persistent left SVC.
 Most common source of cardiac mets = Lung Cancer (lymphoma #2).
 A-Fib is most commonly associated with left atrial enlargement
 Most common cause of tricuspid insufficiency is RVH (usually from pulmonary HTN / cor
 pulmonale).
 Artery of Adamkiewicz comes off on the left side (70%) between T9 - T12 (90%)
 Arch of Riolan - middle colic branch of the SMA with the left colic of the IMA.
 Most common hepatic vascular variant = right hepatic artery replaced off the SMA
 The proper right hepatic artery is anterior the right portal vein, whereas the replaced right hepatic artery is
 posterior to the main portal vein.
 Accessory right inferior hepatic vein - most common hepatic venous variant.
 Anterior tibialis is the first branch off the popliteal
 Common Femoral Artery (CFA): Begins at the level of inguinal ligament
 Superficial Femoral Artery (SFA): Begins once the CFA gives off the profunda femoris
' Popliteal Artery: Begins as the SFA exits the adductor canal
 Popliteal Artery terminates as the anterior tibial artery and the tibioperoneal trunk

                                                       577
Axillary Artery; Begins at the first rib
Brachial Artery; Begins as it crosses the teres major
Brachial Artery; Bifiircates to the ulnar and radial artery
Intraosseous Branch; Typically arises from the ulnar artery
Superficial Arch = From the Ulna, Deep Arch = From the Radius
The "coronary vein," is the left gastric vein
Enlarged splenorenal shunts are associated with hepatic encephalopathy.
Aortic Dissection and intramural hematoma are caused by HTN (70%)
Penetrating Ulcer is from atherosclerosis.
Strongest predictor of progression of dissection in intramural hematoma = Maximum aortic diameter >
5cm.
Leriche Syndrome Triad; Claudication, Absent/ Decreased femoral pulses, Impotence.
Most common associated defect with aortic coarctation = bicuspid aorta (80%)
Neurogenic compression is the most common subtype of thoracic outlet syndrome
Splenic artery aneurysm - More common in pregnancy, more likely to rupture in pregnancy.
Median Arcuate Compression - worse with expiration
Colonic Angiodysplasia is associated with aortic stenosis
Popliteal Aneurysm; 30-50% have AAA, 10% of patient with AAA have popliteal aneurysm, 50-70% of
popliteal aneurysms are bilateral.
Medial deviation of the popliteal artery by the medial head of the gastrocnemius = Popliteal Entrapment
Type 3 Takayasu is the most common (arch + abdominal aorta).
Most common vasculitis in a kid = HSP (Henoch-Schonlein Purpura)
Tardus Parvus infers stenosis proximal to that vessel
ICAPeak Systolic Velocity < 125 = "No Significant Stenosis" or < 50%
ICA Peak Systolic Velocity 125-230 = 50-69% Stenosis or "Moderate"
ICA Peak Systolic Velocity > 230 = >70% Stenosis or "Severe"
18G needle will accept a 0.038 inch guidewire,
19G needle will allow a 0.035 inch guidewire.
Notice that 0.039, 0.035, 0.018 wires are in INCHES
3 French = 1 mm
French size is the OUTSIDE of a catheter and the INSIDE of a sheath
End Hole Only Catheters = Hand Injection Only
Side Hole + End Hole = Power Injection OK, Coils NOT ok
Double Flush Technique = For Neuro IR -- no bubbles ever
"Significant lesion" = A systolic pressure gradient > 10 mm Hg at rest
Things to NOT stick a drain in; Tumors, Acute Hematoma, and those associated with acute bowel
rupture and peritonitis
Renal Artery Stenting for renal failure - tends to not work if the Cr is > 3. -- go medical management
Persistent sciatic artery is prone to aneurysm
Even if the cholecystostomy tube instantly resolves all symptoms, you need to leave the tube in for 2-6
weeks (until the tract matures), otherwise you are going to get a bile leak.
MELD scores greater than 24 are at risk of early death with TIPS
The target gradient post TIPS (for esophageal bleeding) is less than 12
Absolute contraindication for TIPS - Heart Failure -- always get pre-procedure ECHO
Most common side effect of BRTO is gross hematuria
Sensitivity = GI Bleed Scan = O.lmL/min , Angiography = 1.0 mL/min
For GI Bleed - after performing an embolization of the GDA (for duodenal ulcer), you need to do a run
of the SMA to look at the inferior pancreaticoduodenal
Most common cause of lower GI bleed is diverticulosis
TACE will prolong survival better than systemic chemo
TACE; Portal Vein Thrombosis is considered a contraindication (sometimes) because of the risk of
infarcting the liver.
Go above the rib for Thoracentesis
Left Bundle Branch Block needs a pacer before a Thoracic Angiogram

                                                      578
Never inject contrast through a Swan Ganz catheter for a thoracic angiogram
You treat pulmonary AVMs at 3mm
Hemoptysis - Active extravasation is NOT typically seen with the active bleed.
UAE - Gonadotropin-releasing medications (often prescribed for fibroids) should be stopped for 3
months prior to the case
The general rule for transgluteal is to avoid the sciatic nerves and gluteal arteries by access through the
sacrospinous ligament medially (close to the sacrum, inferior to the piriformis).
When to pull an abscess catheter; As a general rule - when the patient is better (no fever, WBC
normal), and output is < 20 cc over 24 hours.
If the thyroid biopsy is non-diagnostic, you have to wait 3 months before you re-biopsy.
Posterior lateral approach is the move for percutaneous nephrostomy
You can typically pull a sheath with an ACT < 150-180
Artery calcifications (common in diabetics) make compression difficult, and can lead to a false
elevation of the ABI.
Type 2 endoleaks are the most common
Type 1 and Type 3 endoleaks are high pressure and need to be fixed stat
Venous rupture during a fistula intervention can ofter be treated with prolonged angioplasty (always leave
the balloon on the wire).
Phlegmasia alba = massive DVT, without ischemia and preserved collateral veins.
Phlegmasia cerulea dolens = massive DVT, complete thrombosis of the deep venous system, including the
collateral circulation.
You are more likely to develop Venous Thromboembolism if you are paraplegic vs tetraplegic.
Circumaortic left renal vein: the anterior one is superior, the posterior one is inferior, and the filter should
be below the lowest one.
Risk of DVT is increased with IVC filters
Filter with clot > Icm^ of clot = Filter Stays In
Acute Budd Chiari with fulminant liver failure = Needs a TIPS
Pseudoaneurysm of the pancreaticoduodenal artery = "Sandwich technique" - distal and proximal
segments of the artery feeding off the artery must be embolized
Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome - First line is surgical release of the ligament
Massive Hemoptysis = Bronchial artery - Particles bigger than 325 micrometers
Acalculous Cholecystitis = Percutaneous Cholecystostomy
Hepatic encephalopathy after TIPS = You can either (1) place a new covered stent constricted in the
middle by a loop of suture - deployed in the pre-existing TIPS, (2) place two new stents - parallel to each
other (one covered self expandable, one uncovered balloon expandable).
Recurrent variceal bleeding after placement of a constricted stent - balloon dilation of the constricted stent
Appendiceal Abscess - Drain placement * just remember that a drain should be used for a mature (walled
off) abscess and no frank pertioneal symptoms
Inadvertent catheterization of the colon (after trying to place a drain in an abscess) - wait 4 weeks for the
tract to mature - verify by over the wire tractogram, and then remove tube.
DVT with severe symptoms and no response to systemic anticoagulation = Catheter Directed
Thrombolysis
Geiger Mueller - maximum dose it can handle is about lOOmR/h

Activity level greater than 100 mCi of Tc-99m is considered a major spill.

Activity level greater than 100 mCi of Tl-201 is considered a major spill.

Activity level greater than 10 mCi of In-111, is considered to represent a major spill.

Activity level greater than 10 mCi of Ga-67, is considered to represent a major spill.

An activity level greater than 1 mCi of I-l 31 is considered to constitute a major spill.

Annual Dose limit of 100 mrem to the public

Not greater than 2 mrem per hour - in an "unrestricted area"

Total Body Dose per Year = 5 rem

                                                      579
Total equivalent organ dose (skin is also an organ) per year = 50 rem

Total equivalent extremity dose per year = 50 rem (500mSv)

Total Dose to Embryo/fetus over entire 9 months - O.Srem

NRC allows no more than 0.15 micro Ci of Mo per 1 mili Ci of Tc, at the time of administration.

Chemical purity (A1 in Tc) is done with pH paper

The allowable amount of A1 is < 10 micrograms

Radiochemical purity (looking for Free Tc) is done with thin layer chromatography

Free Tc occurs from - lack of stannous ions or accidental air injection (which oxidizes)

Prostate Cancer bone mets are uncommon with a PSA less than 10 mg/ml
Flair Phenomenon occurs 2 weeks - 3 months after therapy
Skeletal Survey is superior (more sensitive) for lytic mets
AVN - Early and Late is COLD, Middle (repairing) is Hot.
Particle size for VQ scan is 10-100 micrometers
Xenon is done first during the VQ scan
Amiodarone - classic thyroid uptake blocker
Hashimotos increases risk for lymphoma
Hot nodule on Tc, shouldn't be considered benign until you show that it's also hot on I '23. This is the
concept of the discordant nodule.
History of methimazole treatment (even years prior) makes 1-131 treatment more difficult
Methimazole side effect is neutropenia
In pregnancy PTU is the blocker of choice
Sestamibi in the parathyroid depends on blood flow and mitochondria
You want to image with PET - following therapy at interval of 2-3 weeks for chemotherapy, and 8-12
weeks for radiation is the way to go. This avoids "stunning" - false negatives, and inflammatory
induced false positive.
'' 'In Pentetreotide is the most commonly used agent for somatostatin receptor imaging. The classic
use is for carcinoid tumors
Meningiomas take up octreotide
In 111 binds to neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes and even RBCs and platelets
Tc99m HMPAO binds to neutrophils
WBCs may accumulate at post op surgical sites for 2-3 weeks
Prior to MIBG you should block the thyroid with Lugols Iodine or Perchlorate
Scrotal Scintigraphy: The typical agent is Tc-99m Pertechnetate. This agent is used as both a flow
agent and a pool agent.
Left bundle branch block can cause a false positive defect in the ventricular septum (spares the apex)
Pulmonary uptake of Thallium is an indication of LV dysfunction
MIBG mechanism is that of an Analog of Norepinephrine - actively transported and stored in the
neurosecretory granules
MDP mechanism is that of a Phosphate analog - which works via Chemisorption
Sulfiir Colloid mechanism = Particles are Phagocytized by RES
The order of tumor prevalence in NF2 is the same as the mnemonic MSME (schwannoma >
meningioma > ependymoma).
Maldeveloped draining veins is the etiology of Sturge Weber
All phakomatosis (NF 1, NF -2, TS, and VHL) EXCEPT Sturge Weber are autosomal dominant -
family screening is a good idea.
Most Common Primary Brain Tumor in Adult = Astrocytoma
"Calcifies 90% of the time" = Oligodendroglioma
Restricted Diffiision in Ventricle = Watch out for Choroid Plexus Xanthogranuloma (not a brain
tumor, a benign normal variant)
Pituitary - T1 Big and Bright = Pituitary Apoplexy
Pituitary - Normal T1 Bright = Posterior Part (because of storage of Vasopressin , and other storage
proteins)

                                                      580
Pituitary - T2 Bright = Rathke Cleft Cyst
Pituitary - Calcified = Craniopharyngioma
CP Angle - Invades Internal Auditory Canal = Schwannoma
CP Angle - Invades Both Internal Auditory Canals = Schwannoma with NF2
CP Angle - Restricts on Diffusion = Epidermoid
Peds - Arising from Vermis = Medulloblastoma
Peds - "tooth paste" out of 4th ventricle = Ependymoma
Adult myelination pattern: T1 at I year, T2 at 2 years
Brainstem and posterior limb of the internal capsule are myelinated at birth.
CN2 and CNV3 are not in the cavernous sinus
Persistent trigeminal artery (basilar to carotid) increases the risk of aneurysm
Subfalcine herniation can lead to ACA infarct
ADEM lesions will NOT involve the calloso-septal interface.
Marchiafava-Bignami progresses from body -> genu -> splenium
Post Radiation changes don't start for 2 months (there is a latent period).
Hippocampal atrophy is first with Alzheimer Dementia
Beaked Tectum = Chiari 2
Beaker Anterior Inferior LI = Hurlers
Sometimes Beaked Pons = Multi-System Atrophy
Most common TORCH is CMV
Toxo abscess does NOT restrict diffusion
Small cortical tumors can be occult without IV contrast
JPA and Ganglioglioma can enhance and are low grade
Nasal Bone is the most common fracture
Zygomaticomaxillary Complex Fracture (Tripod) is the most common fracture pattern and involves
the zygoma, inferior orbit, and lateral orbit.
Supplemental oxygen can mimic SAH on FLAIR
Putamen is the most common location for hypertensive hemorrhage
Restricted diffusion without bright signal on FLAIR should make you think hyperacute (< 6 hours)
stroke.
Enhancement of a stroke; Rule of 3s - starts at day 3, peaks at 3 weeks, gone at 3 months
PAN is the Most Common systemic vasculitis to involve the CNS
Scaphocephaly is the most common type of craniosynostosis
Piriform aperture stenosis is associated with hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis issues.
Cholesterol Granuloma is the most common primary petrous apex lesion
Large vestibular aqueduct syndrome has absence of the bony modiolus in 90% of cases
Octreotide scan will be positive for esthesioneuroblastoma
The main vascular supply to the posterior nose is the sphenopalatine artery (terminal internal
maxillary artery).
Warthins tumors take up pertechnetate
Sjogrens gets salivary gland lymphoma
Most common intra-occular lesion in an adult = Melanoma
Enhancement of nerve roots for 6 weeks after spine surgery is normal. After that it's arachnoiditis
Hemorrhage in the cord is the most important factor for outcome in a traumatic cord injury.
Currarino Triad: Anterior Sacral Meningocele, Anorectal malformation, Sarcococcygeal osseous
defect
Type 1 Spinal AVF (dural AVF) is by far the more common.
Herpes spares the basal ganglia (MCA infarcts do not)
Most common malignant lacrimal gland tumor = adenoid cystic adenocarcinoma
Arthritis at the radioscaphoid compartment is the first sign of a SNAC or SLAC wrist

SLAC wrist has a DISI deformity

Pull of the Abductor pollucis longus tendon is what causes the dorsolateral dislocation in the Bennett Fx

Carpal tunnel syndrome has an association with dialysis

                                                      581
Degree of femoral head displacement predicts risk of AVN
Proximal pole of the scaphoid is at risk for AVN with fracture
Most common cause of sacral insufficiency fracture is osteoporosis in old lady
Patella dislocation is nearly always lateral
Tibial plateau fracture is way more common laterally
SONK favors the medial knee (area of maximum weight bearing)
Normal SI joints excludes Ank Spon
Looser Zones are a type of insufficiency fracture
T score of -2.5 marks osteoporosis
First extensor compartment = de Quervains
First and Second compartment = intersection syndrome
Sixth extensor compartment = early RA
Flexor pollicis longus goes through the carpal tunnel, flexor pollicis brevis does not
The pisiform recess and radiocarpal joint normally communicate
The periosteum is intact with both Perthes and ALPSA lesions. In a true bankart it is disrupted.
Absent anterior/superior labrum, + thickened middle glenohumeral ligament is a Buford complex.
Medial meniscus is thicker posteriorly.
Anterior talofibular ligament is the most commonly tom ankle ligament
TB in the spine - spares the disc space (so can brucellosis).
Scoliosis curvature points away from the osteoid osteoma
Osteochondroma is the only benign skeletal tumor associated with radiation.
Mixed Connective Tissue Disease requires serology (Ribonucleoprotein) for Dx
Medullary Bone Infarct will have fat in the middle
Bucket Handle Meniscal tears are longitudinal tears
Anterior Drawer Sign = ACL
Posterior Drawer Sign = PCL
"McMurray" = MCL
No grid on mag views.
BR-3 = < 2% chance of cancer
BR-5 = > 95% chance of cancer
Nipple enhancement can be normal on post contrast MRl - don't call it Pagets.
Upper outer quadrant has the highest density of breast tissue, and therefore the most breast cancers.
Majority of blood (60%) is via the internal mammary
Majority of lymph (97%) is to the axilla
The stemalis muscle can only be seen on CC view
Most common location for ectopic breast tissue is in the axilla
The follicular phase (day 7-14) is the best time to have a mammogram (and MRI).
Breast Tenderness is max around day 27-30.
Tyrer Cuzick is the most comprehensive risk model, but does not include breast density.
If you had more than 20Gy of chest radiation as a child, you can get a screening MRI
BRCA 2 (more than 1) is seen with male breast cancer
BRCA 1 is more in younger patients, BRCA 2 is more in post menopausal
BRCA 1 is more often a triple negative CA
Use the LMO for kyphosis, pectus excavatum, and to avoid a pacemaker / line

                                                     582
  Use the ML to help catch milk of calcium layering
  Fine pleomorphic morphology to calcification has the highest suspicion for malignancy
  Intramammary lymph nodes are NOT in the fibroglandular tissue
  Surgical scars should get lighter, if they get denser - think about recurrent cancer.
  You CAN have isolated intracapsular rupture.
  You CAN NOT have isolated extra (it's always with intra).
  If you see silicone in a lymph node, you need to recommend MRI to evaluate for extracapsular rupture
  The number one risk factor for implant rupture is the age of the implant
  Tamoxifen causes a decrease in parenchymal uptake, then a rebound.
  T2 Bright things - these are usually benign. Don't forget colloid cancer is T2 bright.
  Lymphoma is most commonly biopsied malignancy that results in nondiagnostic findings (lymphoma
  samples intended for flow cytometry are placed in saline solution instead of formalin)
1 have poured all my knowledge into you. When you fight, my spirit fights with you.
-PL

                                                        583
BLANK FOR SCRIBBLES

                                                       584
BLANK FOR SCRIBBLES

                                                        585
