                                       S E C T IO N 1:

                                   P LA Y E R VS E n v ir o n m e n t

The 3 Kinds of Questions

1. The ones you know - you want to get 100% of these right
2. The ones you don't know - you want to get 25% of these right (same as a monkey

    guessing)
3. The ones you can figure out with some deep thought - you want to get 60-70% of

    these right.
If you can do that you will pass the test, especially if you've read my books.
My recommendations:
- For the ones you know, just get them right.
 For the ones you don't know - just say to yourself '^ihis is one I don't know,

   Prometheus saysjust try and narrow it down and guess. "
- For the ones you think you can figure out, mark them, and go through the entire exam.

   If you follow my suggestion on the first two types of questions you will have ample
   time left over for head scratching. Other reasons to go ahead and do the whole exam
   before trying to figure them out is (a) you don't want to rush on the questions you can
   get right, and (b) sometimes you will see a case that reminds you of what the answer
   is. In fact it's not impossible that the stem of another question flat out tells you the
   answer to a previous question.

Let your plans be dark, and impenetrable as night, and when you move, fall like a thunderbolt.
                                                                                 -Sun Tzu

                                                        524
studying for a C-

For many of you this is the first time you truly do not need an A on the exam. I can
remember in undergrad and medical school feeling like I needed to get every question
right on the exam to maintain my total and complete dominance.
I felt like if I missed a single question that 1wouldn't honor the class, I wouldn't match
radiology, and I'd end up in rural West Virginia checking diabetic feet for ulcers in my
family medicine clinic. The very thought of a career in family medicine was so horrible
that I'd begin to panic.

Panic doesn't help!
Truly this exam is not like that. You can miss questions. You will miss questions. You
can miss a lot of questions. You just need to miss less than about 10%of the room. No
matter what they tell you, no matter what you read all standardized exams are curved. If
they passed 100% - the exam would be called a joke. If they failed 50% the program
directors would riot (after first punishing the residents with extra call). The exam will
maintain a failure rate around 10-15%. What that means is that you only need to beat
10-15% of the room. You don't need 99th percentile. There is no reward for that. You
need 16th percentile. 16th percentile is a C-, that is the goal.
The reason I'm perseverating on this is that you need to avoid panic. If you mark
20-30% of the questions as "not sure" - or Promethean category 2 or 3 - you might begin
to freak out. Especially if the inner gunner medical student in you thinks you won't get
honors. Chill Out! It's ok to miss questions. Look around the room and know that you
studied harder and are smarter than 15% of the room.

Do notflee the exam in tears !

Fate rarely calls upon us at a moment o f our choosing.
                                                      -Optimus Prime

                                                        525
Exploiting the "Genius Neuron"

Have you ever heard someone in case conference take a case and lead with "It's NOT this," when
clearly "this" is what the case was? It happens all the time. Often the first thing out of people's
mouths is actually the right answer, but many times you hear people say "it's not" first. Ever
wondered why?
I have this idea of a "Genius Neuron." You have one neuron that is superior to the rest. This guy
fires faster and is more reliable than his peers and because of this he is hated by them. He is the
guy in the front row waving his hand shouting "I know the answer!" You know that guy, that guy
is a notorious asshole. So, in your mind he shouts out the answer first, and then the rest of the
neurons gang up on him and try and talk him out of it. So the end product is "It's NOT this."
For the purpose of taking cases in conference, this is why you should always lead with "this
comes to mind," instead of "it's not." Now, the practical piece of advice I want to give you is to
trust your genius neuron. Seriously, there is a lot of material on this test. But if you read this
book, there will be enough knowledge to pass the test existing somewhere between your ears. You
just have to trust that genius neuron.
How?? - Do it like this:

    rUTI Read the entire question. Look at all the pictures.

    nrn Read ALL the answer choices. Never stop at A thinking that is the answer.
    rm Look again at ALL the pictures - now that you see the choices.
    nrn choose the first answer your mind tells you is correct - the one your genius neuron thinks

        it correct.

    rm After you have finished the test, and you are re-reviewing your answers, NEVER change
        the genius neuron's answer except for two criteria. (A) You read the question wrong. (B)
        You are 100% sure that it is another choice, and you can give a reason why. Never change
        based on your gut feelings. Those secondary gut feelings are the stupid neurons trying to
        gang up on the smart one. Just like in the real world, the stupid people significantly
        outnumber the smart ones.

I know this sounds silly, but I really believe in this. This is a real thing. I encourage you to try it
with some practice questions.

You either believe in yourself or you don't

                     -Captain James T. Kirk.

                                                        526
Dealing w ith the Linked Question

It is a modem trend for multiple choice tests to have "linked" questions. You may remember
that USMLE Step 3 had them, and it is rumored that the CORE Exam has them as well.
These are the questions that prompt you with "this is your final answer, you can't change
your answer." When you see this STOP!
If you are 100% sure you are right, then go on. If you had it narrowed down to two choices,
think about which one would be easier to write a follow up question about. This might seem
obvious, but in the heat of the battle you might get too aggressive. Slow down and think
twice on these.
The second point I want to make about these questions is finding some Zen if you miss it.
There are a lot of questions on this test, it's ok to miss some. You will still pass (probably).
People like you have always studied for the A+, not the C-. So when you miss a question it
makes you freak out because you think you blew it. Calm the fuck down. You don't need an
A+ this time. You don't need a B. You just need to pass so they don't get any more money
from you. Believe me they have taken enough from you already. Ijust want you to
understand that you will miss questions and it's ok. If the second part reveals that you
dropped one, don't let it phase you. Just do your best. The most important fight is always
your next one.

It isn't the mountains ahead to climb that wears you out; it's the pebble in your shoe
                                                                     -Muhammad Ali

                                                        527
It's Possible to Know Too Much

If you were to begin studying and begin taking multiple choice practice questions and you plotted
your progress as you gained more knowledge you would notice something funny. At first you
would begin to get more and more questions right... and then you would start to miss them.

Well how can that be? I will tell you that once you know enough all choices on the exam become
correct. Which of the following can occur?... well actually they can all occur - I've read case
reports of blah blah blah. That is what happens.
The trick is to not over think things. Once you've achieved a certain level of knowledge, if they
give you a gift -- take it. It's usually not a trick (usually). Don't look for obscure situations
when things are true. Yes... it's possible for you to know more than the person writing the
questions. Yes... I said it and it's fucking true. These people don't know everything. You can out
knowledge them if you study enough - and that is when you get yourself into trouble.
Take home point - once you've reached the peak (arrow on chart) - be careful over thinking
questions past that point.

"Always remember: Yourfocus determines your reality
                           -Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn
                                                        528
      8 Promethean Laws For Multiple Choice III

#1 - If you have a gut feeling - go for i t ! (trust the genius neuron)
#2 - D on't over think to the extent that you veer from a reflexive answer -
especially if choices seem equally plausible (you can know too much).
#3 - Read ALL the choices carefully
#4 - If it seems too obvious to be true (trickery), re-read it and then go with it
(even if it seems too easy). Let it happen - it's usually not a trick... usually.
#5 - Add up what you know you know, and compare with what you think you
know. Weigh your answers by what you KNOW you KNOW.
#6 - If you are tom between two choices, ask yourself "which o f these is
NOT correct ?" - Sometimes making your brain work backwards w ill
elucidate the solution.
#7 - Do NOT change your answers ! (trust the genius neuron)
#8 - Most Importantly - D on't Panic

Maybe I can't win, maybe the only thing I can do isjust take everything he s got. But to beat me,
he's gonna have to kill me, and to kill me, he's gonna have to have the heart to stand infront of
me, and to do that, he has to be willing to die himself
- Rocky Balboa

                                                        529
