Electromagnetic Radiation
Electromagnetic (EM) radiations, such as visible light, have long been
known to have a duality to their nature: behaving in some situations
as a wave and in others as a particle, or photon. The EM spectrum (Fig.
1.3) varies in wavelength and frequency, from low-energy radio
waves up to high-energy x-rays and gamma (γ) rays as used in
medical imaging and therapy.
The unit of energy typically used in atomic and nuclear physics is
the electron volt (eV), which is the amount of energy an electron
garners when crossing an electronic potential difference of 1 volt. One
eV is equivalent to 1.6 × 10–9 joules. EM radiations travel at the speed
of light (c) with the known relationship:
where ν is frequency, λ is the wavelength, and c = 3 × 108 m/s.
FIG. 1.2  Orbital binding energy.
Table 1.3
Terms Used to Describe Electrons
Term
Comment
Electron
Basic elementary particle
Orbital
electron
Electron in one of the shells or orbits in an atom
Valence
electron
Electron in the outermost shell of an atom; responsible for chemical
characteristics and reactivity
Auger electron
Electron ejected from an atomic orbit by energy released during an electron
transition
Conversion
electron
Electron ejected from an atomic orbit because of internal conversion
phenomenon as energy is given off by an unstable nucleus
Photoelectron
Electron ejected from an atomic orbit as a consequence of an interaction with a
photon (photoelectric interaction) and complete absorption of the photon’s
energy
Compton
electron
Electron ejected from orbit after absorbing a portion of a photon’s energy during
Compton scatter
The photon energy (E) is related to the frequency of the EM wave
by
where h is Planck’s constant (6.626 × 10–34 J/s)
Visible light has energy slightly less than 1 eV, whereas x-rays and
gamma rays have energies in the range of several thousand eV (or
keV) to tens of millions eV (MeV).
X-rays and gamma-ray photons do not differ in their energy levels
but in their origin. X-rays are generated from interactions outside the
nucleus, whereas gamma rays are generated by transitions within the
nucleus. Once created, nothing distinguishes an x-ray from a gamma
ray (e.g., A 100-keV x-ray is absolutely identical and indistinguishable
from a 100-keV gamma ray).
Production of X-Rays
X-rays are produced in two ways: (1) as a result of the transition of
atomic electrons from one orbit to another and (2) from the
deacceleration of passing charged particles as they interact with other
charged particles, usually as a result of columbic electrical
interactions.
Characteristic X-Rays
In the first instance, excited electrons may be removed from their
atomic orbit or elevated to a higher-energy orbit. An electron from an
outer orbit can drop down to fill the vacancy, and the excess energy,
the difference in the binding energy of the shells, can be emitted as an
x-ray photon, a fluorescent x-ray (Fig. 1.4A). This is also known as a
characteristic x-ray because it is specific to not only each element but
also to the orbital shell from which it originated. Consider the case of
fluorescent or characteristic x-rays from electronic transitions within
an iodine atom with the following binding energies: K = 35, L = 5, and
M = 1 keV. Thus, the energy of the fluorescent x-rays resulting from
the transition of electrons from the L to the K shell (referred to as Kα
fluorescent x-rays) is 30 keV (35 − 5 keV) and that from the transition
from the M to the K shell (referred to as K β  x-rays) is 34 keV (35 − 1
keV).
FIG. 1.3  Electromagnetic energy spectrum. Photon energies (eV) and
wavelengths of x-rays and gamma ultraviolet, visible light, infrared, and
radio waves.
FIG. 1.4  Interactions may result in (A, left) emission of characteristic
(fluorescent) x-rays or (B, right) Auger electrons.
Auger Electrons
There is an alternative outcome to characteristic x-ray emission, where
the transition can cause an outer-shell electron to be ejected. This
electron is called an Auger (pronounced oh-zhey) electron (see Fig.
1.4B). The kinetic energy (KE) of the resultant Auger electron is
determined by the binding energy of the orbits involved:
Using the example of the iodine atom binding energies again for the
transitions shown in Fig. 1.4B, the calculation would then be:
The probability of an Auger electron being emitted is greater in
lower Z elements and from outer shells where the binding energy is
lower. X-ray fluorescence, on the other hand, is the more likely
outcome when binding energy is higher, such as in higher Z elements
and from inner-shell electrons.
Particle Deceleration and Bremsstrahlung X-
Rays
X-rays can also be produced as a charged particle deaccelerates as it
passes an atom. In nuclear medicine, this commonly involves
electrons or beta particles passing through soft tissue. In this case, the
negatively charged particle is slowed as it interacts with the positively
charged nucleus it is passing, causing it to slow. The energy it loses is
emitted as radiation referred to as bremsstrahlung (from the German
for “braking”) radiation. The magnitude of the bremsstrahlung
production increases linearly with the kinetic energy of the incident
electron and the Z number of the target material. Thus,
bremsstrahlung x-ray production is more likely to occur at higher
energies and with high-Z targets. As a result, radiographic systems
can generate x-rays by directing an energetic electron beam into a
tungsten (Z = 74) target. On the other hand, the intensity of the
bremsstrahlung radiation is relatively low when beta particles pass
through soft tissue.
FIG. 1.5  Graph of neutrons (N) versus protons (P) for various
nuclides. For elements with a low atomic number, the two are roughly
equal (Z = N). With increasing atomic number, the relative number of
neutrons increases. Stable nuclear species tend to occur along the
“curve of stability.”
