Radioactivity and Radioactive Decay
The protons and neutrons can only exist in the nucleus in a limited
number of combinations. The remaining unstable atoms may
transform to a lower-energy stable state through radioactive decay (or
disintegration), with the excess energy resulting in either particulate
emissions or electromagnetic radiation. The initial nuclide, or
radionuclide, is known as the parent, and the resultant one after
radioactive decay is known as the daughter. Although the daughter
nucleus created from a radioactive decay has a lower energy than the
parent nucleus, it may not be stable, and thus subsequent radioactive
decays may result.
Fig. 1.5 shows a plot of the stable nuclides as a function of the Z
number on the x-axis and the N number on the y-axis. At low Z
numbers, stable elements tend to have equal numbers of protons and
neutrons (e.g., carbon-12, nitrogen-14, and oxygen-16) and lie along or
near the Z = N line. However, as the nucleus becomes larger, the
repulsive force of the nuclear protons grows, and more neutrons are
necessary in the stable nucleus to provide additional attractive nuclear
force. Other factors also contribute to the stability and instability of
the nucleus. For example, nuclides with even numbers of protons and
neutrons tend to be more stable than those with odd Z and N
configurations.
FIG. 1.6  “Proton-rich” radionuclides that decay by positron emission
can be made in a cyclotron or particle accelerator. (A) Varying in size
and appearance, cyclotrons may be self-shielded or housed in a thick
cement vault (as shown) to reduce radiation exposure. Beam lines
(arrow) extending from the central unit direct high-speed charged
particles to bombard desired targets. (B) The bottom of the cyclotron
contains the accelerating electrodes (short arrows). (C)
Electromagnetic fields created by a large magnet (arrowhead) in the
upper portion of the cyclotron constrain the particles to circular orbits.
Photos courtesy of Anthony F. Zagar, University of Alabama at
Birmingham.
Unstable nuclides fall to either the right or the left of the curve of
stability, with those to the right considered proton rich and those to the
left neutron rich. As unstable radionuclides decay to entities that are
closer to the curve of stability, proton-rich radionuclides tend to decay
in a manner that will reduce the Z number and increase the N
number, and neutron-rich radionuclides tend to decay in a way that
decreases the N number and increases the Z number.
Proton-rich radionuclides can be created by bombarding a certain
target material with high-energy protons that can overcome nuclear
forces. Typically, a particle accelerator such as a cyclotron is used,
increasing kinetic energy by accelerating charged particles to high
speeds in a spiral path using alternating high-frequency voltage and
electromagnetic fields (Fig. 1.6). Conversely, in artificial production of
neutron-rich radionuclides, one typically must use a nuclear reactor to
bombard a target with a neutron flux (Fig. 1.7).
Modes of Radioactive Decay
A decay scheme is a way to illustrate the transition from parent to
daughter nuclides. In a decay scheme, higher energy levels are toward
the top of the figure, and higher Z numbers are to the right of the
figure. Transitions that lead to a reduction in energy are represented
by an arrow pointing down. If it also results in a daughter nuclide
with a change in the Z number, the arrow will point to the left with a
decrease in the Z number and to the right if Z is increased.
FIG. 1.7  Fission and neutron capture radionuclide production in a
nuclear reactor. Samples can be lowered into the reactor as shown,
with water acting as shielding against neutrons. The blue glow is
caused by the emission of electrons from the radioactive products;
when charged particles move faster than the speed of light in a medium
such as water, the emitted radiation is called Cherenkov radiation.
Courtesy of the University of Missouri Research Reactor Center.
Alpha Decay
An unstable heavy atom may decay to a nuclide closer to the curve of
stability by emitting an alpha particle (α) consisting of 2 protons and 2
neutrons (essentially an ionized helium atom):
The daughter nucleus may not be stable, and thus the emission of
an alpha particle often will lead to the emission of a series of
radiations until the nucleus is stable. The decay scheme for the decay
of radium-226 (Ra-226) to radon-222 (Rn-222) is shown in Fig. 1.8.
Beta-Minus Decay
Neutron-rich radionuclides tend to stabilize by decreasing the number
of neutrons through a radioactive-decay process referred to as beta-
minus (β – ), also known as negatron or beta decay. Factors such as
weak forces between nucleons transfer energy, transforming a
neutron into a proton (N – 1 and Z + 1). This is an isobaric transition
with no change to the atomic mass (A). An example of the beta-minus
decay scheme for I-131 is shown in Fig. 1.9. Excess energy is emitted
from the nucleus as an antineutrino and a negative beta particle (or
negatron). This process can be written as follows:
FIG. 1.8  Alpha decay. The emission of an alpha particle (2 protons
and 2 neutrons) results in the atomic number (Z) decreasing by 2 and
the atomic mass (Z + N) decreasing by 4. Decay of radium-226 to the
daughter Rn-222 shows the arrow pointed down, indicating a decrease
in energy, and to the left because of the decrease in Z.
FIG. 1.9  Beta minus (β –) decay scheme for iodine-131 to the
daughter Xe-133. β – decay (negatron emission) results in the daughter
with one more proton in the nucleus (Z + 1), so the arrow points to the
right. Because a neutron is lost (N – 1), this is an isobaric transition
with the atomic mass unchanged.
The antineutrino is very difficult to measure because it has virtually
no mass or charge associated with it, only energy. The negative beta
particle is indistinguishable from an electron with the same mass and
electric charge, differing only in that the beta particle is emitted from
the nucleus and the electron orbits the nucleus. In addition to the Mo-
99 used to make Tc-99m, several β – -emitting radionuclides play an
important role in nuclear medicine for therapy applications: I-131,
phosphorus-32 (P-32), yttrium-90 (Y-90), and lutetium-177 (Lu-177).
Beta-Plus (Positron) Decay
Unstable proton-rich radionuclides can reduce Z and increase N
numbers through either beta-plus decay or electron capture. In beta-plus
decay, the parent nucleus emits a positively charged beta particle, a
positron (β +). The resulting daughter nucleus has one fewer proton
and one more neutron than the parent, an isobaric transition:
The positron has the same mass as a beta-minus particle or electron,
with a charge of the same magnitude but the opposite. In fact, the
positron is the antiparticle of the electron; if they are brought into close
contact, they will be annihilated and transformed into two 511-keV
photons, traveling at 180 degrees in opposite directions. This
annihilation process is the basis of PET imaging. The 511-keV value
derives from the energy equivalence of the mass of the beta particle,
similar to the rest mass of an electron (using E = mc 2 as previously
discussed).
For positron decay to occur, the transition energy must be in excess
of a 1022-keV threshold (twice 511 keV) to overcome the production of
the positron and addition of an orbital electron to maintain electric
neutrality. These radionuclides are typically produced using a
cyclotron. Some positron-emitting radionuclides of interest include
fluorine-18 (F-18; Fig. 1.10), nitrogen-13 (N-13), carbon-11 (C-11),
gallium-68 (Ga-68), and rubidium-82 (Rb-82).
FIG. 1.10  Positron (β +) decay results in a loss of 1 proton (Z – 1) in
proton-rich radionuclides. Because 1 neutron is gained, the atomic
mass of the daughter is unchanged, another example of isobaric
transition. F-18 decay by positron emission results in the daughter
product, O-18. The arrow points down and to the left, indicating the
decrease in Z.
FIG. 1.11  Electron capture is an alternate transition that can occur to
reduce the proton number and does not require that an energy
threshold be met. Tl-201 decays by electron capture, with the daughter
(Hg-201) containing one fewer proton (Z – 1) than the parent.
Electron Capture
An alternative to beta-plus decay for proton-rich radionuclides is
electron capture (EC). In this process, an inner-shell, orbital electron is
absorbed into the nucleus, leading to the reduction of Z and increase
of N by 1. However, no energy threshold exists for EC to occur. In
cases in which the transition energy is less than the 1022-keV
threshold, EC is the only possible decay process, but either process is
possible when the energy is greater than 1022 keV. For F-18, positron
decay occurs 97% of the time, and EC occurs 3% of the time. The
capture of an orbital electron leads to an inner-shell vacancy, which in
turn leads to the emission of fluorescent x-rays or Auger electrons.
Radionuclides that decay through EC exclusively include thallium-201
(Tl-201; Fig. 1.11), gallium-67 (Ga-67), and indium-111 (In-111). These
are all produced in a cyclotron.
Isomeric Transition
In some cases, an excited radionuclide decays from one energy level to
another while retaining the same Z and N numbers. This is referred to
as an isomeric transition because the nuclide decays from one isomer
(energy level) to another. This transition may result in the emission of
a gamma ray, the energy of which is determined by the energy
difference of the initial and eventual energy levels. In some cases, an
alternate process called internal conversion can occur, resulting in the
emission of an orbital electron, a conversion electron. The kinetic energy
is calculated as the difference in the two energy levels minus the
electron’s binding energy.
FIG. 1.12  Isomeric transitions involve a change in the energy state of
a radionuclide, such as Tc-99m to Tc-99.
FIG. 1.13  Decay scheme of Mo-99. Beta-minus emission to Tc-99m,
followed by isomeric transition to Tc-99.
Perhaps the most important isomeric transition for nuclear
medicine involves technetium. The term metastable (i.e., almost stable)
is used if the daughter nucleus remains in the excited state for a
considerable amount of time (>1 microsecond, which is long by
nuclear standards). Mo-99 decays to an excited, or metastable, Tc-99m
that in turn transitions to Tc-99 (Figs. 1.12 and 1.13). Tc-99m has a 6-
hour half-life. Tc-99m is so commonly used because of its reasonable
half-life, as well as its gamma-ray energy (140 keV) and lack of beta-
or alpha-particle emissions. Another example of isomeric transition is
seen in the decay scheme of I-131 (see Fig. 1.9). Xenon-131 (Xe-131),
formed from the beta-minus decay of I-131, is in an excited state and
immediately decays by isomeric transition with the emission of a 364-
keV gamma ray.
Radioactive Decay Calculations
Atoms in a sample containing a certain number (N) of radioactive
atoms will not all decay at the same time but with a mean time (Tm)
that is characteristic of a particular radionuclide. The reciprocal of Tm,
the fraction of the radioactive atoms that decay per unit time, is
referred to as the decay constant, λ:
Thus, the number of atoms (dN) that decay in a short time interval
(dt) is given by:
Integrating this equation over time leads to:
where N0 is the initial number of radioactive atoms, and N is the
number remaining after some time, t.
This equation describes exponential decay in which a certain
fraction of the material is lost in a set period. This fraction is referred
to as the decay fraction, DF:
Thus, the number of radioactive atoms remaining, N, is also given
by:
Also, Nd is the number of atoms that have decayed in time, t, and
can be calculated with:
The time necessary for half of the material to decay is defined as the
half-life (T 1/2 ). The half-life is related to the mean life and the decay
constant by the following equations:
Alternatively, one can determine the decay constant from the half-
life by:
One can also express the radioactive decay equation using the half-
life:
If a sample contains 10,000 radioactive atoms at a particular point in
time, one half-life later, there will be 5000 atoms; another half-life
later, there will be 2500 atoms; and so on. This process of a certain
fraction of the material decaying in a certain time is representative of
exponential decay (Fig. 1.14A). When graphed using a log scale on the
y-axis (semilog plot), the result is a straight line with the negative
slope equal in magnitude to the decay constant (Fig. 1.14B).
The amount of activity (A) is the number of nuclear transformations
—decays
or
disintegrations—per
unit
time.
The
activity
is
characterized by the number of radioactive atoms in the sample, N,
divided by the mean time to radioactive decay, Tm:
FIG. 1.14  Decay plot for Tc-99m. (A) Standard graph showing the
exponential loss. (B) Semilog graph.
Activity is thus the product of the decay constant and the number of
radioactive atoms:
Conversely, if the amount of activity of a particular radionuclide is
known, the number of radioactive atoms can be calculated:
Because the activity is directly related to the number of radioactive
atoms, all of the equations for radioactive decay apply to activity, as
well as the number of atoms:
And
The units associated with activity are the becquerel (1 Bq = 1
disintegration per second) and the curie (1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010
disintegrations per second; Box 1.2). Their relationship is as follows:
Example 1. The radiopharmacy is preparing a dose of an I-123–
labeled agent (13-hour half-life) for the clinic. If 10 mCi is to be
administered at 1 PM, how much activity should be placed in the
syringe at 7 AM?
Thus
Example 2. The staff at the nuclear medicine clinic is testing their
equipment with a cobalt-57 source (270-day half-life) that was
calibrated to contain 200 MBq on January 1 of this year. How much
activity remains on September 1 (243 days)?
Box 1.2 Conversion of International System and
Conventional Units of Radioactivity
Mathematical
c (centi-) 10–2
m (milli-) 10–3
k (kilo-) 103
μ (micro-) 10–6
M (mega-) 106
n (nano-) 10–9
G (giga-) 109
p (pico-) 10–12
T (tera-) 1012
Conventional Unit
1 curie (Ci) = 3.7 × 1010 disintegrations per second (dps)
SI Unit
1 becquerel (Bq) = 1 dps
Curies → Becquerels
1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010 dps = 37 GBq
1 mCi = 3.7 × 107 dps = 37 MBq
1μCi = 3.7 × 104 dps = 37 KBq
Becquerels → Curies
1 Bq = 1 dps = 2.7 × 10–11 Ci = 27 pCi
1 MBq = 106 dps = 2.7 × 10–5 Ci = 0.027 mCi
1 GBq = 109 dps = 27 mCi
Probability of radiative losses directly proportional to Z of target
and energy incident particle.
Thus
