Interactions Between Radiation and Matter
Charged-Particle Interactions With Matter
A charged particle may transfer energy in different ways. First, it can
be attracted and slowed by the opposite charge of the nucleus or
orbiting electrons in target material atoms. The resulting kinetic
energy loss is released as radiation (radiative losses). Bremsstrahlung
radiation occurring with a β – emitter is one example of this type of
interaction. The energy of radiative losses is directly proportional to
the Z number of the target as well as to the incident particle’s energy.
Charged particles can also directly transfer energy to the atom’s
orbital electrons, resulting in electron excitations and ionizations.
While excited, electrons can temporarily move to a shell farther from
the nucleus. As de-excitation occurs, transferred energy leads to the
emission of Auger electrons or electromagnetic radiation. This
radiation can have a wide range of energies, including visible or
ultraviolet radiation for outer-shell transitions and fluorescent x-rays
for the inner-shell transitions.
When the energy from charged-particle interactions produces
ionized electrons and atoms in tissues, the majority of the ionized
electrons are low energy. However, some interactions result in high-
energy electrons, referred to as delta rays, which in turn can also cause
excitation and ionization. In the energies of practical interest in
nuclear medicine, nearly all of the energy from a charged-particle
interaction (greater than 99%) is expended in excitation and ionization
(or collisional losses) compared with radiative losses.
The rate at which a material causes a charged particle to lose energy
(per unit length of the matter) is referred to as its stopping power. A
related quantity is linear energy transfer (LET), which is the amount of
energy deposited locally (i.e., not lost to energetic electrons, delta rays,
or radiative loss) per unit length. The stopping power and LET values
depend on the type of radiation, its energy, and the density of the
material through which it travels. Radiation with a higher LET value
has been shown to cause more damage to cells. Alpha particles have a
higher LET than beta particles or electrons.
Although densely ionizing, alpha particles deposit their energy over
a very short distance, a small fraction of a millimeter in soft tissues.
Also, although they are easily stopped by the skin, these high-energy
particles cause substantial cell death when internalized, making them
both extremely dangerous if accidentally ingested as well as highly
effective in therapeutic applications (e.g., Ra-223 in prostate cancer).
Comparatively, β – particles travel for much longer distances,
ranging from several millimeters to several centimeters depending on
their initial energy. They can be stopped by material such as a thin
sheet of aluminum or a few millimeters of soft tissue. The β – kinetic
energy is variable because it shares energy with the antineutrino
produced during the decay event. The maximum kinetic energy of the
beta particle (Emax) is defined by the difference in the energy levels of
the parent and daughter nuclide. However, it is the average kinetic
energy that is used when calculating the impact of the β – on cells and
tissues, estimated as 1/3 of
, similar to the calculation
previously described for positrons.
Photon Interactions in Matter
High-energy photons (gamma rays, x-rays, bremsstrahlung radiation,
and annihilation radiation) can also transfer energy to the electrons,
nuclei, or atoms as a whole that they encounter. Unlike charged
particles, which directly create ionized atoms, the high-energy
photons act indirectly, transferring their energy to charged particles,
specifically electrons, which in turn create most of the excitations and
ionizations that occur in the matter. Thus they are considered
secondary ionizing radiations.
At low energy levels (a few keV), photons are scattered in a manner
that does not deposit energy, referred to as Rayleigh scattering. Photons
with energy in excess of several MeV can result in pair production of a
negatron and a positron (effectively a negative and positive electron).
However, in energy ranges most common in nuclear medicine (from
several tens of keV to approximately 1 MeV), the two most prominent
modes of photon interaction are the photoelectric effect and Compton
scattering. Factors involved in the various types of interaction are
outlined in Table 1.4.
Photoelectric Effect
The photoelectric effect (Fig. 1.15) occurs when a photon transfers all
of its energy to an orbital electron, causing it to be ejected from the
atom and creating an electron-shell vacancy. The kinetic energy of the
liberated photoelectron equals the incident photon’s energy minus the
binding energy of the electron’s initial orbital shell. As the shell
vacancy is filled by electrons from outer shells, fluorescent x-rays and
Auger electrons are also emitted. Paradoxically, the probability of
photoelectric interactions is highest for tightly bound orbiting
electrons (i.e., those in the inner shells of high Z elements). These
electrons are most likely the ones in the innermost orbital shell where
the binding energy is just under the photon’s energy. In addition, the
chance of this interaction dramatically decreases as incident photon
energy increases. The probability of the photoelectric interaction (or
PPE) is given by:
where Z = atomic number, and E = incident photon kinetic energy.
Table 1.4
Photon Interactions in Matter
Interaction
Occurrence
Effect of Target
Material Z
Incident Photon E
Range (E0)
Target
Res
Em
Compton
Predominant in
soft tissues at
diagnostic E
Nearly
independent
of Z
Mid E range (≈26
keV–30 MeV)
Outer-shell e–
Rec
range
Depends on e–
density
(therefore
on target
density)
Hydrous >
anhydrous
material
Photoelectric
effect
Predominates in
shielding and
detector
crystals/PMT
High-Z materials
Low-E
photon
Z3/E3
Innermost-
shell e–
possible
e– cascade
produces
Characteristic x-
ray
with  Z-detector
material,
shielding
when weakly bou
(e.g., PMT photo
materials)
Auger e–
in soft tissues
e– binding E
less a
factor in
tissue
Pair production
Not typically
seen in
energies used
in medicine
1.02-MeV
minimum
but
actually
>>1.02 MeV
(not
present at
diagnostic
E ranges)
Usually
nucleus,
sometimes
orbital e–
E, Energy; Z, atomic number (number of protons); PMT, photomultiplier tube; e – , electron; β
+, positron (or a positive electron); β – , negatron (same as negative electron or beta-minus
particle).
In soft tissues (low Z), the photoelectric effect is much less common
than Compton scatter. It is, however, more prevalent in the high-Z
materials used for shielding (e.g., lead) or for photon detection
(sodium iodide crystals). Photoelectric effect interactions can also
occur in the gamma camera’s photomultiplier tubes, which contain
high-Z materials, such as cesium.
Compton Scatter
The incident photon does not disappear in Compton scatter. Rather, it
transfers a portion of its energy to an orbital electron (a Compton
electron), which is then ejected from the atom. The photon is deflected
or scattered, at an angle  from its original path (Fig. 1.16). The
electron and scattered photon may go on to ionize or excite other
atoms.
The sum of the kinetic energies of the scattered photon and the
Compton electron will equal the initial photon’s energy. With lower-
energy incident photons, more energy is transferred to the electron,
and there is greater backscatter of the resulting photon (i.e., the angle
between the incident and scattered photons tends to be wider), with
even 180 degrees of backscatter occurring. Higher-energy incident
photons lose less energy to the electron, and deflection is less
significant (i.e., the scatter angle is narrower), such that both the
scattered photon and electron tend to travel in a more forward
direction.
Whereas the photoelectric effect is important at lower energies and
more likely involves inner-shell electrons in high-Z materials,
Compton scatter predominates in soft tissues in the moderate-energy
ranges of gamma-ray and x-ray photons in nuclear medicine imaging
and tends to involve outer-shell electrons. Because the energy of the
incident photon is much greater than the shell’s binding energy, the
collision occurs as if involving a free electron. Compton interactions
tend to depend on electron density but are relatively independent of
the Z number or incident photon energy. Because electron density is
fairly consistent among the atoms in soft tissues, the probability
increases with increasing material density rather than its Z number.
Electron density is higher when hydrogen atoms are present, so
tissues with high water content are more affected than anhydrous
tissues.
FIG. 1.15  Photoelectric absorption. (A) An incident photon interacts
with an orbital electron. (B) The electron is ejected from its shell,
creating a vacancy. The electron is either ejected from the atom or
moved to a shell further from the nucleus. (C) The orbital vacancy is
filled by the transition of an electron from a more distant shell.
Consequently, a characteristic x-ray is given off.
FIG. 1.16  Compton scatter. An incident photon interacts with an outer
or loosely bound electron, giving up a portion of its energy to the
electron and undergoing a change in direction at a lower kinetic energy
level.
Suggested Reading
Chandra R, Rahmin A.  Nuclear Medicine Physics: The Basics . 8th ed. Philadelphia: Williams &
Wilkins; 2012.
Cherry S.R, Sorenson J.A, Phelps M.E.  Physics in Nuclear Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2012.
Eckerman K.F, Endo A.  MIRD: Radionuclide Data and Decay Schemes . 2nd ed. Reston,
VA: Society of Nuclear Medicine; 2008.
Loevinger R, Budinger T.F, Watson E.E.  MIRD Primer for Absorbed Dose Calculations . Reston,
VA: Society of Nuclear Medicine; 1988.
Powsner R.A, Powsner E.R.  Essentials of Nuclear Medicine Physics . 3rd ed. West Sussex,
UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2013.
Saha G.P.  Physics and Radiobiology of Nuclear Medicine . 4th ed. New York: Springer; 2013.
