Radiation Detection & Ancillary
Instrumentation
Janis M. O’Malley, Harvey Ziessman, and Frederic Fahey
The passage of radiation, such as x-rays and gamma rays, through a
given material leads to ionizations and excitations that can be used to
quantify the amount of energy deposited. This property allows
measurement of the level of intensity of a radiation beam or small
amounts of radionuclides, including from within the patient. The
appropriate choice of detection approach depends on the purpose. In
some cases, the efficient detection of minute amounts of the
radionuclide is essential, whereas in other cases the accurate
determination of the energy or location of the radiation deposited is
most important. A variety of approaches to radiation detection are
used, including those that allow for in vivo imaging of
radiopharmaceuticals.
Radiation detection
Consider the model of a basic radiation detector, as shown in Fig. 2.1.
The detector acts as a transducer that converts radiation energy to
electronic charge. Applying a voltage across the detector yields a
measurable electronic current. Radiation detectors typically operate in
either of two modes, current mode or pulse mode. Detectors that operate
in current mode measure the average current generated within the
detector over some characteristic integration time. This average
current is typically proportional to the exposure rate to which the
detector is subjected or the amount of radioactivity within the range of
the detector. In pulse mode, each individual detection is processed
with respect to the peak current (or pulse height) for that event. This
pulse height is proportional to the energy deposited in the detection
event. The histogram of pulse heights is referred to as the pulse-height
spectrum. It is also referred to as the energy spectrum because it plots a
histogram of the energy deposited within the detector.
Certain properties of radiation detectors characterize their
operation. Some are applicable to all detectors, whereas others are
used for detectors that operate in pulse mode. These characterizations
are not only useful for describing the operation but can also give
insight into the benefits and limitations of the particular detector.
The detection efficiency depends on several factors, including the
intrinsic and extrinsic efficiency of the detector. The intrinsic efficiency
is defined as the fraction of the incident radiation particles that
interact with the detector. It depends on the type and energy of the
radiation and the material and thickness of the detector. For photons,
the intrinsic efficiency, D I, is given to first order by:
where μ is the linear attenuation coefficient for the material of interest
at the incident photon energy, and x is the thickness of the detector.
Thus the intrinsic efficiency can be improved by using a thicker
detector or choosing a photon energy and detector material that
optimizes the value of μ.
The extrinsic efficiency is the fraction of photons or particles emitted
from the source that strike the detector. It depends on the size and
shape of the detector and the distance of the source from the detector.
If the detector is a considerable distance from the source (i.e., a
distance that is >5 times the size of the detector), the extrinsic
efficiency, D E, is given by:
where A is the area of the detector, and d is the distance from the
source to the detector. This equation defines the inverse square law. For
example, if the source-to-detector distance is doubled, the intensity of
the radiation beam is reduced by a factor of 4. The total detection
efficiency is the product of the intrinsic and extrinsic efficiencies:
In pulse mode, the pulse height is proportional to the energy
deposited within the detector. However, the uncertainty in the energy
estimation, referred to as the energy resolution, depends on the type of
detector used and the energy of the incident radiation. For a photon
radiation source of a particular energy, the feature associated with
that energy is referred to as the photopeak, as shown in Fig. 2.2. The
width of the photopeak, as characterized by the full width at half of its
maximum (FWHM) value normalized by the photon energy
represented as a percentage, is used as a measure of the energy
resolution of the detector.
When the detector is subjected to a radiation beam of low intensity,
the count rate is proportional to the beam intensity. However, the
amount of time it takes for the detector to process an event limits the
maximum possible count rate. Two models describe the count rate
limitations: nonparalyzable and paralyzable. In the nonparalyzable
model, each event takes a certain amount of time to process, referred
to as the dead time, which defines the maximum count rate at which
the detector will saturate. For example, if the dead time is 4 μs, the
count rate will saturate at 250,000 counts per second. With the
paralyzable model, the detector count rate not only saturates but can
“paralyze”—that is, lose counts at very high count rates. Gamma
cameras, for example, are paralyzable systems.
FIG. 2.1  Block diagram of basic detector. The radiation detector
basically acts as a transducer, converting radiation energy deposited
into an electrical signal. In general, a voltage has to be supplied to
collect the signal, and a current or voltage measuring device is used to
measure the signal. In some instances, the average current over a
characteristic integration time is measured, which is referred to as
current mode. In other cases, the voltage pulse of each detection event
is analyzed, referred to as pulse mode.
From Cherry, Sorenson JA, Phelps ME. Physics in Nuclear Medicine.
3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003.
FIG. 2.2  Spectrum for technetium-99m (Tc-99m) in air. The energy
resolution is characterized by the width of the photopeak (the full width
at half maximum [FWHM]) normalized by the photon energy. For the
particular detector system illustrated, the FWHM is 18 keV. The energy
resolution of the detector system for Tc-99m is 13% (100 × 18/140).
The three basic types of radiation detectors used in nuclear
medicine are gas detectors, scintillators, and semiconductors. These three
operate on different principles and are typically used for different
purposes.
Gas detectors are used every day in nuclear medicine for assaying
the amount of radiopharmaceutical to be administered and to survey
packages and work areas for contamination. However, because of the
low density of gas detectors, even when the gas is under pressure, the
sensitivity of gas detectors is not high enough to be used for clinical
counting and imaging applications.
FIG. 2.3  Amplitude of gas detector output signal as a function of
applied voltage. This graph shows the relationship between the
magnitude of the output signal from the gas detector (related to the
amount of ionized charge collected) as a function of the voltage applied
across the detector. There is no signal with no voltage applied. As the
voltage is increased, the detector signal starts to increase until the
saturation voltage is reached, the start of the plateau defining the
ionization chamber region, where all of the initially liberated charge is
collected. Further increasing the voltage leads to the proportional
counter region, at which the liberated electrons attain sufficient energy
to lead to further ionization within the gas. Finally, the Geiger-Müller
region is reached, at which each detection yields a terminal event of
similar magnitude (i.e., a “click”).
From Cherry, Sorenson JA, Phelps ME. Physics in Nuclear Medicine.
3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003.
A gas radiation detector is filled with a volume of gas that acts as
the sensitive material of the detector. In some cases it is air, and in
others it is an inert gas such as argon or xenon, depending on the
particular detector. Electrodes are located at either end of the sensitive
volume. The detector circuit also contains a variable voltage supply
and a current detector. As radiation passes through the sensitive
volume, it causes ionization in the gas. If a voltage is applied across
the volume, the resulting ions (electrons and positive ions) will start to
drift, causing a measurable current in the circuit. The current will last
until all of the charge that was liberated in the event is collected at the
electrodes. The resulting current entity is referred to as a pulse and is
associated with a particular detection event. If only the average
current is measured, this device operates in current mode. If the
individual events are analyzed, the device is operating in pulse mode.
Fig. 2.3 shows the relationship between the charge collected in the
gas detector and the voltage applied across the gas volume. With no
voltage, no electric field exists within the volume to cause the ions
liberated in a detection event to drift, and thus no current is present
and no charge is collected. As the voltage is increased, the ions start to
drift, and a current results. However, the electric field may not be
sufficient to keep the electrons and positive ions from recombining,
and thus not all of the originally liberated ions are collected. This
portion of Fig. 2.3 is referred to as the recombination region. As voltage
is increased, the level is reached at which the strength of the electric
field is sufficient for the collection of all of the liberated ions (no
recombination). This level is referred to as the saturation voltage, and
the resulting plateau in Fig. 2.3 is the ionization chamber region. When
operating in this region, the amount of charge collected is
proportional to the amount of ionization caused in the detector and
thereby to the energy deposited within the detector. Ionization
detectors or chambers typically operate in current mode and are the
detectors of choice for determining the radiation beam intensity level
at a particular location. They can directly measure this intensity level
in either exposure in roentgens (R) or air kerma in rad. Dose
calibrators and the ionization meters used to monitor the output of an
x-ray device or the exposure level from a patient who has received a
radiopharmaceutical are examples of ionization (or ion) chambers
used in nuclear medicine.
If the voltage is increased further, the drifting electrons within the
device can attain sufficient energy to cause further ionizations, leading
to a cascade event. This can cause substantially more ionization than
with an ionization chamber. The total ionization is proportional to the
