Quality Control
To ensure proper operation of any medical device, including the
gamma camera, it is essential that a comprehensive quality control
program be applied. This involves acceptance testing of the device
before its initial use and a program of routine tests and evaluations
applied on a regular basis. It is essential that the performance be
evaluated regularly to ensure that the images adequately demonstrate
the in vivo distribution of the administered radiopharmaceutical and
that any quantitation performed with the camera yields values that
are as accurate and precise as possible.
FIG. 2.10  System sensitivity (left) and spatial resolution (right) as a
function of the source-to-collimator distance. The system spatial
resolution of all collimators degrades (increases in value) with distance.
The pinhole collimator (blue) provides the best spatial resolution
(lowest value) but the lowest sensitivity, which varies according to the
inverse square law. The converging collimator (green) provides very
good spatial resolution with a sensitivity that increases with distance as
the source approaches the focal distance of the collimator. The high-
resolution parallel-hole collimator (pink) has good resolution and
reasonable sensitivity. The general-purpose, parallel-hole collimator
(red) has poorer spatial resolution than the high-resolution collimator
but with a 50% increase in sensitivity. It is noted that the sensitivity of
the two parallel-hole collimators does not vary with distance.
FIG. 2.11  Uniformity (flood) phantom image.
Gamma camera quality control involves tests that are either
quantitative or qualitative. For the quantitative tests, various
parameters are used to measure the characteristics of the gamma
camera system. Some of these parameters are evaluated intrinsically
(i.e., without a collimator, to characterize the optics and electronics of
the system) and other parameters extrinsically to include the
collimator. If extrinsic tests are performed frequently (e.g., daily), they
should be performed using the collimators most commonly used in
the clinic. However, it may be best to perform the tests with all of the
collimators used in the clinic at least annually. Certain parameters
may be evaluated in different parts of the gamma camera’s field of
view. The useful field of view (UFOV) is the portion of the field of view
the manufacturer has designated to be the proper extent for clinical
imaging. Although the UFOV typically covers more than 95% of the
total field of view, it may not extend to the very edge of the NaI
crystal or collimator face. The central field of view (CFOV) is the central
50% of the area of the UFOV. The U.S. National Electronic
Manufacturers
Association,
a
trade
association
of
electronic
manufacturers,
has
defined
parameters
for
gamma
camera
manufacturers to use to characterize the performance of their
equipment. Although some of these parameters may be difficult to
assess in the clinic, they still provide the basis for many of the
quantitative measures used in the gamma camera quality control
program.
The uniformity (or flood) test evaluates the consistency of the
response of the gamma camera to a uniform flux of radiation (Fig.
2.11). It should not be confused with the high-count uniformity
calibration. The uniformity test can be applied either intrinsically or
extrinsically. For the intrinsic test, the collimator is removed and
exposed to the radiation from a point source of small activity (about
.05 mCi (2 MBq) at a distance far enough to ensure uniform irradiation
of the camera’s field of view (at least 2 m). Extrinsic flood images are
acquired with a large-area uniform source containing approximately 3
mCi to 10 mCi (111 to 370 MBq). This may consist of a thin water-
filled source into which the radionuclide of choice (e.g., Tc-99m) is
injected and thoroughly mixed. More commonly, a solid, sealed,
large-area source of Co-57 (122-keV gamma ray, 270-day half-life) is
used. For routine testing, 5 to 20 million counts are acquired and the
images evaluated qualitatively for any notable nonuniformities. The
daily
flood
should
be
acquired
before
administering
the
radiopharmaceutical to the first patient to ensure that the camera is
working properly. Extrinsic floods for all collimators used with the
camera may be acquired on an annual basis.
Gamma camera spatial resolution can be evaluated either
intrinsically or extrinsically, qualitatively or quantitatively. In general,
it may be evaluated quantitatively only during acceptance testing and
perhaps during annual testing using very small point or line sources.
The spatial resolution is characterized by the width of the image of the
small source. Typical values for intrinsic spatial resolution range from
3 to 4 mm. Extrinsic values depend on the particular collimator being
evaluated and the distance at which the test was performed, but for
collimators commonly used in the clinic, the extrinsic spatial
resolution at 10 cm ranges from about 8 to 12 mm. In the clinic, a
qualitative assessment of extrinsic spatial resolution, typically a four-
quadrant bar phantom (Fig. 2.12), is more commonly performed. Each
quadrant of this phantom comprises alternating lead and spacing
equal to the width of the bars of varying sizes (e.g., 2.0, 2.5, 3 0, and
3.5 mm). For extrinsic spatial resolution at the collimator surface, the
phantom is placed on the collimator with the large-area uniformity
source on top of it. The user reviews the resultant image and
determines how many of the quadrants of the phantom can be
discerned as separate bars. In general, the bars that can be discerned
should be approximately 60% of the quantitative spatial resolution
value. Thus, if the intrinsic spatial resolution is 3.5 mm, it should be
possible to discern 2-mm bars of the four-quadrant bar phantom. The
extrinsic spatial resolution at the surface of the most commonly used
collimator in the clinic is qualitatively evaluated routinely on either a
weekly or monthly basis. The number of quadrants that can be
discerned should be compared with those determined during
acceptance testing. The four-quadrant bar phantom image can also be
used to qualitatively test spatial linearity by evaluating the
straightness of the bars in the image.
FIG. 2.12  Four-quadrant bar phantom image for spatial resolution.
Other performance parameters or characteristics that can be tested
include the sensitivity, energy resolution, count rate performance, and
multiwindow registration. The sensitivity is most commonly
evaluated extrinsically using a small-area source (e.g., 10 × 10 cm) of
known activity (typically approximately 1.1 -3.2 mCi (40 - 120 MBq)`
of Tc-99m) placed on the collimator being evaluated, counted for 1
minute and reported as the counts per minute per unit activity. For
parallel-hole collimators, the distance of the source to the collimator is
inconsequential because the sensitivity does not vary with distance.
For the pinhole or focusing collimators, a standard distance such as 10
cm should be used. The sensitivity value will obviously depend on the
collimator being evaluated, ranging from 5.0 to 8.5 cpm/kBq for
typical high-resolution and general-purpose collimators. For the
energy resolution, a pulse height (or energy) spectrum is acquired of a
known radionuclide, typically Tc-99m, and the width of the
photopeak is determined in a manner similar to that used for spatial
resolution normalized by the gamma-ray energy. A typical gamma
camera will have an energy resolution of 9% to 11% at 140 keV. As
discussed previously, radiation detectors take a certain amount of
time to process each event and, if events are registered too quickly,
some may be lost as a result of dead time or count rate losses. The
count rate performance can be evaluated by using two sources of
reasonably high activity to calculate the dead time value in
microseconds or by varying the exposure rate to which the camera is
exposed and recording the observed count rate. For modern cameras,
the maximum observable count rate is typically between 200,000 and
400,000 counts per second (cps). Finally, the multiwindow registration
can be characterized. As previously discussed, the gamma camera
position estimate obtained using Anger logic must be normalized by
the energy deposited so that the position estimate does not vary as a
function of photon energy. For this test, point sources of gallium-67,
which emits photons of three different energies (90, 190, and 300 keV),
are placed in several locations within the gamma camera field of view
and the image location of each of the points sources are evaluated to
make sure that they do not vary depending on which photopeak was
imaged.
Table 2.1
Gamma Camera Quality Control Summary
Parameter
Comment
Daily
Uniformity
Flood field; intrinsic (without collimator) or extrinsic (with collimator)
Window setting
Confirm energy window setting relative to photopeak for each radionuclide
used with each patient
Weekly or Monthly
Spatial resolution
Requires a “resolution” phantom such as the four-quadrant bar
Linearity check
Qualitative assessment of bar pattern linearity
Annually
System uniformity
High count flood with each collimator
Multiwindow
For cameras with the capability of imaging multiple energy windows
registration
simultaneously
Count rate
performance
Vary counts using decay or absorber method
Energy resolution
Easiest in cameras with built-in multichannel analyzers
System sensitivity
Count rate performance per unit of activity for each collimator
These parameters should be evaluated and compared with
manufacturer specifications during acceptance testing. It is highly
recommended that these tests be performed by a qualified nuclear
medicine physicist. After acceptance testing, quality control tests will
be run at various frequencies (daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, or
annually), and the evaluation may be qualitative rather than
quantitative in these cases. Table 2.1 summarizes the recommended
frequency for each of the described tests. These recommendations are
for the typical gamma camera, and the most appropriate quality
control program for a specific gamma camera depends on
manufacturer recommendations and the clinical use and stability of
performance for that particular camera.
FIG. 2.13  Digital image. Consider a nuclear medicine image acquired
in matrix mode using a 6 × 6 matrix. (A) The calculated positions based
on Anger logic a number of events. (B) A 6 × 6 matrix superimposed
onto these events demonstrates into which of the pixels of the matrix
each event would fit. (C) The number of events (dots) in each pixel is
recorded and assigned a particular shade of gray or another color to
create the digital matrix.
The x- and y-location of each accepted detection event is digitally
stored within the acquisition host computer associated with the
gamma camera. These data can be captured in two ways—matrix and
list mode. In matrix mode, a specific matrix size (64 × 64, 128 × 128, 256
× 256, and so on) is predetermined depending on the assumed spatial
resolution of the imaging task. For tasks that involve higher spatial
resolution, a larger matrix would be required. The chosen matrix size
is mapped to the field of view, and each estimated (x,y)-location is
assigned to a particular picture element or pixel within the image
matrix. The value of that pixel is then incremented by 1. In this
manner, a 2D histogram of the event locations is generated, and at the
end of the acquisition, the value in a particular pixel is the total
number of events assigned to that pixel during the data acquisition
process. An example with a 6 × 6 matrix is shown in Fig. 2.13. To
display the image, the number of counts in a particular pixel is
assigned a color or gray value according to a certain color scale
lookup table on the computer monitor. An example might be that the
pixel with the most counts is assigned the color white, pixels with no
counts are assigned black, and all other pixels are assigned a shade of
gray. Alternatively, the colors of the rainbow could be used, with
violet indicating zero counts and red indicating the highest count. In
addition, many other color tables could be used.
In many cases, more than one image is acquired during the imaging
procedure. In some cases, a time-sequence of image frames, also
known as a dynamic study, may be acquired. For example, a frame may
be acquired every minute for 20 minutes. A multiphase study may be
acquired, in which ten 30-second frames are followed by five 60-
second frames, followed by five 120-second frames. In other instances,
the data acquisition may be associated with a physiological gating
signal such as the electrocardiogram (ECG) or a respiratory gate. In
the cardiac example, counts from different parts of the heart cycle
could be placed in different frames, resulting in frames from the end
of diastole to the end of systole and back again. In matrix mode, these
multiframe acquisitions would be obtained by establishing the desired
number of the frames in the computer a priori. During the acquisition
process, the appropriate pixel for each event would need to be
determined, in addition to the appropriate frame within the heart
cycle.
In list mode, the (x,y)-location of each event is stored using the
highest level of digitization possible as a stream. In addition, timing
and physiological gating marks may be stored periodically. For
example, a timing mark may be stored every millisecond, as can the
time of the R peak in the ECG (Fig. 2.14). After the acquisition is
complete, the user can then select the desired matrix size and the
temporal or physiological framing rate a posteriori. Based on these
criteria, a postacquisition program is run to format the data as
defined. The user could then decide to reformat the data to a different
set of parameters. In this way, list mode acquisition is very flexible
because it does not require the user to define the acquisition matrix
and framing a priori. On the other hand, it typically requires more
computer storage and running the formatting program to view the
data. For these reasons, matrix mode is most commonly used.
FIG. 2.14  List-mode data acquisition. In list mode, the (x,y)-position of
each detection event is determined at the highest available resolution
and stored in sequence. In addition, time markers and physiological
signals (such as the timing of the R wave from the electrocardiogram
trigger) are periodically stored. Once the acquisition is completed, the
desired matrix size, time sequence, and physiological gate framing can
be selected, and a formatting program is run to provide the acquired
data for viewing and analysis.
Each pixel in the planar nuclear medicine image can be considered
its own detector, and thus the total counts in a pixel are governed by
Poisson statistics similar to a well counter or a thyroid probe.
Therefore the standard deviation of the pixel counts is simply
estimated by the square root of the pixel counts. In addition, the sum
of Poisson distributed values is also a Poisson distributed value.
Therefore, if a region of interest is defined on a planar nuclear
medicine image and the pixel values within that region are added, the
result is also Poisson distributed. Nuclear medicine studies are often
quantified by defining regions of interest (ROIs) over features of
interest and subsequently comparing the counts. In some cases, the
counts from different views of the patient can be combined to provide
more accurate quantitation. For example, taking the geometrical mean
(square root of the product of the counts) of similar regions from
opposite, conjugate views such as the anterior and posterior views,
can provide an estimate that, to first order, does not depend on the
depth of the activity within the body. Theoretically, this approach
works for point sources, but it also has been shown to work
reasonably well for extended sources. The counts are determined from
the ROIs drawn about each lung, right and left, on images acquired
from both the anterior and posterior views of the patient. The
geometrical mean of the counts in each lung is calculated, and the
differential function of each lung is estimated by dividing the counts
for that lung by the sum of counts for both lungs.
In a dynamic study, the region of interest counts in each frame can
be plotted as a function of time. The resulting plot is referred to as the
time–activity curve (TAC). In the case of relatively short-lived
radionuclides, each value along the plot should be decay corrected to
the beginning of the acquisition or the time of radiopharmaceutical
administration. In the example of a Tc-99m MAG3 renal study, a TAC
can be used to evaluate both renal perfusion and clearance of the
agent.
Radiation detection and counting form the cornerstone of nuclear
medicine. Detectors of all types—gas detectors, scintillators, and
semiconductors—are used every day in the nuclear medicine clinic.
Some are used for ancillary purposes that support the clinic, such as
those used in the context of radiation protection. Others are used
specifically to acquire biological data for a particular clinical purpose.
Most notably, the gamma camera is used to obtain images of the
in vivo distribution of the administered radiopharmaceutical from
which the patient’s physiology or function can be inferred to further
define the patient’s medical picture. A rigorous quality control
program must be maintained for all equipment used in the nuclear
medicine clinic to ensure the integrity of the data obtained from the
patient. The quality control program for the gamma camera includes
acceptance testing and tests that need to be performed on a routine
basis. The nuclear medicine image acquired with the gamma camera
provides a snapshot of the patient’s in vivo radiopharmaceutical
distribution from a certain view and at a particular point in time.
These images can also be acquired as a dynamic (time-sequence)
study or in conjunction with a physiological gate such as the ECG.
ROIs can be drawn about specific features to provide regional
quantitation or TACs of dynamic processes. Nuclear medicine
instrumentation continues to evolve, including the development of
devices designed for a specific clinical task, such as breast imaging. It
is expected that this development will continue in the years ahead.
Suggested Reading
Chandra R, Rahmim A.  Nuclear Medicine Physics: The Basics . 8th ed. Philadelphia: Williams &
Wilkins; 2018.
Cherry S.R, Sorenson J.A, Phelps M.E.  Physics in Nuclear Medicine . 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2012.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Nuclear Medicine Physics: A Handbook for Teachers
and Students . Vienna, Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2014.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Planning a Clinical PET Centre . Vienna,
Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2010.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Quality Assurance for PET and PET-CT Systems
. Vienna, Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2019.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Quality Assurance of SPECT Systems . Vienna,
Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2009.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Quality Control Atlas for Scintillation Camera Systems
. Vienna, Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2019.
National Electrical Manufacturers Association.  Performance Measurements of Positron Emission
Tomographs . Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers Association; 2018.
Powsner R.A, Powsner E.R.  Essentials of Nuclear Medicine Physics . 3rd ed. Malden,
MA: Blackwell Science; 2012.
