Ancillary Nuclear Medicine Equipment
Besides the imaging equipment in the nuclear medicine clinic, other
additional ancillary equipment may be necessary from either a
medical or regulatory point of view or to otherwise enhance the
operation of the clinic. This equipment will be reviewed, including the
quality control required for proper operation.
As previously discussed, the two basic radiation meters commonly
used in the nuclear medicine clinic are the Geiger-Müller (GM) meter
and the ionization chamber. Both are gas detectors, although they
operate differently. With the GM meter, all detections lead to a
terminal event of the same magnitude—a “click.” The device is
excellent for detecting small amounts of contamination. It is routinely
used to determine whether there is contamination on packages of
radiopharmaceutical that are delivered to the clinic and to test
working surfaces and the hands and feet of workers for
contamination. GM meters often are equipped with a test source of
cesium-137, with a very small amount of radioactivity, that is affixed
to the side of the meter. On calibration, the probe is placed against the
source, and the resulting exposure rate is recorded. The probe is tested
daily using the source to ensure that the meter’s reading is the same at
the time calibration. The GM meter should be calibrated on an annual
basis.
The ionization chamber meter (ion chamber) operates in current
mode and assesses the amount of ionization within an internal
volume of gas (often air) and thus can directly measure exposure or
air kerma rate. The ion chamber is used to evaluate the exposure rate
at various locations within the clinic. For example, it could be used to
measure the exposure rate in an uncontrolled area adjacent to the
radiopharmaceutical hot laboratory. The ion chamber is also used to
evaluate the exposure rate at a distance from a patient who has
received radionuclide therapy (e.g., iodine-131 for thyroid cancer) to
determine that the patient can be released without exposing the
general public to unacceptable radiation levels. The ion chamber also
should be annually calibrated.
The dose calibrator is an ionization chamber used to assay the
amount of activity in vials and syringes. This includes the assay of
individual doses before administration to patients, as required by
regulation. The dose calibrator operates over a very wide range of
activities, from tens of microcuries to a curie (hundreds of Bq to tens
of GBq). The device is also equipped with variable settings for each
radionuclide to be measured, with typically about 10 buttons for
ready selection of the radionuclides commonly used in the clinic. In
addition, buttons are available for user-defined radionuclide selection.
Others can be selected by entering the appropriate code for that
radionuclide into the system.
The dose calibrator is used to assay the activity administered to the
patient, and thus a comprehensive quality control program is
necessary. Regulations specify dose calibrator quality control program
must meet the manufacturer’s recommendations or national
standards. Typically, the program comprises four basic quality control
tests: geometry, accuracy, linearity, and constancy.
The geometry protocol tests that the dose calibrator provides the
same reading for the same amount of activity irrespective of the
volume or orientation of the sample. A reading of a certain amount of
activity in a 0.5-mL volume is obtained. The volume is then increased
by augmenting the sample with amounts of nonradioactive water or
saline and taking additional readings. The subsequent readings
should not vary from the original readings by more than 10%. The
geometry test is performed during acceptance testing and after a
major repair or move of the equipment to another location.
For accuracy, calibrated sources (typically cobalt-57 and 137Cs) are
assayed; the resultant reading cannot vary by more than 10% from the
calibrated activity decay corrected to the day of the test. The accuracy
test should be performed during acceptance testing, annually
thereafter, and after a major repair or move.
The linearity protocol tests that the dose calibrator operates
appropriately over the wide activity range to which it is applied. The
device is tested from 10 μCi (370 kBq) to a level higher than that
routinely used in the clinic and perhaps as high as 1 Ci (37 GBq). The
activity readings are varied by starting with a sample of the
radioactivity of Tc-99m at the highest value to be tested (e.g., tens of
gigabequerels). The activity readings are then varied by either
allowing the source to radioactively decay over several days or using
a set of lead shields of varying thicknesses until a reading close to 370
kBq is obtained. Each reading should not vary by more than 10% from
the line drawn through the calculated activity values. The linearity
test should be performed during acceptance testing, quarterly
thereafter, and after a major repair or move.
The constancy protocol tests the reproducibility of the readings
compared with a decay-corrected estimate for a reference reading
obtained from the dose calibrator on a particular day. Today’s
constancy reading cannot vary from the decay-corrected reference
reading by more than 10%. The constancy test varies from accuracy in
that it evaluates the precision of the readings from day to day rather
than accuracy. The constancy test should be performed on every day
that the device is used to assay a dose to be administered to a patient.
There are two nonimaging scintillator devices, the well counter, and
the thyroid probe that are routinely used in the nuclear medicine
clinic. The well counter is used for both radiation protection and
clinical protocols. The thyroid probe can provide clinical studies with
a fraction of the equipment costs and space requirements of the use of
nuclear imaging equipment. However, these devices also require
comprehensive quality control programs.
The well counter consists of an NaI crystal with a hole in it,
allowing for test tubes, and other samples can be placed within the
device for counting. The samples to be placed in the counter is
practically surrounded by the detector, with a geometrical efficiency
in excess of 90%. Thus the well counter can measure very small
amounts of radioactivity, on the order of a kilobecquerel. The well
counter should not be confused with the dose calibrator, which is a
gas-filled ionization chamber that can measure activities up to 37 GBq.
It is used to test packages of radiopharmaceuticals to ensure that no
radioactivity has been spilled on the outside of the package or leaked
from the inside. The device also can be used to measure removable
activity from working surfaces where radioactivity has been handled
or from sealed sources such as calibration sources to ensure that the
radioactivity is not leaking out.
The well counter can also be used for the assay of biological
samples for radioactivity for a variety of clinical evaluations. For
example,
after
the
administration
of
Tc-99m
diethylenetriamepentaacetic acid (DTPA), blood samples can be
counted at several time points (e.g., at 1, 2, and 3 hours) to estimate
the patient’s glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The amount of
radioactivity in a 0.2-mL blood sample will be very small, and thus the
well counter is the appropriate instrument for these measurements. By
making these measurements and the measurements of standards of
known activity concentration (kilobecquerel per milliliter), the
patient’s GFR can be estimated.
The thyroid probe consists of an NaI crystal on a stand with the
associated counting electronics. The patient is administered a small
amount of radioactive iodine. The probe is placed at a certain distance
from the thyroid, and a count is obtained. In addition, a count is
acquired of a known standard at the same distance. The thyroid
uptake of iodine can be estimated from these measurements.
The quality control program for both the well counter and the
thyroid probe includes the energy calibration, the energy resolution,
the sensitivity, and the chi-square test. For the energy calibration, the
energy window is set for the calibration source of a particular
radionuclide—for example, the 662-keV peak of Cs-137. The amplifier
gain is varied until the maximum count is found that corresponds
with the alignment of the window with the 662-keV energy peak. In
addition, the counts in a series of narrow energy windows across the
peak can be measured to estimate the energy resolution. A standard
window can be set, and the counts of a known calibration source can
be counted and normalized by the number of nuclear transformations
to estimate the sensitivity in counts per transformation (or counts per
second per becquerel). Finally, the chi-square test evaluates the
operation of the counter by comparing the uncertainty of the count to
that expected from the Poisson distribution.
