The Patient as a Radioactive Source
In
nuclear
medicine,
the
patient
is
administered
a
radiopharmaceutical
that
distributes
according
to
a
specific
physiological or functional pathway. The patient is then imaged using
external radiation detectors to determine the in vivo distribution and
dynamics of the radiopharmaceutical through which the patient’s
physiology can be inferred, providing this essential information to the
patient’s doctor to aid in diagnosis, prognosis, staging, and treatment.
The equipment used to acquire these data will be described in the
sections ahead. Single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) and PET are described in the next chapter. However, before
examining how the instrumentation operates, it is instructive to
understand the nature of the signal itself—that is, the radiation being
emitted from within the patient.
The radiopharmaceutical is administered to the patient most
commonly by intravenous injection but also in some cases through
other injection routes, such as intraarterial, intraperitoneal, or
subdermal. In other cases, the radiopharmaceutical may be introduced
through the gastrointestinal tract or through the breathing of a
radioactive gas or aerosol. After administration, the path and rate of
uptake depend on the particular radiopharmaceutical, the route of
administration, and the patient’s individual physiology. However, the
characteristics
and
parameters
associated
with
the
radiopharmaceutical in vivo distribution and dynamics are of
considerable clinical importance. In some cases, the enhanced uptake
of the radiopharmaceutical in certain tissues (e.g., the uptake of
fluorodeoxyglucose [FDG] in tumors) may be of most clinical
importance, whereas in other cases it may be the lack of uptake (e.g.,
the absence of Tc-99m sestamibi in infarcted myocardium). In the first
case, this would be referred to as a hot-spot imaging task, and in the
latter would be a cold-spot task. In other situations, it may be the rate
of uptake (wash in) or clearance (wash out) that may be considered the
essential
characteristic
of
the
study.
In
a
Tc-99m
mercaptoacetyltriglycine (MAG3) renal study, fast wash in may
indicate a well-perfused kidney, and delayed clearance may indicate
renal obstruction. In the Tc-99m DTPA counting protocol described
previously, a slow clearance of the radiopharmaceutical from the
blood would indicate a reduced GFR. In some cases, the ability to
discern uptake in a particular structure that is adjacent to other
nonspecific uptake may require the ability to spatially resolve the two
structures, whereas other tasks may not require such specific
resolution. The choice of instrumentation, acquisition protocol, and
data-processing approach fundamentally depend on the clinical task
at hand.
To
characterize
the
rate,
location,
and
magnitude
of
radiopharmaceutical uptake within the patient, the emitted radiation
must be detected, in most cases, by detectors external to the patient’s
body. Some instruments are specially designed for internal use—for
example, interoperative radiopharmaceutical imaging—but in most
the cases, the imaging device is located outside the body while
detecting radiation internally. This requirement limits the useful
emitted radiations for nuclear medicine imaging to energetic photons
—that is, gamma rays and x-rays. The amount of overlying tissue
between the internally distributed radiopharmaceutical and the
radiation detector may vary from several centimeters to as much as 20
to 30 cm. Alpha and beta particles will not be of use in most cases
because their ranges in tissue are limited to a few millimeters, and
thus they will not exit the body and cannot be measured by external
radiation detectors. Even x-rays and gamma rays must have energies
in excess of 50 keV to penetrate 10 cm of tissue. On the other hand,
once the radiation exits the patient, it is best that the radiation not be
so energetic as to be difficult to detect with reasonable-size detectors.
Thus the radiation types optimal for most nuclear medicine imaging
applications are x-rays and gamma rays in the 50- to 600-keV energy
range, depending on the equipment and collimation being used.
Consider a situation in which a radiopharmaceutical labeled with
Tc-99m leads to a point source at some depth within the patient’s
body. The 140-keV gamma rays will be emitted isotropically from the
point source. Therefore it would be advantageous to place the
radiation detector close to the source or to place several detectors
around the source to collect as many of the emitted photons as
possible. In fact, acquiring data from several angles may allow the
source to be better localized. Those emitted photons that exit the body
without interaction and are subsequently detected will yield the
highest quality spatial information. Conversely, those photons that
scatter within the patient compromise spatial information. Photons
that undergo very-small-angle scatter will perhaps not be of much
consequence, but those that undergo scatter at larger angles will not
be of much use. Noting that the Compton-scattered photons have less
energy than the incident photons, and that small-angle scatter leads to
less energy loss than large-angle scatter, energy discrimination (i.e.,
only allowing photons to be counted within a narrow energy window
about the photopeak energy) will lead to the elimination of a
significant number of scattered photons from the nuclear medicine
image. In contrast to the case of a point source, a more challenging
clinical case with regard to scatter may be the imaging of a cold-spot
feature, such as an infarction in a myocardial perfusion scan or a renal
scar in a Tc-99m DMSA scan. In these cases, scattered photons in the
neighboring tissue may be displaced into the cold spot, leading to a
loss in image contrast and an inability to properly discern the extent of
the feature. It must also be kept in mind that in a true clinical case, the
distribution of the radiopharmaceutical is unknown, and background
levels in other tissues may compromise the situation. The pulse-height
spectrum from a patient is shown in Fig. 2.5.
FIG. 2.5  Energy spectrum from a gamma camera with the
technetium-99m (Tc-99m) activity in the patient. Note the loss of
definition of the lower edge of the Tc-99m photopeak. This spectrum
illustrates the difficulty of discriminating Compton-scattered photons
within the patient using pulse-height analysis.
