linearity as a function of position across the entire field of view.
Again, these shifts in both energy and position are applied on an
event-by-event basis, providing an image that is free of linear
distortion. A very-high-count uniformity calibration map is acquired
that characterizes the remaining nonuniformities inherent in the
gamma camera acquisition process. These uniformity calibration maps
are used to generate uniformity corrections that are applied during
each acquisition.
Collimators
Although the NaI crystal, PMTs, and electronics can estimate the
location of a detection event to within 3 to 4 mm, the directionality of
the event is not known. Gamma rays from a point source could be
detected anywhere across the field of view, and the counts detected at
a particular location in the NaI crystal could have also originated from
practically anywhere within the patient. Thus collimation is required
to determine the directionality of the detected event. Because gamma
rays cannot be easily focused, absorptive collimation must be used—
that is, all photons not heading in the desired direction will be
absorbed by the collimator, and those heading in the correct direction
will be allowed to pass. Therefore absorptive collimation is inherently
very insensitive because practically all of the emitted photons will be
absorbed and only a very few will be accepted. In general, only 0.01%
(i.e., 1 in 10,000) of the photons emitted from the patient will be
accepted by the collimator and incorporated into the image.
FIG. 2.7  Pinhole collimator. The image is inverted. The image is
magnified if the distance from the aperture to the object is smaller than
the distance from the aperture to the gamma camera crystal. Spatial
resolution improves and sensitivity decreases as the aperture diameter
decreases. The sensitivity also decreases with the source-to-aperture
distance, according to the inverse square law. In general, the pinhole
collimator provides the best spatial resolution and the lowest sensitivity
of any collimator used in nuclear medicine.
The simplest is the pinhole collimator (Fig. 2.7). It consists of a single,
small hole or aperture located a set distance (typically on the order of
20 cm) from the surface of the NaI crystal. Photons from one end of
the source that pass through the aperture will be detected on the
opposite side of the detector. In addition, objects that are closer to the
aperture will be magnified compared with those farther away. If b is
the distance from the aperture to the object and f is the distance from
the aperture to the detector, the amount of magnification, M, is given
by:
Magnification can be of significant value when imaging small
objects using a camera with a large field of view. Magnification will
minimize the effect of the intrinsic spatial resolution of the camera and
thus enhance overall system resolution. The collimator spatial
resolution of the pinhole, R PH, is determined by the diameter or the
aperture, d (typically 4-6 mm) and the distances from both the object
and the NaI crystal to the aperture.
FIG. 2.8  Multihole, parallel-hole collimator. The collimator shown at
the top has longer holes designed to provide higher resolution.
However, it would also have a lower sensitivity than the collimator
shown at the bottom. The septal thickness and thus energy rating are
the same for both collimators.
It must be kept in mind that spatial resolution is typically
characterized by the size of an imaged point source, and thus a large
value corresponds to poor resolution, and a very small value indicates
excellent spatial resolution. A system with 1-mm spatial resolution
will lead to an image with greater acuity than one with 5-mm spatial
resolution. For this reason, the term high resolution can be ambiguous
because it may be unclear whether this system has very high
resolution or a high R value (poor resolution). Based on the earlier
formula, better spatial resolution is attained using a smaller aperture
(small d value) with the source as close to the pinhole aperture as
possible. In fact, all gamma camera collimators provide the best
spatial resolution very close to the collimator, and spatial resolution
will degrade as the object is moved farther from the collimator. The
geometrical sensitivity of the pinhole collimator, G PH, depends on the
area of the pinhole (πd 2) compared with the squared distance of the
source from the pinhole (b 2):
Thus the geometrical collimator sensitivity is highest with a large
aperture diameter and drops off as the inverse square of the distance
from the source to the aperture—that is, it follows the inverse square
law. A larger aperture diameter leads to better geometrical sensitivity
but poorer spatial resolution, whereas the converse is true for a
smaller aperture diameter. As is true in some other instances in
nuclear medicine imaging, a trade-off occurs between sensitivity and
spatial resolution such that improvement in one area may cause
degradation of another. The choice of whether to use high sensitivity
or better resolution may depend on the clinical imaging task at hand,
but often a compromise will lead to a reasonable value for both
parameters. The pinhole collimator typically provides the best spatial
resolution and the lowest sensitivity of all of the collimators
commonly used in nuclear medicine. It is often used when imaging
small organs (e.g., the thyroid gland) with a gamma camera with a
large field of view or in special cases when a very-high-resolution spot
view image is required, such as when trying to discern which bone in
the foot may be demonstrating increased radiopharmaceutical uptake
on a bone scan.
The multihole collimator provides substantially better geometrical
sensitivity compared with the pinhole collimator because the object is
viewed through many small holes rather than through a single hole.
The most commonly used multihole collimators consist of a very large
number of parallel holes with absorptive septa between the holes to
restrict the emitted gamma rays from traversing from one hole to a
neighboring hole. The holes are typically hexagonal and arranged in a
hexagonal, close-packed array (Fig. 2.8). A typical low-energy,
parallel-hole collimator may have hole diameters and lengths of about
1 and 20 mm, respectively, and septal thicknesses between holes of
about 0.1 mm. No magnification occurs with a parallel-hole
collimator. The collimator spatial resolution depends on the diameter
(d) and the length (a) of the collimator holes and the distance from the
source to collimator (b):
A parallel-hole collimator with either small or long holes will
provide the best spatial resolution (Fig. 2.8, top). Similar to the pinhole
collimator, the spatial resolution of the parallel-hole collimator is best
at the surface of the collimator and degrades with distance from the
collimator. The geometrical sensitivity of the parallel-hole collimator
also depends on the thickness of the septa between the holes (t) in
addition to the hole diameter and length:
The geometrical sensitivity will be the highest for a collimator with
the thinnest interhole septa. On the other hand, the septa must be
thick enough to minimize septal penetration when a photon enters one
hole, traverses the septa, and enters the neighboring hole. The septa
are typically designed to be as thin as possible while limiting the
amount of septal penetration to less than 5% of photons striking the
septa. As a result, collimators designed for higher energy photons
(over 200 keV) will require thicker septa than those designed for lower
energies. Converse to collimator spatial resolution, the best
geometrical sensitivity is attained with a collimator with either large
or short holes. Thus again, a trade-off exists between spatial resolution
and geometrical sensitivity. Because the geometrical sensitivity is
proportional to (d/a)2 and the spatial resolution is proportional to (d/a),
the geometrical sensitivity of the collimator is roughly proportional to
the square of the spatial resolution:
Finally, it is notable that the geometrical sensitivity of a parallel-
hole collimator does not depend on the distance between the source
and the collimator. The sensitivity is the same at the surface as it is at a
distance removed from the surface. This fact may be counterintuitive
because it might be expected that the sensitivity would drop off with
distance as it does with the pinhole collimator. In fact, the sensitivity
of a single hole of the collimator does go down with distance, but the
degrading spatial resolution leads to the irradiation of more holes,
and these two facts cancel each other.
FIG. 2.9  Converging-hole collimator. With this collimator, objects are
magnified, which tends to minimize the blurring effects of the intrinsic
spatial resolution and thus provide higher system spatial resolution. In
addition, the sensitivity increases with distance as the collimator’s focal
distance is approached, and thus it provides both improved spatial
resolution and higher sensitivity, but with a decreased field of view.
The converging multihole collimator provides both enhanced spatial
resolution and improved sensitivity. With the converging collimator
(Fig. 2.9), the direction of the holes is focused at a point some distance
from the collimator surface. The distance from the collimator to the
focal point is typically on the order of 50 cm and thus far beyond the
boundaries of the patient. The focusing provides magnification similar
to that with the pinhole collimator. As a result, the spatial resolution is
typically slightly better than that with a parallel collimator but not as
good as that with a pinhole collimator. In addition, the geometrical
sensitivity of the converging collimator improves as the source
approaches the focal point, and thus the sensitivity improves at
distances farther from the collimator. On the other hand, the field of
view is slightly reduced at greater distances because of the increased
magnification. The converging collimator is used in applications
similar to those with the pinhole collimator—that is, for imaging
smaller objects using a camera with a large field of view and to
achieve a magnified image with slightly improved spatial resolution.
The extrinsic or system spatial resolution (R E ) depends on both the
intrinsic and collimator geometrical spatial resolution (R I and R C ,
respectively). To first order, the relationship between these is given
by:
Based on this equation, the larger of the two values, the intrinsic or
the collimator resolution, will dominate the system resolution. Except
at distances very close to the collimator face, the collimator spatial
resolution is substantially greater than the intrinsic resolution, and
thus the collimator spatial resolution is, in general, the more
important factor. In cases involving magnification, the intrinsic spatial
resolution, R I , is modified by magnification, thus minimizing the
effect of intrinsic spatial resolution on system spatial resolution:
The system spatial resolution and the collimator geometrical
sensitivity vary as a function of the distance from the radioactive
source to the collimator (Fig. 2.10). The system spatial resolution of all
of the collimators degrades with increasing distance from the
collimator (see Fig. 2.10). The pinhole provides the best spatial
resolution, followed by the converging collimator and two types of
parallel-hole collimators, the high-resolution and general-purpose
collimators. On the other hand, the pinhole collimator has the poorest
geometrical sensitivity, which varies as the square of the distance (see
Fig. 2.10). For the two parallel-hole collimators, the sensitivity does
not vary with distance, and the sensitivity of the converging
collimator improves with distance.
The standard gamma camera can be used for various studies;
however, some other nuclear medicine imaging devices are designed
for very specific clinical applications. These often use novel
approaches to either gamma ray or light detection. In some instances,
they use a semiconductor detector such as CZT. In other cases, they
may use avalanche photodiode or silicon PMTs for light detection in
conjunction with a scintillator. The most notable clinical planar
imaging application for these types of devices is breast imaging. The
compact size allows the device to stay close to the breast, resulting in
high spatial resolution. In addition, the camera can be designed with
limited dead space between the edge of the field of view and the
patient, allowing imaging close to the chest wall. All of these
characteristics result in improved imaging with this device relative to
