FIG. 2.5  Energy spectrum from a gamma camera with the
technetium-99m (Tc-99m) activity in the patient. Note the loss of
definition of the lower edge of the Tc-99m photopeak. This spectrum
illustrates the difficulty of discriminating Compton-scattered photons
within the patient using pulse-height analysis.
Gamma cameras
In the earliest days of nuclear medicine, counting devices similar to
the thyroid probe described in the previous section were used to
evaluate the amount of activity in a particular tissue. For example,
probes could be used to evaluate the iodine uptake of the thyroid
gland. However, it was not long before clinicians realized that it
would be helpful to not only know the total uptake of the
radiopharmaceutical within the tissue of interest but also to be able to
discern the spatial distribution of the uptake within the tissue. In the
early 1950s, Benedict Cassan attached a focused collimator to an NaI
crystal and a mechanism for acquiring the counts from the patient at
multiple locations in a raster fashion and plotting the spatial
distribution of the counts. This device, the rectilinear scanner, provided
nuclear medicine images of physiological function. As a result the
term scan, as in a thyroid or bone scan, has remained in the nuclear
medicine lexicon. However, these scans took a long time to acquire
and did not allow for the acquisition of time-sequence or dynamic
studies. Still, the rectilinear scanner continued to be used in nuclear
medicine clinics through the late 1970s.
FIG. 2.6  Schematic of gamma scintillation camera. The diagram
shows a photon reaching the NaI crystal through the collimator and
undergoing photoelectric absorption. The photomultiplier tubes (PMTs)
are optically coupled to the NaI crystal. The electrical outputs from the
respective PMTs are further processed through positioning circuitry to
calculate (x, y)-coordinates and through additional circuitry to calculate
the deposited energy of the pulse. The energy signal passes through
the pulse height analyzer. If the event is accepted, it is recorded
spatially in the location determined by the (x,y)-positioning pulses.
In the mid-1950s, Hal Anger developed his first prototype of the
gamma camera, which allowed a section of the body to be imaged
without a raster scan, opening the door for the possibility of both
dynamic and physiologically gated studies. Further developments of
the technology took place over the next 10 years, and the first
commercial gamma camera was introduced in the mid-1960s. With
further advances that have improved and stabilized the operation of
the instrument, along with the addition of tomographic capability, the
gamma camera remains the most commonly used imaging device in
the nuclear medicine clinic.
A block diagram of the gamma camera is shown in Fig. 2.6. Gamma
rays emitted from within the patient pass through the holes of an
absorptive collimator to reach the NaI crystal. On interaction of the
gamma ray with the NaI scintillating crystal, thousands of light
photons are emitted, a portion of which are collected by an array of
PMTs. By taking weighted sums of the PMT signals within the
associated computer, the two-dimensional (2D) x- and y-location and
the total energy of the detection event deposited are estimated. If the
energy deposited is within a prespecified energy window (e.g., within
10% of the photopeak energy), the event is accepted, and the location
of the event recorded. In this manner, the gamma camera image is
constructed on an event-by-event basis, and a single nuclear medicine
image may consist of hundreds of thousands of such events. Each
component of the gamma camera will be described.
The detection material of the gamma camera is typically a single,
thin large-area NaI scintillation crystal. Some smaller cameras rely on
a 2D matrix of smaller crystals, but most rely on a single large crystal.
In the most common gamma camera designs, the NaI crystal is about
30 cm × 50 cm in area and 9.5 mm thick. Some cameras designed for
imaging only photons with energies below 150 keV may have thinner
crystals. Others used more commonly for higher-energy photons may
be thicker, but the 9.5-mm thickness provides a reasonable
compromise because it detects more than 85% of the photons with
energies of 140 keV or lower and stops about 28% of the 364-keV
gamma rays emitted by I-131. NaI is hygroscopic and thus damaged
by water. It is hermetically sealed and has a transparent light guide on
the side adjacent to the PMT array and aluminum on the side closer to
the collimator. The NaI crystal is the most fragile component of the
gamma camera, being susceptible to both physical and thermal shock.
When the collimator is not in place, the bare NaI crystal must be
treated with extreme care. In addition, the environment in the room
must be controlled so that the air temperature is maintained at a
reasonable level (18-24°C) and is not subject to wide variations over a
short period.
The PMT array consists of about 60 to 100 photomultiplier tubes
that are each about 5 cm in diameter. The PMTs are usually hexagonal
and arranged in a hexagonal close-packed array to collect as many
light photons as possible. Although PMTs are used in practically all
gamma cameras, some small camera designs are using avalanche
photodiodes to collect the scintillation light. The signal from each
PMT is input into the gamma camera host computer. First, the sum of
all of the PMT signals is used to estimate the energy deposited in the
detection event. In addition, each PMT has a weight associated with
its position in both the x- and y-direction. For example, the PMTs on
the left side of the camera may have a low weight, and those on the
right side of the camera would have a higher weight. For a particular
detection event, if the weighted sum of the signal is low, the event
would be on the left side, and if it were high, it would be on the right
side of the camera. However, the weighted sum as described is
dependent not only on the position of the event but also on the total
amount of light collected, which is directly proportional to the energy
deposited. Therefore the sum must be normalized by the energy
estimate. This approach to determining the position of the detection
event is often referred as Anger logic, in honor of the developer of the
gamma camera, Hal Anger. This leads to an estimate of the detection
event location to within 3 to 4 mm, which is referred to as the intrinsic
spatial resolution of the camera.
However, distortions can occur in images with respect to both the
energy and position estimates. Detection events directly over PMTs
lead to the collection of slightly more light than the events between
PMTs and therefore to a slightly higher pulse height. Energy calibration
notes the shift in the pulse height spectrum as a function of position.
Subsequently, an opposite shift is applied on an event-by-event basis,
leading to improved energy resolution and greater energy stability. In
addition, there is an inherent nonlinearity, with events being bunched
over PMTs and spread out between PMTs. Analogous to energy
calibration, linearity calibration determines the spatial shift from
