amount of ionization initially liberated; therefore these devices are
referred to as proportional counters or chambers. Proportional counters,
which usually operate in pulse mode, are not typically used in nuclear
medicine. If the voltage is increased further, the drifting electrons
attain the ability to cause a level of excitations and ionizations within
the gas. The excitations can lead to the emission of ultraviolet
radiation, which also can generate ionizations and further excitations.
This leads to a terminal event in which the level of ionization starts to
shield the initial event, and the level of ionization finally stops. This is
referred to as the Geiger-Müller process. In the Geiger-Müller device,
every event leads to the same magnitude of response, irrespective of
the energy or the type of incident radiation. Thus the Geiger-Müller
meter does not directly measure exposure, although it can be
calibrated in a selected energy range to milliroentgens per hour
(mR/hr). However, the estimate of exposure rate in other energy
ranges may not be accurate. The Geiger-Müller survey meter is
excellent at detecting small levels of radioactive contamination and
thus is often used to survey radiopharmaceutical packages that are
delivered and work areas within the nuclear medicine clinic at the end
of the day.
Scintillation detectors
Some crystalline materials emit a large number of light photons upon
the absorption of ionizing radiation. This process is referred to as
scintillation, and these materials are referred to as scintillators. As
radiation interacts within the scintillator, a large number of excitations
and ionizations occur. On de-excitation, the number of light photons
emitted is directly proportional to the amount of energy deposited
within the scintillator. In some cases, a small impurity may be added
to the crystal to enhance the emission of light and minimize the
absorption of light within the crystal. Several essential properties of
scintillating materials can be characterized, including density,
effective Z number (number of atomic protons per atom), amount of
light emitted per unit energy, and response time. The density and
effective Z number are determining factors in the detection efficiency
because they affect the linear attenuation coefficient of the scintillation
material. The amount of emitted light affects both energy and, in the
gamma camera, spatial resolution. Resolution is determined by the
statistical variation of the collected light photons, which depends on
the number of emitted photons. Finally, the response time affects the
temporal resolution of the scintillator. The most common scintillation
crystalline material used in nuclear medicine is thallium-doped
sodium iodide (NaI) with lutetium oxyorthsilicate (LSO) or lutetium
yttrium oxyorthosilicate (LYSO) most commonly used in positron
emission tomography (PET).
Once the light is emitted in a scintillation detector, it must be
collected and converted to an electrical signal. The most commonly
used device for this purpose is the photomultiplier tube (PMT). Light
photons from the scintillator enter through the photomultiplier
entrance window and strike the photocathode, a certain fraction of
which (approximately 20%) will lead to the emission of photoelectrons
moving toward the first dynode. For each electron reaching the first
dynode, approximately a million electrons will eventually reach the
anode of the photomultiplier tube. Thus the photomultiplier tube
provides high gain and low noise amplification at a reasonable cost.
Other solid-state light-detection approaches are now being introduced
into nuclear medicine devices. In avalanche photodiodes (APDs), the
impinging light photons lead to the liberation of electrons that are
then drifted in the photodiode, yielding an electron avalanche. The
gain of the APD is not as high as with the PMT (several hundred
compared with about a million), but the detection efficiency is
substantially higher (approximately 80%). A second solid-state
approach is the silicon photomultiplier tube (SiPMT). This device
consists of hundreds of very small APD channels that operate like
small Geiger-Müller detectors—that is, each detection is a terminal
event. The signal from the SiPMT is the number of channels that
respond to a particular detection event in the scintillator. SiPMTs have
moderate detection efficiency (approximately 50%) and operate at low
voltages. One further advantage of APDs and SiPMTs compared with
PMTs is that they can operate within a magnetic field. Thus the
development of positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance
(PET/MR) scanners has involved the use of either APDs or SiPMTs.
Solid-state technology is used to detect the light from a scintillation
detector and also can be used to directly detect gamma rays. The
detection of radiation within a semiconductor detector leads to a large
number of electrons liberated, resulting in high energy resolution. The
energy
resolution
of
the
lithium-drifted
germanium
(GeLi)
semiconductor detector has approximately 1% energy resolution
compared with the 10% energy resolution associated with a sodium
iodide scintillation detector. However, thermal energy can lead to a
measurable current in some semiconductor detectors such as GeLi,
even in the absence of radiation, and thus these semiconductor
detectors must be operated at cryogenic temperatures. On the other
hand, semiconductor detectors such as cadmium telluride (CdTe) or
cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) can operate at room temperature. CdTe
and CZT do not have the excellent energy resolution of GeLi, but at
approximately 5%, it is still significantly better than that of sodium
iodide.
FIG. 2.4  Energy spectrum for technetium-99m (Tc-99m) in air for a
gamma scintillation camera with the collimator in place. Note the iodine
escape peak at approximately 112 keV. The 180-degree backscatter
peak at 90 keV merges with the characteristic x-ray peaks for lead
(Pb). The Compton edge is at 50 keV.
The pulse height spectrum corresponding to the detection of the
140-keV gamma rays from technetium-99m (Tc-99m) is illustrated in
Fig. 2.4. The photopeak corresponds to events where the entire energy
of the incident photon is absorbed within the detector. These are the
events of primary interest in most counting experiments, and thus the
good events are within an energy acceptance window about the
photopeak. Other events correspond to photons scattered within the
detector material and depositing energy, which can range from very
low energy from a very-small-angle scatter to a maximum 180-degree
scatter (in the spectrum referred to as the Compton edge). Events below
the Compton edge correspond to these scattered events. In some
cases, photons can undergo multiple scatters and possibly result in
events between the Compton edge and the photopeak. Photons
scattered within the patient and then detected may also result in
