Single-Photon Emission
Computed Tomography, Positron
Emission Tomography, and
Hybrid Imaging
Data Acquisition of Emission Tomographyn
Conventional or planar radionuclide imaging suffers a major
limitation in the loss of object contrast as a result of background
radioactivity. In the planar image, radioactivity underlying and
overlying the object of interest is superimposed on that coming from
the object. The fundamental goal of tomographic imaging systems is a
more accurate portrayal of the three-dimensional (3D) distribution of
radioactivity in the patient, with improved image contrast and
definition of image detail. This is analogous to the way computed
tomography (CT) provides better soft tissue contrast than planar
radiography. The Greek tomo means “to cut”; tomography may be
thought of as a means of “cutting” the body into discrete image
planes. Tomographic techniques have been developed for both single-
photon and positron imaging, referred to as single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography
(PET), respectively.
Restricted or limited-angle tomography keeps the plane of interest
in focus while blurring the out-of-plane data in much the same way as
conventional x-ray tomography. Various restricted-angle systems
have been investigated, including multi-pinhole collimator systems,
pseudo-random, coded-aperture collimator systems, and various
rotating slant-hole collimator systems. Although clinical use has been
limited, resurgent interest has been shown for specific imaging
applications, including those designed for cardiac and breast imaging.
Tomographic approaches that acquire data over 180 or 360 degrees
provide a more complete reconstruction of the object and therefore are
more widely used. Rotating gamma camera SPECT systems offer the
ability to perform true transaxial tomography. PET uses a method
called annihilation coincidence detection to acquire data over 360 degrees
without the use of absorptive collimation. The most important
characteristic of these approaches is that only data arising in the image
plane of interest are used in the reconstruction of the tomographic
image. This is an important characteristic leading to improved image
contrast compared with methods using restricted-angle tomography.
As will be discussed, the reconstruction of these data has historically
been done with filtered back-projection. However, iterative techniques
such as ordered subsets expectation maximization (OSEM) are
increasingly used. This chapter reviews the current approaches to the
acquisition and reconstruction of SPECT and PET, including the use of
hybrid imaging such as PET/CT, PET/MR and SPECT/CT, and the
quality control necessary to ensure high-quality clinical results.
All tomographic modalities used in diagnostic imaging, including
SPECT, PET, CT, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), acquire raw
data in the form of projection data at a variety of angles about the
patient. Although SPECT and PET use different approaches to
acquiring these data, the nature of the data is essentially the same.
Image reconstruction involves the processing of these data to generate
a series of cross-sectional images through the object of interest.
The geometries associated with the acquisition of SPECT and PET
are illustrated in Fig. 3.1. In the simple SPECT example using a
parallel-hole collimator, the data acquired at a particular location in
the gamma camera crystal originated from a line passing through that
point perpendicular to the surface of the sodium iodide (NaI) crystal
face and is referred to in the figure as the line of origin (see Fig. 3.1,
left). Thus the data at this point can be seen to represent the sum of
counts that originated along this line, or ray, referred to as a ray sum.
These ray-sum values across the patient are referred to as the
projection data for this cross-sectional slice at this particular viewing
angle. For PET, the ray sum represents the data collected along a
particular line of response (LOR) connecting a pair of detectors
involved in a coincidence detection event (see Fig. 3.1, right).
For a SPECT acquisition, the projection image acquired at each
angle consists of the stack of projections for all slices within the
camera field of view at that angle. Fig. 3.2, on the right, shows
projections from a SPECT brain scan at five different viewing angles.
For a particular slice (see Fig. 3.2, dashed white line), a row of the
projection data for each angle can be stacked such that the
displacement along the projection is on the x-axis and the viewing
angle is on the y-axis (see Fig. 3.2, right). This plot is referred to as the
sinogram, because the resulting plot of a point source resembles a sine-
wave plot turned on its side. A more complicated object such as a
brain scan can be perceived as many such sine waves overlaid on top
of each other for each point within the object. The sinogram,
represents the full set of projection data necessary to reconstruct a
particular single slice. A separate slice is made in the sinogram for
each cross-sectional slice through the object. The set of projection
views and the set of sinograms are alternative means of displaying the
projection data associated with a tomographic acquisition. Each
projection view displays the projection data across all slices with a
separate image for each angle, whereas the sinogram displays the
projection data across all angles with a separate sinogram for each
slice.
FIG. 3.1  Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and
positron emission tomography (PET) acquisition geometries. For
SPECT (left), the gamma camera rotates about the patient, acquiring a
projection image at each angle. Each projection image represents the
projections of many slices acquired at that angle. For PET (right), the
patient is located within a ring of detectors. A positron annihilation
event leads to two photons emitted in opposite directions. When two
events are detected within a small timing acceptance window (5-12 ns),
they are considered to be from the same event and are assumed to
have originated along the line of response that connects the two
detectors.
FIG. 3.2  Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
projection images and sinograms. Right, projection images of a SPECT
brain scan at five different viewing angles. For a particular slice
(indicated by the dashed white line), the projection data can be stacked
to form the sinogram (left).
From Henkin RE. Nuclear Medicine. St. Louis: Mosby; 2006.
The geometry of PET acquisition (see Fig. 3.1, right) involves the
data acquired along a particular LOR connecting two detectors that
may be involved in an annihilation coincidence detection event. These
data thus represent the ray sum along this LOR. The data associated
with a particular LOR are characterized in the sinogram by their
distance from the center of the gantry (on the x-axis) and their angle of
orientation (on the y-axis). In this manner, PET data acquisition
directly into sinograms may be more straightforward than into
projection views. In a PET detection event, the two detectors involved
in the coincidence event are identified, and the LOR is recorded. The
location in the sinogram corresponding to that particular LOR is
localized, and its data are incremented. After the collection of many
such events, the projection data are represented by a set of sinograms
for each PET slice. However, these data also can be displayed as
projection views similar to those acquired in SPECT studies. This
simple example illustrates the acquisition of PET data in 2D mode, in
which each cross-sectional slice basically is acquired separately. Most
current PET scanners acquire data only in 3D mode, in which LORs cut
across the parallel cross-section slices. The corresponding projection
data will include oblique views or sinograms through the object. With
time-of-flight PET (discussed later in this chapter), it is necessary to
record not only the LOR but also the time difference between the two
detections involved in the annihilation coincidence detection event,
which will also be incorporated into the reconstruction of these data.
Tomographic data can be acquired in a dynamic or gated approach.
For example, a PET study can be acquired as a time sequence of scans
that might be simple or multiphase (e.g., ten 5-second frames, four 30-
second frames, and five 60-second frames). In addition, the
tomographic study can be acquired in association with a physiological
gate such as the electrocardiogram (ECG) or a respiratory signal. For
example, myocardial perfusion SPECT is acquired in conjunction with
the ECG. In dynamic or gated tomographic acquisitions, a full set of
projection data acquired at each time or gate point is to be
reconstructed separately.
Tomographic Reconstruction
Images, like time signals, can be considered as either a spatial
variation of the signal or a sum of signals of varying frequencies. It is
intuitive to consider images as a spatial variation in the signal because
some part of the image will be bright and other parts will be dark. In
nuclear medicine, the bright and dark areas may correspond to
regions of high and low radiopharmaceutical uptake, respectively.
Conversely, it is not intuitive to consider an image to comprise signals
of varying frequency, although this is in fact the case. On the other
hand, we do naturally perceive audio signals in terms of frequencies.
A choral performance comprises sopranos, altos, tenors, and basses,
and the combination of these voices hopefully leads to a very
pleasurable experience. On the other hand, we cannot perceive a
presentation of the audio signal as a temporal variation of the signal
and intuitively identify it as music. The music is fully described by
either representation, and there may be cases in which either the
temporal (i.e., real) or the frequency representation is the best
approach for considering the audio data. The same is true for image
data, except the variations are in space rather than time.
FIG. 3.3  Simple back-projection. (A) The counts in each position
along the projection are back-projected across the reconstruction
matrix because the algorithm has no knowledge as to the origin of the
event. This process is referred to as simple back-projection. (B) Simple
back-projection leads to streak artifacts that render all but the simplest
objects discernable.
Image data may be best represented in either spatial (real) or
frequency space. The mathematician Joseph Fourier noted in 1807 that
any arbitrary signal can be generated by adding a large number of
sine and cosine signals of varying frequencies and amplitudes. The
plot of amplitude as a function of frequency is referred to as the
Fourier transform, and it defines the components of the image at each
frequency. The low frequencies provide the overall shape of the
object, whereas the high frequencies help define the sharp edges and
fine detail within the image. Audio signals can be manipulated by
emphasizing certain frequencies (low or high); the same is true for
images. Image noise is typically present in all frequencies; if the low
frequencies are emphasized, the image may be less noisy but blurry,
whereas emphasizing the high frequencies will accentuate both the
edges of the objects and the noise. Such image manipulation is
referred to as filtering because it allows certain spatial frequencies to
be realized while removing others.
Since the initial development of CT 40 years ago, filtered back-
projection has been the most common approach to reconstructing
medical tomographic data, including SPECT, PET, and CT, although
iterative techniques were introduced into the clinic for use with PET
more than a decade ago. However, filtered back-projection is still used
in SPECT and remains the most common method for CT. In back-
projection, it is assumed that all of the data detected at a particular
point along the projection originated from somewhere along the line
emanating from this point. For SPECT using parallel-hole collimation,
this would be the line of origin passing through the detection point
and perpendicular to the NaI crystal surface. For PET, events would
be assumed to have come from the LOR connecting the two detectors
involved in the annihilation coincidence detection event. In general,
back-projection makes no assumptions of where along the line the
event occurred, and thus the counts are spread evenly along the line.
In other words, the counts are back-projected along the line of origin or
LOR. All of the counts from every location along every projection are
back-projected across the reconstructed image (Fig. 3.3, A ). The result is
referred to as simple back-projection; it has substantial streak artifacts
that, in all but the simplest objects, render the reconstructed image
indiscernible (see Fig. 3.3, B ). These streaks are caused by uneven
sampling of frequency space during the back-projection process,
where low frequencies are sampled at a much higher rate than higher
frequencies. To compensate for this, a filter, called the ramp filter, is
applied during the reconstruction that increases linearly with
frequency (Fig. 3.4). Applying back-projection in conjunction with
such filtration is referred to as filtered back-projection. With a very large
number of accurate, noiseless projections, filtered back-projection will
yield an excellent, almost perfect reconstruction.
However, with true clinical data, the projections are noisy, and thus
the ramp filter will tend to accentuate the high-frequency noise in the
data. Therefore a windowing filter is applied, in addition to the ramp
filter, to smoothly bring the filter back to zero at frequencies above the
pertinent content in the study. Commonly used windowing functions
include the Hamming and Butterworth filters (see Fig. 3.4). With these
filters, a cutoff frequency is defined, which is the point at which they
return to zero, with no higher frequencies being incorporated into the
reconstructed image. Noting that low frequencies yield the overall
shape and high frequencies yield the sharp edges and fine detail, the
appearance of the resultant reconstructed image can be altered by
varying the cutoff frequency. Selecting a cutoff frequency that is too
low will yield a blurry reconstruction (Fig. 3.5, A , far left), and one
that is too high will yield a noisy reconstruction (see Fig. 3.5, C, second
from the right). However, an appropriate choice for cutoff frequency
will provide an image that is a fair compromise between noise and
detail (see Fig. 3.5, B,  second from left). With an appropriate choice of
cutoff frequency, filtered back-projection is a simple, fast, and robust
approach to image reconstruction.
Iterative reconstruction provides an alternative to filtered back-
projection that tends to be less noisy, tends to have fewer streak
artifacts, and often allows for the incorporation of certain physical
factors associated with the data acquisition into the reconstruction
process, leading to a more accurate result. In iterative reconstruction,
an initial guess as to the 3D object that could have led to the set of
acquired projections is estimated. In addition, a model of the imaging
process is assumed that may incorporate assumptions regarding
photon attenuation and Compton scatter. It may also include other
assumptions regarding the data-acquisition process, such as estimates
of the device’s spatial resolution that vary with position within the
field of view; for example, the variation of collimator spatial
resolution as a function of the distance between the object and the
collimator can be incorporated into the reconstruction process.
FIG. 3.4  Ramp, Hamming, and Butterworth filters. The ramp filter is a
“high-pass” filter designed to reduce background activity and the star
artifact. Hamming and Butterworth filters are “low-pass” filters designed
to reduce high-frequency noise.
Based on this model and the current estimate of the object, a new set
of projections is simulated that is then compared with the real,
acquired set. Variations between the two sets, parameterized by either
the ratio or difference between pixel values, are then back-projected
and added to the current estimate of the object to generate a new
estimate (Fig. 3.6). These steps are repeated, or iterated, until an
acceptable version of the object is reached. The goodness of the
current estimate is typically based on statistical criteria such as the
maximum likelihood. In other words, the process generates an
estimate of the object that has the highest statistical likelihood to have
led to the set of acquired projection data. A commonly used approach
for the reconstruction of SPECT and PET data is the maximum-
likelihood expectation maximization (MLEM) algorithm.
Iterative
reconstruction
often
leads
to
a
more
accurate
reconstruction of the data than that obtained through filtered back-
projection. However, a large number of iterations, perhaps as many as
50, may be required to generate an acceptable estimation, and each
iteration may take about the same time as a single filtered back-
projection; thus the iterative approach may take 50 times longer to
reconstruct. One approach to reducing the number of iterations is to
organize the projection data into a series of ordered subsets of evenly
spaced projections and update the current estimate of the object after
each subset rather than after the complete set of projections. If the data
are organized into 15 subsets, in general, the data can be reconstructed
about 15 times faster while generating a result of similar image
quality. A similar result can be produced with 15 ordered subsets and
3 iterations as would be obtained with 45 iterations using the
complete set. The most common approach that uses ordered subsets
in the clinic is referred to as OSEM. Fig. 3.5, D  (far right) shows an
OSEM reconstruction compared with a filtered back-projection of the
same object. The use of faster algorithms such as OSEM and the
development
of
faster
computers
have
allowed
iterative
reconstruction of SPECT and PET data in 5 minutes or less, which is
considered acceptable for clinical work. With the development of even
faster computers, iterative reconstruction may be routinely applied to
the larger data sets associated with CT in the near future.
FIG. 3.5  Effect of different filtration on reconstruction. (A) Single-
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) study reconstructed
with a cutoff frequency that is too smooth. The image is very blurry. (B)
SPECT study reconstructed with an appropriate cutoff frequency, with
a moderate noise level and sharpness. (C) SPECT study reconstructed
with a cutoff frequency that is too sharp. The level of detail is good, but
an excessive amount of image noise is present. (D) SPECT study
acquired with iterative reconstruction ordered subsets expectation
maximization (OSEM).
FIG. 3.6  Iterative reconstruction process. A set of simulated
projections is generated from an initial guess of the object. This is
compared with the real projection data, and the difference is back-
projected and added to the initial guess. This process is iterated until
the differences between the simulated and real projections are within
an acceptable level.
Attenuation Correction
A special problem of both SPECT and PET imaging is the attenuation
of emissions in tissue. Photons emitted from deeper within the object
are more likely to be absorbed in the overlying tissue than those
emitted from the periphery. Therefore the signals from these tissues
are attenuated. To obtain an image where the signal is not depth
dependent, an attenuation correction must be performed to compensate
for this effect. Good evidence indicates that studies that have not
traditionally been attenuation corrected, such as myocardial perfusion
imaging,
benefit
from
proper
attenuation
correction.
Two
fundamentally different approaches are used for attenuation
correction: analytic methods and those that incorporate transmission
data into the process. Both are designed to create an image attenuation
correction matrix, in which the value of each pixel represents the
correction factor that should be applied to the acquired data. Some
approaches are applied during reconstruction, whereas others are
applied after reconstruction to the resultant images.
For portions of the body consisting almost entirely of soft tissue, an
assumption of near-uniform attenuation can be made, and an analytic
or mathematical approach such as the Chang algorithm can be used.
The Chang algorithm is a postreconstruction approach. After the
object is reconstructed, an outline of the body part is defined on the
computer for each tomographic slice. From this outline, the depth, and
therefore the appropriate correction factor, for each pixel location
inside the outline can be computed. A correction matrix is generated,
and a multiplicative correction is applied on a pixel-by-pixel basis.
The linear attenuation coefficient for technetium-99m (Tc-99m) in soft
tissue is 0.15/cm. This applies only to “good” geometry—that is, a
point source with no scatter. Thus a value for Tc-99m of
approximately 0.12/cm is often used to compensate for scatter. At a
depth of 7 cm in a liver SPECT study, almost 60% of the
corresponding activity is attenuated. The observed count value would
have to be multiplied by a factor of 2.5 (0.4 × 2.5 = 1) to correct for
attenuation. A similar analytic method has been developed for PET
imaging, primarily of the brain.
The major limitation of the analytic approach occurs when multiple
types of tissue, each with a different attenuation coefficient, are in the
field of view. This can be particularly problematic for cardiac imaging,
in which the soft tissues of the heart are surrounded by the air-
containing lungs and the bony structures of the thorax. To correct for
nonuniform attenuation, a transmission scanning approach is
incorporated into the attenuation correction. In essence, a CT scan of
the thorax is obtained using an x-ray tube. Older SPECT and PET
systems also have used radionuclide sources for this purpose. The
technique is similar to the use of CT, except radioactive sources
incorporated into the scanner are used rather than an x-ray tube. The
data are much noisier and require segmentation into the different
tissue types before the attenuation map can be created. Manufacturers
are moving away from the radioactive source methodology.
A hybrid SPECT-CT or PET-CT scanner is used to acquire a CT over
the same axial range as the SPECT or PET scan. The CT scan is
acquired with a tube voltage of 80 to 120 kVp, leading to an effective
energy of about 40 to 60 keV. The range of the tube-current time
product (milliamperes) is variable, depending on whether the CT scan
is acquired for diagnostic purposes, for anatomical correlation, or for
attenuation correction. Thus scans could be acquired with as little as 4
mA and as high as 400 mA. A lookup table is used to convert the
Hounsfield units in the reconstructed CT scan to attenuation
coefficients for the desired photon energy. The resulting attenuation
map can then be applied as a postreconstruction correction or
incorporated in the reconstruction process.
Display of Emission Tomographic Data
A particular advantage of gamma camera rotational SPECT is that a
volume of image data is collected simultaneously. PET data may be
acquired in several steps, but the resultant reconstructed data are also
a volume. The pixel size for SPECT is the same in the three axes; for
PET, the axial sampling might be slightly different from that in the
transverse plane. However, in either case, once the transaxial
tomographic volume is reconstructed, it easily can be resorted into
other orthogonal planes. Thus the sagittal and coronal images can be
directly generated from the reconstructed volume represented by the
set of transaxial slices.
The data can be reformatted into planes oblique to the original
transverse planes. This is particularly useful in cardiac imaging, in
which the long axis of the heart does not coincide with any of the
three major axes of the reconstructed data. It is desirable to reorient
the data to obtain images that are perpendicular and parallel to the
long axis of the left ventricle, which can be readily accomplished from
the original volume data set. The computer operator defines the
geometry of the long axis of the heart, and the data are reformatted to
create cardiac long-axis and short-axis planes oblique to the transaxial
slices (Fig. 3.7). The optimum angulation is highly variable across
patients.
Another useful strategy is to view tomographic data as a sequence
of planar images from different viewing angles in closed-loop cine. In
the early days of SPECT imaging, this was accomplished by viewing
the closed-loop cine of the raw projection data. This is still done in
many cardiac imaging software packages for quality control.
However, these data tend to be noisy, making it difficult to view small
variations in intensity. Currently, a common approach is to reproject
the transaxial images to generate a series of planar images that have
the benefit of greatly reduced noise. The reprojection method often
used is the maximum-intensity projection scan (MIPS), created by
reprojecting the hottest point along each particular ray for any given
projection. These MIPS images emphasize areas of increased
accumulation of radioactivity while providing an overall impression
of the area of increased radioactivity in relation to the normal
structures in individual tomographic slices. In some cases the MIPS
images are distance weighted to make activity that is farther from the
viewer appear less intense, thereby enhancing the 3D effect.
FIG. 3.7  Cardiac single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) images reformat data into multiple planes. The top two rows
are short-axis views obtained perpendicular to the long axis of the left
ventricle. The middle two rows are horizontal long-axis images, and the
bottom two rows are vertical long-axis images. The patient has a large
fixed perfusion defect involving the inferior wall of the left ventricle. The
ability to reformat the data allows for more precise and accurate
localization of abnormalities.
Single Photon Emission Computed
Tomography
SPECT allows true 3D image acquisition, reconstruction, and display
of the radiopharmaceuticals routinely used in conventional nuclear
medicine. Over the past 30 years, SPECT has developed, particularly
in the field of nuclear cardiology, to the point at which SPECT has
become the standard imaging method. In SPECT, a series of projection
images is acquired about the patient. In most cases, these projection
images are acquired by rotating the imaging device about the object,
but in other cases they may be acquired by viewing the object with
multiple devices or through multiple pinhole apertures. These
projection data are then reconstructed as described in the previous
section, leading to the generation of a series of slices through the
object.
The most common device used for SPECT is the rotating gamma
camera, which consists of one or more gamma camera heads mounted
onto a special rotating gantry. Nearly all gamma cameras marketed
today incorporate SPECT capability. Early systems used a single
gamma camera head, whereas modern systems more commonly have
two detector heads. Dual-head systems that allow flexibility in
configuration between the heads are very popular. For body imaging,
the heads are typically arrayed parallel to each other; for cardiac
imaging, they are often placed at right angles (Fig. 3.8). Some cameras
are permanently configured in the 90-degree position for dedicated
cardiac imaging. Multiple heads are desirable because they allow
more data to be collected in a given period. Rotational SPECT is
photon poor compared with x-ray CT, and thus SPECT imaging
protocols commonly take 10 to 30 minutes for the acquisition of a data
set. Therefore it is desirable to obtain as many counts as possible while
completing the imaging within a reasonable time to limit the effects of
patient motion and to minimize pharmacokinetic changes during the
imaging time. Rotational SPECT has highlighted the need to improve
every aspect of gamma camera system performance. Flood field
nonuniformities are translated as major artifacts in tomographic
images because they distort the data obtained from each view or
projection. Desirable planar characteristics of a camera to be used for
SPECT are an intrinsic spatial resolution of 3.5 mm (as estimated by
the full width at half maximum [FWHM]), linearity distortion of 1 mm
or less, and corrected integral uniformity within 3%. All contemporary
rotational SPECT systems have online energy and uniformity
correction, as described in Chapter 2.
FIG. 3.8  Two configurations for a dual-detector single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) system.
Recently, dedicated SPECT systems have been developed for
cardiac imaging only. These cameras may use Anger logic for event
positioning; however, they are distinctly different in that they are not
large, single-crystal detectors as are found in the traditional gamma
camera, and many use solid-state detectors of cadmium zinc telluride
(CZT) rather than NaI scintillating material. These detectors often use
a pixelated design with detector elements of approximately 2 × 2 mm.
Because of their multicrystal design, the scintillation-based systems
often
use
either
position-sensitive
photomultiplier
tubes
or
photodiodes for light detection. The systems that use CZT have higher
intrinsic efficiency and enhanced energy resolution (6% at 140 keV
compared with 9%-11% compared with NaI). This allows for the
reduction of Compton scatter in the images and may also enhance the
ability to perform dual-isotope acquisitions (e.g., Tc-99m and iodine-
123). Finally, the detectors in these systems have physical design
characteristics that improve sensitivity. For instance, multiple
detectors
or
pinhole
apertures
may
be
viewing
the
heart
simultaneously. These improvements in sensitivity can be used to
shorten the acquisition time or lower the quantity of injected
radioactivity and thereby lower the patient’s radiation dose. Each
system has different design characteristics, acquisition procedures,
and quality control methods. Although these devices are promising,
their use remains quite limited; therefore the rest of this section
focuses on the rotating camera.
Box 3.1 summarizes factors that must be considered in performing
SPECT with a rotating gamma camera. In addition to the calibrations
described earlier and standard gamma camera quality control, careful
attention to each of these factors will result in the high-quality SPECT
images.
Although collimator selection is generally limited to those supplied
by the manufacturer, the specific choice depends on the clinical
imaging task at hand. For a given septal thickness and hole diameter,
collimators with longer channels provide better resolution but at a
cost of lower sensitivity. However, even though SPECT is relatively
photon poor, collimator selection should favor high resolution over
high sensitivity when possible because high-resolution collimators
provide improved image quality compared with high-sensitivity or
general-purpose collimators, even with fewer counts. The use of
multihead SPECT systems allows the operator to gain back some of
the counts lost when using high-resolution collimators by longer
acquisition at each step or projection angle.
Box 3.1 Image-Acquisition Issues for Single-Photon
Emission Computed Tomography
Collimator selection
Orbit
Matrix size
Angular increment: number of views
180- vs. 360-degree rotation
Time per view
Total examination time
In addition to the parallel-hole collimators routinely used for planar
and SPECT imaging, there are special focused collimator options
specifically designed for SPECT imaging of the brain and the heart.
These typically are a type of converging collimator that permits more
of the camera crystal to be used for radiation detection. These
collimators cause magnification of the object and an increase in
sensitivity proportional to the level of magnification. Thus given a
parallel-hole collimator and a focused collimator with the same spatial
resolution, the focused collimator will have an improvement in
sensitivity compared with the parallel-hole collimator. The use of
focused collimators results in a geometrical distortion that must be
accounted for in the reconstruction.
The orbit selected (circular or noncircular) depends on the organ of
interest (Fig. 3.9). Almost all systems today offer both circular and
noncircular orbits. The ideal orbit keeps the detector as close to the
object of interest as possible during the acquisition because the best
resolution is at the face of the collimator for parallel-hole collimators.
For imaging the trunk of the body, most cameras use a noncircular
orbit for this reason. Both circular and noncircular orbits may be used
for imaging the brain depending on whether the operator is able to
position the detectors to clear the shoulders. When using special
focused collimators, the orbit is often determined automatically by the
system that keeps the organ of interest in the focused area.
FIG. 3.9  Circular orbit (top) and noncircular (elliptical in this case)
orbit (bottom).
The choice of angular sampling and arc of acquisition depends on
the clinical application and the collimator used. For body imaging
applications, a full 360-degree acquisition arc is commonly used. Most
SPECT data are acquired using a 128 × 128 image matrix with high-
resolution collimators and Tc-99m radiopharmaceuticals. However, a
64 × 64 matrix may be used when the camera resolution is not as good
or if the count density will be low because very little activity occurs in
the patient at the time of imaging. Many SPECT/CT hybrid cameras in
which a CT scan will be used for attenuation correction require that
the emission data be acquired in a 128 × 128 matrix. If the 128 × 128
matrix is used, the angular sampling should be set to 3-degree
increments. If the lower-resolution 64 × 64 matrix is used, the step size
may be increased to 4- or 6-degree increments. These combinations of
matrix size and angular sampling, along with the collimator selection,
“balance” the resolution of the respective parameters. However, these
parameters may be varied in some circumstances. For example,
acquiring fewer steps may be acceptable for pediatric patients given
their smaller size.
For cardiac imaging, a 180-degree acquisition arc is well accepted.
Because the heart is located close to the anterior chest wall on the left
side, the best data are obtained by imaging in a 180-degree arc that
spans from the right anterior oblique to the left posterior oblique
positions (Fig. 3.10). This acquisition paradigm is widely accepted in
the clinical practice even when CT attenuation correction is applied to
the data.
FIG. 3.10  The 180-degree arc frequently used for cardiac imaging
from right anterior oblique (RAO; 45 degrees) to left posterior oblique
(LPO; 135 degrees).
Another consideration is whether to use continuous or “step-and-
shoot” data acquisition. Continuous acquisition has the advantage of
not wasting time while the camera heads are moving from one
angular position to the next. However, the data are blurred by the
motion artifact of the moving camera head. The resulting trade-off
between sensitivity and resolution favor step-and-shoot acquisition
for most clinical applications. Exceptions are applications with rapidly
changing tracer distribution and when the determination of overall
tracer concentration is more important than spatial resolution.
In general, SPECT studies are count poor, and thus it is beneficial to
acquire the studies for as long as possible. Within accepted limits for
dosimetry and radiation exposure, a larger administered dosage may
allow for more available counts. Although clinically accepted limits
for administered radioactivity should never be exceeded, the radiation
risk versus benefit must take into account the likelihood of obtaining a
diagnostic-quality image. The goal of obtaining higher counting
statistics is meaningless if the patient moves, causing data between the
different angular sampling views to be misregistered. Most clinical
protocols limit the total imaging time to 20 to 40 minutes.
Correspondingly, the time per projection is usually 20 to 40 seconds,
but as much as 60 seconds may be needed for particularly count-poor
studies with gallium-67 and indium-111.
Even when restricting the total SPECT acquisition time to less than
30 minutes, patient motion may still be an issue. Some camera
manufacturers provide motion-correction programs, but these work in
only one dimension (vertical motion), not three dimensions. Patient
compliance is improved by taking time during setup to position the
patient comfortably. For scans of the head, the patient’s arms can be in
a natural position at the sides. For rotational SPECT studies of the
heart, thorax, abdomen, or pelvis, the arms are typically raised out of
the field of view so that they do not interfere with the path of photons
toward the detector, which may increase the patient’s discomfort. In
all applications, it is important to keep the injection site out of the field
of view to prevent artifacts resulting from residual or infiltrated
activity (Fig. 3.11). Compliance also can be improved by positioning
the patient for maximum comfort by placing support under the knees
to reduce strain on the lower back. If the patient’s arms are over the
head, additional support for the arms may be needed to alleviate
shoulder pain.
FIG. 3.11  Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
artifact caused by injection-site activity in the field of view. Degraded
SPECT image of the liver and spleen caused by including activity at the
injection site in the imaging field of view. The starburst artifact is a
result of back-projection of the hot-spot activity across the image. In
this case the degree of activity in the injection site could not be
accommodated in the reconstruction algorithm.
Before a rotating SPECT camera is used, it must be properly
calibrated. The calibrations necessary for proper operation are
uniformity, center of rotation, and pixel size. For cameras that have
more than one detector, the heads must be matched so that when each
head is at the same projection angle—for example, directly above the
patient—it will record events that occur in the same location within
the object, at the same (x, y)-location in the acquired projection image.
This is usually accomplished by imaging a set of sources at known
locations and matching the pixel size and center of rotation for the
two detectors. The head matching and pixel size adjustments may be
performed by the field service engineer, with routine adjustments by
the technologist. The technologist will usually perform the uniformity
and center-of-rotation calibrations. Each manufacturer will specify
how and with what frequency these calibrations should be performed.
The most common frequency is to perform these calibrations on a
monthly basis. However, some manufacturers may recommend
longer frequencies of up to once per quarter.
All gamma cameras, regardless of how well tuned, will have
residual nonuniformities. Minor variations in uniformity, not
discernible in planar imaging, will result in significant ring or bulls-eye
artifacts in a SPECT study (Fig. 3.12, arrows). The usual 5- to 10-
million-count uniformity image used for routine quality control is
inadequate for uniformity calibration in SPECT imaging. For cameras
with a large field of view and a 128 × 128 matrix, 100 to 200 million
counts (roughly 10,000 counts per pixel) are required to achieve the
desired pixel count that results in a relative standard deviation of 1%,
which is necessary for artifact-free SPECT. Acquiring this number of
counts requires a significant amount of time. The temptation to use
very large amounts of radioactivity should be avoided because high
count rates can also result in degraded performance of the gamma
camera electronics and recording of spurious coincident events.
Conservatively, the correction floods should be obtained at 20,000 to
30,000 counts per second. The uniformity calibration can be acquired
either intrinsically using a point source or extrinsically with a flood
source. The radioactivity in the flood source should have a uniformity
of 1%. Although water-filled flood sources can be used for this
calibration, they are difficult to mix and are subject to bulging. For this
reason, sealed cobalt-57 sources are routinely used for acquiring the
extrinsic uniformity calibration.
FIG. 3.12  Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
ring artifacts. Top, SPECT phantom image with no ring artifact. Bottom,
SPECT phantom image with significant ring artifacts (indicated by
arrows) caused by inadequate uniformity calibration.
The center of rotation calibration matches the axis of rotation to the
center of the image matrix. When viewing the rotational display of the
raw SPECT data, it is the point about which the raw data rotates. Most
importantly, it is the alignment point for the reconstruction. A
common practice is to acquire the center of rotation correction on the
same schedule as the uniformity correction. Many multiple-detector
systems also use these data to match the heads. Each manufacturer
has a very specific protocol for the center of rotation and multihead
registration that typically involves the acquisition of a series of images
of a set of point or line sources of radioactivity.
FIG. 3.13  Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
quality control phantom. A series of slices from a phantom acquisition.
As previously discussed, rotational SPECT requires maximum
performance of the gamma camera. Performance that may be
considered acceptable for planar imaging can render a SPECT study
unreadable. In addition to the calibrations discussed earlier, all
routine daily, weekly, and annual quality control procedures for
gamma cameras should be performed. Particular attention should be
paid to variations in uniformity because small variations in the field
uniformity may result in significant artifacts.
A cylindrical tomographic phantom should be imaged periodically.
An example of a phantom is shown in Fig. 3.13. Radioactivity can be
added to this water-filled phantom to provide a uniform source that
can be used to test for the presence of ring artifacts caused by
inadequate uniformity calibration. In addition, other structures within
the phantom can test SPECT system performance with respect to
contrast and spatial resolution. In the example shown, solid Plexiglas
rods of varying size and spacing and solid spheres of varying size are
also imaged. These structures provide cold structures within the
phantom—that is, areas of no activity. The phantom also may provide
hot structures. It is customary to routinely acquire a SPECT study of
such a phantom (e.g., quarterly) and compare the results to a reference
study to determine whether a deterioration in SPECT performance has
occurred.
An essential part of any imaging quality control program is the
review of each patient’s acquired data, and this is particularly true
with SPECT. Excessive patient motion degrades the quality of SPECT
scans because misregistration of the data in the different angular
projections can lead to significant artifacts. Patient motion can be
assessed in several ways. When the unprocessed projection images are
viewed in a closed-loop cine, excessive patient motion is readily
detected as a flicker or discontinuity in the display. Some laboratories
use radioactive marker sources placed on the patient to further assess
motion. Another approach is to view a sinogram of a slice in the
study. The borders of the sinogram should be smooth, and interslice
changes in intensity should be small. Any discontinuity may indicate
patient motion (Fig. 3.14). Only up-and-down motion can be readily
corrected. Discontinuities in the sinogram also may indicate an
instrument malfunction. In addition to patient motion, the sinogram is
useful for evaluation of head misregistration. A lateral shift at the
point in the sinogram where the data from the first head ends and the
second head begins can indicate a problem with the head registration.
A tomographic acquisition of a point source can help determine
whether these shifts are a result of head misregistration. Finally, the
patient’s reconstructed data should be carefully scrutinized for the
presence of any irregularities or artifacts that may compromise the
diagnostic quality of the study.
Positron Emission Tomography
PET, and particularly PET/CT, is a rapidly growing area of nuclear
medicine. PET is made possible by the unique fate of positrons. When
positrons undergo annihilation by combining with negatively charged
electrons, two 511-keV photons are emitted in opposite directions, 180
degrees apart. In contrast to SPECT imaging, which detects single
events, in PET imaging, two detector elements on opposite sides of the
object are used to detect paired annihilation photons. If the photons
are detected at the same time (or “in coincidence”), the event is
assumed to have occurred along the line connecting the two detectors
involved (that is the line of response or LOR) (Fig. 3.15). Thus the
direction of the photons can be determined without the use of
absorptive collimation. This process is referred to as annihilation
coincidence detection and is the hallmark of PET imaging.
FIG. 3.14  Patient quality control. (A) Sinogram from a myocardial
perfusion study. The sinogram corresponds to the level of the cursor in
the image on the left. Note the regular progression in the data across
the projection profiles, indicating stability and lack of unwanted
movement of the heart from one projection view to the next. (B)
Sinogram illustrating multiple gaps in the sequential profile data.
Compare these discontinuities with the regular progression of data in A.
The discontinuities indicate unwanted motion of the object from one
sampling position to the next.
FIG. 3.15  Positron emission tomography (PET) ring detector. After
emission, positrons travel a short distance in tissue before the
annihilation event. The 511-keV protons are given off 180 degrees
apart.
Annihilation coincidence detection leads to at least a 100-fold
increase in the sensitivity of PET relative to conventional nuclear
medicine imaging and explains the higher image quality compared
with SPECT. The counts occurring between a single pair of detectors
can be considered a ray, and projections can thereby be generated and
reconstructed, just as in SPECT. Although both filtered back-
projection and iterative approaches such as OSEM can be used to
reconstruct the data, the latter is more common for PET because of the
greatly improved image quality.
Instrumentation for PET has undergone several generations of
development. Early systems had a single ring with multiple detectors
and generated a single tomographic section at a time. Now, PET
typically consists of many rings of multiple detectors that cover a 15-
to 20-cm axial field of view. Each detector is typically paired with
multiple other detectors on the opposite side of the detector ring.
These detectors in coincidence are selected to encompass the field of
view of the object or organ being imaged (Fig. 3.16). Multiple-ring
systems allow a volume to be imaged simultaneously. Early systems
typically had septa of absorptive material such as lead or tungsten
inserted between the tomographic planes to reduce intraplane scatter
and shield the detectors from crosstalk caused by activity outside of
the plane of interest. These systems with interplane septa are referred
to as 2D systems because they limit the allowable coincidences to 2D
transverse planes. Over time, the number of rings increased, and the
ability to remove the septa to acquire data across planes (i.e., 3D
mode) became common. The 3D design greatly increases the system
sensitivity of the PET scanner and increases the number of Compton
scattered and random events recorded. Most contemporary systems
do not have septa between the planes and are referred to as 3D only
systems. This is made possible by improvements in scatter-correction
algorithms and a reduction in the number of random coincidence
events detected because of newer, faster detector materials.
FIG. 3.16  Pairing of detectors. In the positron emission tomography
(PET) tomograph, each detector is paired with multiple detectors on the
opposite side of the ring to create an arc encompassing the object. This
multiple-pairing strategy increases the sensitivity of the device.
When choosing the appropriate detector material for PET, the
detection efficiency (related to the effective atomic number, Z, and
mass density), resolution (spatial and energy, related to the number of
scintillation light photons emitted per kiloelectron volt), and response
time or decay time of the scintillator must be considered. The density
and effective atomic number (Z) for NaI, the detector material
commonly used in gamma cameras, are not optimal for the detection
of the 511-keV photons in PET imaging. Bismuth germinate oxide
(BGO) is approximately twice as dense as NaI and has an effective Z
of 74, compared with the effective Z of 50 for NaI, leading to its use in
PET for the past 30 years. However, its drawbacks include
significantly lower light output per kiloelectron volt (i.e., lower energy
resolution) and longer light decay time. This longer light decay time
necessitated the use of coincidence timing windows of 10 to 12
nanoseconds (ns). New detector materials, such as lutetium
oxyorthosilicate (LSO), lutetium-yttrium oxyorthosilicate (LYSO), and
gadolinium oxyorthosilicate (GSO) combine high density with better
timing resolution and superior light yield. Timing windows have been
reduced to about 5 to 6 ns, which in turn reduces the number of
random events by approximately 50%. It also provides the
opportunity for time-of-flight PET. The better light output allows for
better energy discrimination and thus a reduction in the number of
scatter events acquired. For these reasons, state-of-the-art PET
scanners are incorporating either LSO or LYSO as the detection
material.
The spatial resolution of modern PET tomographs is excellent,
primarily determined by the size of the detector modules. Resolution
under clinical scanning conditions is superior in PET compared with
SPECT. Resolution for clinical studies is in the 5- to 8-mm FWHM
range with high-end contemporary PET scanners. Specialized devices
designed for small animal imaging have a spatial resolution of about
1.5-mm.
The ultimate spatial resolution of PET is limited by two physical
phenomena related to positrons and their annihilation. First, positrons
are given off at different kinetic energies. Energetic positrons such as
those emitted by oxygen-15, gallium-68, and rubidium-82 may travel
several millimeters in tissue before undergoing annihilation (see Fig.
3.15). Thus the location of the annihilation event is some distance from
the actual location of the radionuclide. This travel in tissue degrades
the ability to truly localize the biodistribution of the radioactive agent
in the patient and results in images with poorer resolution,
particularly for radionuclides with higher positron kinetic energies,
such as Ga-68 and Rb-82, compared with F-18. The second
phenomenon limiting resolution is the noncollinearity of the
annihilation photons. If the positron–electron pair is still moving at
the time of annihilation, the result is a small deviation from true
colinearity along a single ray (see Fig. 3.15), leading to a 1- to 2-mm
spatial uncertainty in event localization. This leads to a limit of about
3-3.5 mm resolution in clinical whole-body PET scanners, irrespective
of detector size.
Annihilation Coincidence Detection
Special circuitry in the PET tomograph allows the detection of two
annihilation photons given off by a single positron annihilation event.
The two events are considered to be from the same event if they are
counted within a defined coincidence timing window. In current
scanners, the coincidence window is on the order of 6 ns (although it
may be as high as 12 ns in older, BGO-based scanners). Thus, when
events are registered in paired detectors within 6 ns of each other,
they are accepted as true coincidence events and recorded as occurring
along the LOR that connects the two detectors. If a single recorded
event is not matched by a paired event within the coincidence time
window, the data are discarded. This approach effectively provides
electronic collimation without the need for absorptive collimation.
Therefore PET tomographs offer much higher sensitivity than gamma
cameras. One complication in the coincidence approach occurs at
higher count rates when two unrelated or random events are recorded
within the coincidence timing window, leading to what is referred to
as a random coincidence. Such random coincidences do not provide
useful information with regard to localizing the radiopharmaceutical,
thus, if no correction is applied, leading to a higher level of
background signal that reduces the overall object contrast.
Data can be recorded in several ways, depending on whether the
data are acquired in 2D or 3D format. PET data can be stored as
sinograms (2D) or projections (3D). In either case, the counts in each
pixel represent the coincidence events recorded along a particular
LOR between a pair of detectors in coincidence. We know the
coincidence event happened somewhere on the LOR but not
specifically where along the LOR the event occurred. The sinogram or
projection data are then reconstructed, most commonly using iterative
reconstruction methods, although filtered back-projection may
sometimes be used.
Time-of-flight PET uses the time difference in the arrival of the
annihilation photons in the coincidence timing windows to estimate
where on the LOR the event occurred. The estimated location of the
event, Δd, is calculated from the time difference between the two
events, Δt, using the formula: Δd = (Δt × c)/2, where c is the speed of
light. With the current detectors, such as LSO or LYSO, this
methodology can be used to locate the annihilation event to within
about 7 cm along the LOR, which can lead to a significant
improvement in PET image quality, particularly in large patients.
However, it has relatively little benefit when used for brain and
pediatric imaging because of the smaller diameter of the object being
imaged. Newer digitally based PET systems have been able to
improve the temporal resolution leading to localization of the
annihilation event to about 4 cm yielding a significant improvement in
PET image quality.
PET Quality Control
A PET scanner has a very large number of detectors. A state-of-the-art
scanner with 4-mm crystals and an 80-cm ring diameter can have as
many as 32,000 crystals. As with any imaging system, variations occur
in the response of the crystals to a uniform source of radiation. To
correct for these variations, a high-count uniformity calibration is
acquired, and a correction is applied. This correction is analogous to
the uniformity correction applied to SPECT cameras. However, it
differs in that the detectors are stationary, and therefore small
variations in a given detector are not propagated over the complete
360 degrees of data. Thus whereas uniformity variations in SPECT
will result in ring artifacts, this is not the case in PET. As a result, the
uniformity correction for PET is done much less frequently, perhaps
quarterly.
The PET scanner records detected annihilation coincidence events
as counts or, more correctly, counts per second per pixel. It is
preferred to have these data in units of microcurie or becquerels per
milliliter. Therefore a calibration scan is performed to determine a
conversion factor to convert counts to activity. This is accomplished
by imaging a uniform phantom with a known concentration of
activity (microcuries or becquerels per millimeter). The conversion
factor is determined by calculating the ratio of activity concentration
in the phantom to the counts per second per pixel in the image. This
calibration factor is stored and later applied during image
reconstruction so that the resultant image is reported in units of
activity concentration. This conversion factor is crucial when activity
quantitation is applied, such as in determining the standardized
uptake value (SUV). The SUV is the ratio of the activity concentration
in a pixel within the patient’s PET study normalized by the
administered activity and patient size (usually patient mass). If the
radiopharmaceutical distributes uniformly within the patient, the SUV
value will be 1. Inaccuracies in the count-to-activity calibration will
result in inaccurate SUV values.
Each day, the detectors in a PET scanner are exposed to a uniform
source of radioactivity to evaluate that each detector is working
properly. Because of the large number of detectors, a small number of
them may not be working. The data are presented to the user in a
manner that allows an evaluation of which detectors are not working
as expected. Each manufacturer has a different method, but the end
result is a report that indicates whether the system is working
properly. Systems that are identified as not working properly will
need corrective action.
PET scans that are done for evaluation of different cancers are
reconstructed, and the pixel values in some cases may be converted to
SUVs. It is common for physicians to report changes in these values
from one scan to the next as indicative of progression or regression of
disease. It is important that the SUVs generated by the scanner are
consistent from scan to scan. Drift in the electronics of the scanner can
result in discordance between the calibration factor and patient data.
One method of verifying the SUV is to image a uniform distribution of
known radioactivity concentration. The phantom is imaged using
clinical scan parameters. The amount of activity in the phantom and
the mass of the phantom are entered into the acquisition data as if it
were a patient. When these data are reconstructed, the average SUV in
each reconstructed slice is determined. The resultant average SUV
should be 1.0 ± 10%. Values outside this range would indicate that the
scanner should be recalibrated. This test uses the methodology for
calibrating the scanner as a check of the calibration. It has the
advantage that, if necessary, the phantom is ready to be used for
recalibration of the scanner.
Another method for evaluating the performance of PET scanners is
to image a cylindrical, tomographic quality control phantom. These
phantoms are similar to those used in SPECT, but they typically differ
in that they often contain hot features in which the activity
concentration is greater than that in the background for evaluating
contrast (Fig. 3.17). They are usually imaged on a quarterly basis but
could be imaged more frequently and combined with the quantitative
accuracy value check. These phantoms typically allow for the
evaluation of uniformity, resolution, contrast, and quantitative
accuracy using one data acquisition. The hot features in the phantom
are specified to have a certain target-to-background ratio (e.g., 2.5:1 or
4:1); the SUV of each is recorded. The targets may be spheres or
cylinders of decreasing size. The resolution section typically consists
of cold rods of decreasing size in a warm background, similar to those
used in SPECT. The phantom is imaged using the clinical protocol.
The SUV values in the hot features are compared with the expected
value, and the sizes of the smallest rods and targets are recorded. The
background is evaluated for an average SUV of 1.0 ± 10%. Because of
the complexity in filling this phantom, it is typically used less
frequently than the uniform phantom for checking the quantitative
accuracy of the scanner.
Hybrid Imaging
Nuclear medicine images are excellent for looking at physiology, but
they are organ specific and generally low resolution. Thus it is
sometimes difficult to accurately localize features seen on the emission
tomography scans. The introduction of hybrid PET-CT and SPECT-
CT, allowing direct correlation of the functional information available
from PET or SPECT with the anatomical information from CT, has
greatly enhanced the clinical utility of these modalities. The addition
of CT to both PET and SPECT has been very useful in anatomically
defining both pathological and normal anatomy in the emission
images. For PET, areas of increased uptake can be more easily
correlated with a metastatic lymph node or a region of brown fat. The
same is true for a variety of SPECT procedures, such as parathyroid
imaging and bone SPECT for back pain.
The PET-CT places the CT scanner in front of the PET scanner. In
the case of SPECT, the CT scanner is behind or parallel with the
SPECT scanner. On either system, the CT scan may be acquired either
before or after the emission study, although the more common order
is to acquire the CT first and then the emission study. The CT scan can
then provide both the transmission scan for attenuation correction and
anatomical correlation.
FIG. 3.17  Positron emission tomography (PET) quality control
phantom. A series of slices from a phantom acquisition.
The CT scanner incorporated into these devices may be a state-of-
the-art CT scanner, or in some cases, particularly with SPECT-CT, it
may be a CT scanner of less capability but still adequate for the
imaging task at hand. The quality control of the CT scanner is the
same as that necessary for a clinical CT scanner and is therefore
beyond the scope of this chapter. However, a test object should be
imaged periodically that can be seen with both modalities to ensure
alignment of the two devices.
When the CT is used for attenuation correction of the emission scan,
artifacts can be introduced when misregistration exists between the
emission and transmission data sets. The CT scan is acquired much
more quickly than the emission studies. This can result in different
breathing patterns between the two scans that can make registration
of the data in the area of the diaphragm difficult. Therefore it is
important to review both the attenuation-corrected images and the
non–attenuation-corrected images in conjunction with the CT scan to
evaluate misregistration. In cardiac imaging, misregistration of the
heart can result in false-positive scans. This is true for both PET and
SPECT.
In recent years, hybrid PET-MR scanners have been introduced by
several vendors. In one case, the PET scanner is actually fitted within
the MR device, and the two scans can be acquired simultaneously. In
other cases, the PET and MR scanners are adjacent to each other and
use a common bed that can service the two devices. Combined PET-
MR acquisitions have the potential for interesting research
applications; however, their clinical role is yet to be determined.
Suggested Reading
Chandra R, Rahmim A.  Nuclear Medicine Physics: The Basics . 8th ed. Philadelphia: Williams &
Wilkins; 2018.
Cherry S.R, Sorenson J.A, Phelps M.E.  Physics in Nuclear Medicine . 3rd ed. WB
Saunders: Philadelphia; 2012.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Planning a Clinical PET Centre . Vienna,
Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2010.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Quality Assurance for PET and PET/CT Systems
. Vienna, Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2009.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Quality Assurance of SPECT Systems . Vienna,
Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2009.
International Atomic Energy Association.  Quality Control Atlas for Scintillation Camera Systems
. Vienna, Austria: International Atomic Energy Agency; 2003.
National Electrical Manufacturers Association.  Performance Measurements of Positron Emission
Tomographs . Rosslyn, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers Association; 2018.
Powsner R.A, Palmer M.R, Powsner E.R.  Essentials of Nuclear Medicine Physics . 3rd
ed. Hoboken NJ: Wiley Blackwell; 2013.
