Carrier Molecule
Stable binding to its carrier molecule (if used)
No toxicity
Rapid, specific localization
Prompt background clearance
Therapy
Rapid, specific localization
Background clearance with short residence time in radiation-
sensitive tissues (e.g., bone marrow, lungs)
Particulate emissions that do not travel beyond the tumor or
tissue being treated
“Crossfire” killing of immediately adjacent abnormal cells
useful
Emitting additional γ-rays suitable for imaging useful for
distribution assessment
Radiopharmaceuticals are sought that will accumulate rapidly in
the targeted system or organ while quickly clearing from the
background tissues, resulting in a high target-to-background ratio.
Localizing mechanisms for common radiopharmaceuticals are listed
in Table 4.7. It is important to be familiar with normal distribution
patterns in order to better identify abnormalities that can occur due to
disease or poor preparation. Problems with radiopharmaceutical
quality often relate to the challenges of radiolabeling.
Radiopharmaceutical Preparation
Technetium Radiolabeling
The chemistry of Tc-99m is complex. In most labeling procedures,
technetium must be reduced from its +7 valence state. The reduction is
usually accomplished with stannous ion. One exception is the labeling
of Tc-99m sulfur colloid, which requires heating.
Commercial kits for radiolabeling these agents contain a reaction vial
with the appropriate amount of stannous ion (tin), the nonradioactive
pharmaceutical to be labeled, and other buffering and stabilizing
agents. The vials are flushed with nitrogen to prevent atmospheric
oxygen interrupting the reaction. The sequence of steps in a sample-
labeling process is illustrated in Fig. 4.8. Sodium pertechnetate is
drawn into a syringe and assayed in the dose calibrator. After the Tc-
99m activity is confirmed, the sample is added to the reaction vial. The
amount of Tc-99m activity added is determined by the number of
patient doses desired in the case of a multidose vial, an estimate of the
decrease in radioactivity caused by decay between the time of
preparation and the estimated time of dosage administration, and the
in vitro stability of the product. Each patient dose is kept in a special
lead-shielded container and individually assayed before being
dispensed.
Table 4.7
Radiopharmaceutical Localization Mechanisms
Mechanism
Applications or Examples
Compartmental
localization
Blood pool imaging, direct cystography
Passive diffusion
(concentration
dependent)
Blood–brain barrier breakdown, glomerular filtration,
cisternography
Capillary blockade
(physical entrapment)
Perfusion imaging of lungs
Physical leakage from a
luminal compartment
Gastrointestinal bleeding, detection of urinary tract or biliary
system leakage
Metabolism (facilitated
transport)
Glucose, fatty acids
Active transport (active
cellular uptake)
Hepatobiliary imaging, thyroid, and adrenal imaging; renal tubular
function; amino acid imaging (e.g., prostate)
Chemical bonding and
adsorption
Skeletal imaging
Amyloid plaque imaging
Cell sequestration
Splenic imaging (heat-damaged red blood cells)
Chemotaxis
White blood cell localization
Receptor binding and
storage
Adrenal medullary imaging, somatostatin receptor imaging;
dopamine transporter (DAT)
Phagocytosis
Reticuloendothelial system imaging
Antigen–antibody
Tumor imaging
Multiple mechanisms
Perfusion and active
transport
Myocardial imaging
Active transport and
metabolism
Thyroid uptake and imaging
Active transport and
secretion
Hepatobiliary imaging, salivary gland imaging
Excessive oxygen can react directly with the stannous ion, leaving
too little reducing power in the kit, which can result in unwanted free
Tc-99m pertechnetate in the preparation. Another problem that can
result in free pertechnetate after kit preparation is radiolysis. This
phenomenon, molecular decomposition due to the radiation itself, is
less commonly seen but can occur when high amounts of Tc-99m
radioactivity are used. Free pertechnetate is evidenced by uptake in
the thyroid and stomach, as well by excretion in the urine.
Commonly Used Single-Photon
Radiopharmaceuticals
The major Tc-99m–labeled radiopharmaceuticals are summarized in
Table 4.8and discussed in more detail in the chapters on individual
organ
systems.
Important
standard
(i.e.,
single-photon)
radiopharmaceuticals are listed in Table 4.9, and some are covered in
the following discussion. Tables 4.10 and 4.11list PET and therapy
radiopharmaceuticals, respectively.
Radioiodine I-131 and I-123
I-131 as sodium iodide was the first radiopharmaceutical of
importance in clinical nuclear medicine. It was used for physiological
studies of the thyroid gland for several years in the late 1940s.
Subsequently, it was used to radiolabel radiopharmaceuticals for
scintigraphy, including human serum albumin, macroaggregated
albumin (MAA), Hippuran, and meta-iodo-benzyl-guanidine (MIBG).
These radiopharmaceuticals are no longer diagnostically used.
The disadvantages of I-131 include a relatively high principal
photon energy (364 keV), long half-life (8 days), and beta particle
emissions, which result in poor dosimetry for an imaging agent.
Although I-131 is an important radiopharmaceutical for the treatment
of hyperthyroidism and differentiated thyroid cancer, I-123 is
substituted whenever possible for diagnostic purposes. This includes
I-123 MIBG and the newer agent to evaluate for Parkinsonian
syndrome, I-123 ioflupane (DaTscan).
Compared with I-131, I-123 has a shorter half-life (13.2 hours), and
its principal photon energy (159 keV) is better suited to gamma
camera imaging with a photon flux roughly four times higher. It
decays by electron capture without the β– emissions of I-131.
Dosimetry has been further improved through new production
techniques with different cyclotron targets that allow I-123 production
free from contamination by other longer-lived iodine isotopes that
previously limited the amount of radiopharmaceutical given to
patients.
Even in situations where I-131 could be expected to have an
advantage due to its longer half-life, allowing multiday imaging to
improve target-to-background ratios, I-131 has sometimes been
replaced by I-123. Examples of this include whole-body thyroid cancer
scans and MIBG imaging.
Quality control of radioiodinated pharmaceuticals is necessary to
reduce radiation exposure to the thyroid gland. In nonthyroid
imaging applications, it is common practice to block the thyroid gland
with oral iodine (potassium iodide solution [SSKI], Lugol’s solution
[10% potassium iodide/5% iodine], or potassium iodide tablets) to
prevent
thyroid
accumulation
of
any
iodine
present
as
a
radiochemical impurity or metabolite. Protocols vary, but thyroid-
blocking medications are started 1 to 12 hours before radiotracer
administration in dosages equivalent to at least 100 mg of iodide.
Indium-111
In-111 has proved useful for clinical nuclear medicine. Its principal
photon energies of 172 and 245 keV are favorable, and their
abundance is high (>90%). The 2.8-day half-life permits multiple-day
sequential imaging. Examples of radiopharmaceuticals include In-111
oxine leukocytes for the detection of inflammation and infection and
the somatostatin receptor–binding peptide In-111 pentetreotide
(OctreoScan) to detect neuroendocrine tumors.
Gallium-67
In the past, Ga-67 has been used in multiple ways: imaging bone and
soft tissue infection as well as tumors. Since F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) has replaced Ga-67 as the imaging agent of choice for
lymphoma, the use of gallium has decreased tremendously. It is now
generally reserved for occasional problem solving in chronic
infections. This includes diagnosing osteomyelitis in the postoperative
spine, differentiating severe sinusitis unresponsive to surgery from
osteomyelitis, assessing the diabetic foot with Charcot joint, and
identifying the source of a fever of unknown origin when F-18 FDG
PET cannot be performed.
FIG. 4.8  Preparation of a Tc-99m–labeled radiopharmaceutical. (A)
Tc-99m as sodium pertechnetate is added to the reaction vial. (B) Tc-
99m radiopharmaceutical is ready for dispensing. (C) The patient dose
is withdrawn from the vial. (D) Each dose is measured in the dose
calibrator before it is dispensed.
Ga-67 behaves like an iron analog, transported to sites of infection
or trauma in the body by molecules such as transferrin. Its relatively
long half-life (78.3 hours) allows imaging over several days in order to
improve target-to-background ratios but also results in higher
exposure to the patient. For the first 24 to 48 hours, clearance is
primarily through the urine, with bowel excretion subsequently
becoming the dominant route. Activity in the colon required use of
laxatives for assessment of the abdomen in the past, but single-photon
emission
computed
tomography
with
computed
tomography
(SPECT/CT) has since improved localization. Imaging characteristics
are also less than optimal because the four principal gamma photons
include not only 93- and 185-keV photons but also higher-energy 300-
and 395-keV photons.
Thallium-201
Tl-201 became available in the mid-1970s for myocardial scintigraphy.
It behaves as a potassium analog, with high net clearance (∼85%) in
its passage through the myocardial capillary bed, which makes it an
excellent marker of regional blood flow to viable myocardium.
Its major disadvantage is the absence of an ideal photopeak for
imaging. With its 135- and 167-keV gamma emissions in low
abundance, characteristic mercury x-rays in the range of 69 to 83 keV
are acquired (sometimes with the addition of the 167-keV gamma
photon). At the low energies of these x-rays, discriminating scattered
from primary photons is suboptimal with the gamma scintillation
camera. Because of its poor imaging characteristics, Tc-99m–labeled
cardiac perfusion radiopharmaceuticals are used most often used.
Table 4.8
Technetium-99m–Labeled Radiopharmaceuticals
Agent
Application
Tc-99m sodium pertechnetate
Meckel’s diverticulum detection, salivary and thyroid
gland scintigraphy
Tc-99m tilmanocept
Lymphoscintigraphy
Tc-99m sulfur colloid
Lymphoscintigraphy
Liver/spleen scintigraphy, bone marrow
scintigraphy; gastric emptying
Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate
Skeletal scintigraphy
Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin
(MAA)
Pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy, liver intraarterial
perfusion scintigraphy
Tc-99m red blood cells
Radionuclide ventriculography, gastrointestinal
bleeding, hepatic hemangioma
Tc-99m Technegas
Lung perfusion scans
Tc-99m diethylenetriamine-
pentaacetic acid (DTPA)
Renal dynamic scintigraphy, lung ventilation (aerosol),
glomerular filtration rate
Tc-99m mercaptoacetyltriglycine
(MAG3)
Renal dynamic scintigraphy
Tc-99m dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA)
Renal cortical scintigraphy
Tc-99m iminodiacetic acid (HIDA)/Tc-
99m mebrofenin
Hepatobiliary scintigraphy
Tc-99m sestamibi (Cardiolite)
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, breast cancer
imaging
Tc-99m tetrofosmin (Myoview)
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
Tc-99m exametazime (HMPAO)
Cerebral perfusion scintigraphy, white blood cell
labeling
Tc-99m bicisate (ECD)
Cerebral perfusion scintigraphy
ECD, Ethyl cysteinate dimer; HMPAO, hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime.
Table 4.9
Non-Technetium-99m Single-Photon Radiopharmaceuticals
Agent
Application
Diagnostic
Xe-133 xenon (inert gas)
Pulmonary ventilation scintigraphy
Kr-81m krypton (inert gas)
Pulmonary ventilation scintigraphy
I-123 sodium iodide
Thyroid scintigraphy, thyroid uptake function studies
In-111 oxine leukocytes
Inflammatory disease and infection detection
I-123 meta-iodo-benzyl-
guanidine (MIBG)
Adrenal medullary tumor imaging
In-111 pentetreotide
(OctreoScan)
Somatostatin receptor tumor imaging
I-123 ioflupane (DaTscan)
Dopamine transporter receptor imaging for Parkinson disease
and Parkinsonian syndromes
Table 4.10
Positron Emission Tomography Radiopharmaceuticals
Agent
Application
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
Tumor imaging
Infection imaging
Cardiac: Viability, sarcoid diagnosis
Brain: dementia, interictal seizure, +/– recurrent
glioblastoma
Ga-68 DOTATATE
Somatostatin positive neuroendocrine tumor (NET)
F-18 fluciclovine
Recurrent prostate cancer
F-18 florbetapir
Amyloid
F-18 flutemetamol
Amyloid
F-18 florbetaben
Amyloid
Rb-82
Cardiac perfusion
N-13 ammonia
Cardiac perfusion
F-18 sodium fluoride (F-18
NaF)
Bone metastases
C-11 Choline
Prostate cancer
Table 4.11
Therapeutic Radiopharmaceuticals
Agent
Application
I-131 sodium iodide
Thyroid cancer and hyperthyroidism (Graves’ disease, toxic nodule, toxic
nodular goiter)
In-111 ibritumomab
(Zevalin) a
B-cell lymphoma therapy (antibody)
Y-90
microsphere
Y-90
Therasphere
Y-90 Sirsphere
Hepatocellular cancer
Hepatic metastases colon cancer
Lu-177 DOTATATE
(Lutathera)
Neuroendocrine tumor (somatostatin receptor positive)
I-131 iobenguane
(Azedra)
Pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma (≥12 yrs old/MIBG positive)
Ra-223 (Xofigo)
Metastatic prostate cancer
Sr-89 (Metastron)
Metastatic prostate cancer
Sm-153 lexidronan
(Quadramet)
Metastatic prostate cancer
P-32 chromic
phosphate
(Phosphocol)
Effusion leaking into peritoneum or pleural space
Additional treatment applications: peritoneal metastases, hemophilia
joint disease; intracavitary tumor treatment (e.g., glioblastoma)
a  Other radiolabeled antibodies previously approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration but no longer clinically available.
Radioactive Inert Gases
Radioactive inert gases are used for pulmonary ventilation imaging.
Xe-133 is most commonly used. Its advantage over Tc-99m–DTPA
aerosols is better distribution into the lung periphery in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or other issues
causing breathing difficulties. A disadvantage is the relatively low
energy of its principal photon (81 keV), dictating the performance of
ventilation scintigraphy before Tc-99m perfusion scintigraphy.
Because of its poor imaging characteristics and dosimetry issues, Tc-
99m–labeled aerosols are more commonly used. Xe-133 has a 5.2-day
half-life, posing radiation safety issues answered to some extent by a
xenon trap (charcoal).
Krypton-81m (Kr-81m) has advantages because of its high principal
gamma emission (190 keV) and short half-life (13 seconds), allowing
for postperfusion imaging and multiple-view acquisition without
concern for retained activity or radiation dose. However, the
rubidium-81/kr-81m generator system is expensive and must be
replaced daily because of its short half-life. This gas is no longer
clinically used in the United States.
It should be noted that the newer agent Tc-99m Technegas is likely
going to take the lead as the preferred agent for ventilation imaging.
Its photon energy is superior compared with Xe-133 for imaging. Also,
it has improved distribution characteristics compared with Tc-99m
DTPA in cases of COPD because the particles are small enough to
behave like a gas. Although it has been held up for use in the United
States due to challenges in obtaining U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval, it is in widespread use elsewhere.
Dual-Photon Radiopharmaceuticals for
Positron Emission Tomography
The physical characteristics of commonly used positron-emitting
radionuclides
are
summarized
in
Table
4.2.
Many
radiopharmaceuticals have been described for use with PET. Carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen are found ubiquitously in biological molecules.
It is thus theoretically possible to radiolabel almost any molecule of
biological interest. The hydroxyl analog, F-18, has the advantage of a
longer half-life than C-11, N-13, or O-15 and has been used as a label
for the glucose analog FDG. F-18 FDG has found widespread clinical
application in whole-body tumor imaging and, to a lesser extent,
imaging of the brain and heart. The uptake of F-18 FDG is a marker of
tumor metabolism and viability.
F-18 FDG has also been used to diagnose degenerative dementia,
based on changes in metabolic patterns in the brain, and it has also
aided in the identification of seizure foci in the interictal state. F-18-
labeled PET agents have been approved by the FDA for amyloid brain
imaging. In the heart, this radiopharmaceutical can differentiate areas
of viable myocardium from ischemic scar and can help determine
when cases of heart failure are caused by myocardial sarcoid.
Rubidium-82 (Rb-82) is available from a generator system with a
relatively long-lived parent (strontium-82, T1/2 = 25 days). Its
availability from a generator system obviates the need for onsite
cyclotron production. Like thallium, it is a potassium analog and used
for myocardial perfusion imaging. Cardiac imaging with this PET
agent is extremely rapid compared with studies performed with Tc-
99m–labeled agents (e.g., Tc-99m sestamibi) or with Tl-201. One
limitation of Rb-82 is, however, the high energy (3.15 MeV) of its
positron emissions. This results in a relatively long average path in
soft tissue before annihilation, degrading the spatial resolution
