Radiopharmaceuticals
Ideally in nuclear medicine, high-quality images are produced with
the lowest radiation exposure possible. Therefore, the choice of
radiolabel is critical. For example, unless the patient is undergoing
therapy, a pure gamma (γ) emitter should be used, free of alpha (α) or
beta minus (β–) particulate emissions that increase the dose. The
photons produced by decaying radionuclides must be of sufficient
abundance (i.e., have a high likelihood of an emission occurring per
decay event) as well as of suitable energy for external detection. In
single-photon-emitting agents, 100- to 200-keV γ photons are most
favorable. Although a wider range of energies can be used, inferior
images may result. Low-energy photons are more easily scattered or
absorbed. Higher-energy photons not only increase the radiation dose
but also more frequently penetrate collimators and pass through
camera crystals without interaction. In positron (β+) decay, the
resolution is improved if the positrons travel only a short distance
before annihilation. The resulting two relatively high-energy 511-keV
photons traveling at 180 degrees from each other are best detected by
the ring of specialized detectors found in positron emission
tomography (PET) cameras. Imaging done with dual-photon positron-
emitting agents is often of superior quality to that performed with
routine single-photon nuclear medicine agents.
The radionuclide half-life (T1/2) should be long enough only for the
intended application, usually a few hours, because excess time
increases the radiation dose. However, one must consider not only the
physical half-life (TP) related to the decay of the radionuclide but also
the biologic half-life (TB) when calculating the actual or effective half-life
(TE). The biologic half-life is determined by factors that alter how the
agent moves through the body’s various compartments (e.g., plasma,
intracellular fluid, urine) as it is taken up and eliminated from the
body. The TE can be calculated using the following formula:
As mentioned previously, the radionuclide used should also be
carrier-free, with no contaminants from either stable or other
radioactive radionuclides of the same element. Carrier material can
negatively
influence
biodistribution
and
labeling
efficiency.
Contaminating isotopes increase radiation to the patient, especially if
they have high photon energy, longer T1/2, or result in particulate
emissions. The radionuclide used should also have a high specific
activity, that is, a high amount of radioactivity per unit weight
(mCi/mg or MBq/mg). A carrier-free radionuclide has the highest
specific activity.
Technetium-99m most closely matches these desirable features for
use with gamma cameras, and for PET, the agent of choice is generally
fluorine-18. Box 4.3lists desired properties in a radiopharmaceutical. A
few radioactive atoms, such as radioiodine, gallium, and thallium, can
be used without modification because these elements can make use of
the
body’s
own
systems
for
uptake.
However,
most
radiopharmaceuticals combine the radionuclide with a biologically
active molecule or drug carrier that determines localization and
distribution.
Box 4.3 Ideal Properties of Radiopharmaceuticals
Imaging
Radionuclide
Gamma photon energy of 100 to 200 keV
No β– or α particulate emission
Sufficient half-life to allow for preparation, delivery, and
imaging
Carrier Molecule
Stable binding to its carrier molecule (if used)
No toxicity
Rapid, specific localization
Prompt background clearance
Therapy
Rapid, specific localization
Background clearance with short residence time in radiation-
sensitive tissues (e.g., bone marrow, lungs)
Particulate emissions that do not travel beyond the tumor or
tissue being treated
“Crossfire” killing of immediately adjacent abnormal cells
useful
Emitting additional γ-rays suitable for imaging useful for
distribution assessment
Radiopharmaceuticals are sought that will accumulate rapidly in
the targeted system or organ while quickly clearing from the
background tissues, resulting in a high target-to-background ratio.
Localizing mechanisms for common radiopharmaceuticals are listed
in Table 4.7. It is important to be familiar with normal distribution
patterns in order to better identify abnormalities that can occur due to
disease or poor preparation. Problems with radiopharmaceutical
quality often relate to the challenges of radiolabeling.
