Radiation Accidents (Spills)
In a busy nuclear medicine practice, accidental spills of radioactive
material invariably occur. The spills are divided into minor and major
categories, depending on the radionuclide and the amount spilled. For
I-131, incidents involving less than 1 mCi are considered minor; spills
more than that are considered major. For Tc-99m, Tl-201, and Ga-67, a
major spill is considered to be more than 100 mCi.
The basic principles of responding to both kinds of spills are the
same (Box 4.8). For minor spills, people in the area are warned that the
spill has occurred. Attempts are made to prevent the spread of the
spilled material. Absorbent paper is used to cover the spilled material.
Minor spills can be cleaned up using soap and water, disposable
gloves, and remote handling devices. All contaminated material,
including gloves and other objects, should be disposed of in
designated bags. The area should be continually surveyed until the
reading from a Geiger-Müller (GM) survey meter is at background
levels. All personnel involved should also be monitored, including
hands, shoes, and clothing. The spill must be reported to the
institution’s radiation safety officer.
For major spills, the area is cleared immediately. Attempts are made
to prevent further spread with absorbent pads, and, if possible, the
radioactivity is shielded. The room is sealed off, and the radiation
safety officer is notified immediately. The radiation safety officer
typically directs further response—for example, when and how to
proceed with cleanup and decontamination.
In dealing with both minor and major spills, an attempt is made to
keep radiation exposure of patients, hospital staff, and the
environment to a minimum. The radiation safety officer must restrict
access to the area until it is safe for patients and personnel. However,
no absolute guidelines exist to provide a definitive approach to every
spill. Each laboratory is responsible for developing its own set of
written procedures. The radiation safety officer must restrict access to
the area until it is safe for patients and personnel.
Quality Control in the Nuclear Pharmacy
Selected
quality
control
procedures
for
Tc-99m–labeled
radiopharmaceuticals and for Mo-99/Tc-99m generator systems are
described earlier in this chapter. Considerations of radiochemical and
radionuclide purity also apply to other single-photon agents and
positron radiopharmaceuticals (see Table 4.15). Radiochemical purity
is important for radioiodinated agents because of the potential for
uptake of free radioiodine by the thyroid gland if the radiolabel
disassociates from the carrier molecule. Other quality control
procedures are aimed at ensuring the sterility and apyrogenicity of
administered radiopharmaceuticals. Quality control monitoring of the
dose calibrator performance is important to ensure that administered
doses are within prescribed amounts.
Sterility and Pyrogen Testing
Sterility implies the absence of living organisms (see Table 4.15).
Apyrogenicity implies the absence of metabolic products such as
endotoxins. Because many radiopharmaceuticals are prepared just
before use, definitive testing before they are administered to the
patient is impractical, which doubles the need for careful aseptic
technique in the nuclear pharmacy.
Autoclaving is a well-known means of sterilization of preparation
vials and other utensils and materials, but it is not useful for
radiopharmaceuticals. When terminal sterilization is required, various
membrane filtration methods are used. Special filters with pore
diameters smaller than microorganisms have been developed for this
purpose. A filter pore size of 0.22 μm is necessary to sterilize a
solution. It traps bacteria, including small organisms such as
Pseudomonas.
Sterility testing standards have been defined by the USP. Standard
media, including thioglycollate and soybean-casein digest media, are
used for different categories of microorganisms, including aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria and fungi.
Pyrogens
are
protein
or
polysaccharide
metabolites
of
microorganisms or other contaminating substances that cause febrile
reactions (see Table 4.15). They can be present even in sterile
preparations. The typical clinical syndrome is fever, chills, joint pain,
and headache developing minutes to a few hours after injection. The
USP test for pyrogen testing uses limulus amebocyte lysate. It is based
on the observation that amebocyte lysate preparations from the blood
of horseshoe crabs become opaque in the presence of pyrogens.
Radiopharmaceutical Dose Calibrators
The dose calibrator is an important instrument in the radiopharmacy
and is subject to quality control requirements. Four basic
measurements are included: accuracy, linearity, precision or
constancy, and geometry. All of these tests must be performed at
installation and after repair.
Accuracy
Accuracy is measured by using reference standard sources obtained
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The test is
performed annually, and two different radioactive sources are used. If
the measured activity in the dose calibrator varies from the standard
or theoretical activity by more than 10%, the device must be
recalibrated.
Linearity
The linearity test is designed to determine the response of the
calibrator over a range of measured activities. A common approach is
to take a sample of Tc-99m pertechnetate and sequentially measure it
during radioactive decay. Because the change in activity with time is a
definable physical parameter, any deviation in the observed assay
value indicates equipment malfunction and nonlinearity. An
alternative approach is to use precalibrated lead attenuators with
sequential measurements of the same specimen. This test is performed
quarterly.
