Quality Assurance in Radionuclides and
Radiopharmaceuticals
In this chapter, quality control (QC) is discussed related to
radionuclide production and radiolabeling radiopharmaceuticals. QC
procedures in the radiopharmacy involve upholding standards
related to radiopharmaceuticals, maintaining measuring devices (e.g.,
the
dose
calibrator),
limiting
unnecessary
exposures,
and
administering activities mandated by governmental agencies such as
the NRC. Many of the issues related to radiation safety and the role of
the Authorized User (AU) are covered in detail in Chapter 5.
Radionuclide Production Quality Control
QC
is
an
important
component
of
radionuclide
and
radiopharmaceutical production. Problems can be grouped as those
related
to
radionuclide
purity,
chemical
purity,
biological
contaminants, and other physical issues (e.g., pH, particle size,
osmolarity). Some of the issues related to radionuclide production are
defined in Box 4.4.
Mo-99/Tc-99m Generator QC
In the case of radionuclide generators, rigorous procedures are
performed to assess quality before commercial generators are
shipped; however, every laboratory must perform QC steps each time
the generator is eluted to be certain the material is in line with
regulatory guidelines (Table 4.12).
Radionuclide Purity
The only desired radionuclide in the Mo-99/Tc-99m generator elute is
Tc-99m sodium pertechnetate ( 99mTcO4 –), and any other radioactive
material is considered an impurity. Limitations on the amount of these
contaminants are strict because they cause additional radiation
exposure without clinical benefit and can also impact radiolabeling.
Tc-99, the daughter product of the isomeric transition of Tc-99m, is not
a problem from a radiation or health standpoint (given a half-life
decay of 2.1 × 105 years to the stable ruthenium-99). Therefore, it is not
tested for as a radionuclide impurity. Other radionuclide impurities
can include those related to Mo-99 production in the reactor (e.g., I-
131, Sr-89, and Sr-90). However, Mo-99 itself is the most common
impurity.
Box 4.4 Radiopharmacy Quality Control Parameter
Definitions
Chemical purity: The amount of unwanted (nonradioactive)
chemical in preparation.
Radionuclide purity: The proportion of the desired radionuclide
relative to other radioactive contaminants.
Radiochemical purity: The amount of the desired radionuclide
or radiopharmaceutical in its proper form (e.g., its oxidation
state or binding to the appropriate carrier molecule),
compared with its other forms (i.e., oxidized or unbound).
Biological purity: The presence or absence of microorganisms
and pyrogens (endotoxins).
Note: Other chemical/physical properties include pH, particle
size, osmolarity, and solution clarity.
The NRC sets allowable limits on the amount of Mo-99
“breakthrough,” and testing must be performed after each elution.
The easiest and most widely used approach is to place the generator
eluate in a special lead container designed to absorb the 140-keV
photons of Tc-99m but to allow a portion of the high-energy 740- and
780-keV gamma emissions of Mo-99 to penetrate. The shielded sample
is placed in a dose calibrator and measured on the Mo-99 setting. Then
the unshielded sample is measured on the Tc-99m setting, allowing
calculation of the ratio of Mo-99 to Tc-99m activity.
The NRC limit is 0.15 μCi of Mo-99 activity per 1 mCi of Tc-99m
activity (<0.15 kBq/MBq Tc-99m) at the time of administration.
Because the half-life of Mo-99 is longer than that of Tc-99m, the
proportion of the contaminant increases with time. If the initial
reading shows near-maximum Mo-99 levels, either the actual dose to
be given to the patient should be restudied before administration or
the buildup factor should be computed mathematically. From a
practical standpoint, the Mo-99 activity may be taken as unchanged
and the Tc-99m decay calculated (Table 4.13). Breakthrough is rare but
unpredictable. When it does occur, Mo-99 levels can be far higher than
the legal limit.
Chemical Purity
Chemical impurities are generally a concern when they are toxic,
biologically
active,
affect
the
radiolabel,
or
alter
the
radiopharmaceutical characteristics. The generator eluate is routinely
tested for the column-packing material, Al2O3. Excessive aluminum
levels may interfere with the normal distribution of certain
radiopharmaceuticals—for example, increased lung activity with Tc-
99m sulfur colloid and liver uptake with Tc-99m methylene
diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP). A colorimetric qualitative spot testing
determines if unacceptable levels are present. A sample from the
eluate is spotted on special test paper that changes color, turning pink
in the presence of alumina. The intensity is compared to a standard,
with the USP limit set at 10 μg/mL.
Table 4.12
Molybdenum-99/Technetium-99m Generator Quality Control Limits
Problem
Category
Detection Tests
Standard
Mo-99 breakthrough
Radionuclide
purity
Shielded dose in dose
calibrator measure 740-
/780-keV Mo-99
photons (140 keV
blocked)
<0.15 μCi Mo-
99/mCi Tc-99m
<0.1% of Tc-99m
activity at time
of
administration
Al3+ (Al2O3 from
generator ion
exchange column in
elution)
Chemical purity
Colorimetric spot test
Comparison to a pink
color standard
(Aurin
tricarboxylic acid)
<10 μg/mL or < 10
ppm (fission
generator)
Oxidized Tc-99m (all
forms besides
desired +7 reduced
99mTcO4 –)
Radiochemical
purity
Instant thin layer
chromatography,
electrophoresis, gel
chromatography
≥95% of Tc-99m
activity should be
as 99mTcO4 –
Sterility
Biologic purity
Inoculate fluid
thioglycolate medium
and soybean-casein
digest medium
USP regulation 14
days’ incubation
and assess for
growth
Pyrogenicity
Biologic purity
Limulus amebocyte lysate
gel-clot
Reaction from
gram-negative
bacterial
endotoxins
measured
Note: limits are far
stricter for
intrathecal
administration.
USP, U.S. Pharmacopeia.
Table 4.13
Physical Decay of Technetium-99m
Time (hr)
Fraction Remaining
T1⁄2 number
% Activity
1.00
0.891
0.794
12.5
0.708
6.25
0.631
3.125
0.532
1.56
0.501
0.78
0.447
0.39
0.398
0.195
0.355
0.098
0.316
0.049
0.282
0.024
0.251
0.012
Tc-99m physical half-life = 6.02 hr. Note: when doses using the same
radiolabel are imaged close together in time, 4 half-lives is often
enough time to reduce background. However, when the amount of
activity is high in a particular organ or when measurements must be
accurate (e.g., in serum sampling), 8 half-lives may be needed (or even
10, which is essentially at background).
Radiochemical Purity
It is important that the materials used are not only free of other
radionuclides and unwanted chemicals but that they also contain
radioactivity in the desired form—so-called radiochemical purity.
When Tc-99m is eluted from the generator, the desired chemical
form of Tc-99m pertechnetate is a +7 valence state. Commercial kits
used to create other Tc-99m–labeled pharmaceuticals are based on this
+7 oxidation state. The USP standard for the generator eluate is that
95% or more of Tc-99m activity be in this form. Reduction states at +4,
+5, or +6 result in impurities. These reduction states can be detected by
thin-layer chromatography. Problems with the radiochemical purity
of the generator eluate are infrequently encountered but should be
considered if kit labeling is poor.
Limits for Other Radionuclides
Although it is most critical to know QC limits related to Tc-99m
production, strict limits have been set concerning contaminants in
other radionuclides. For materials produced through fission in a
reactor, other fission by-products must be identified and removed,
such as I-131. In PET production, fewer sources of contamination are
present but can occur depending on target and reaction type chosen.
In the case of the generator-produced Ga-68, impurities and
breakthrough can be seen. As with Tc-99m or Rb-82 generators, the
parent
radionuclide
could
break
through
during
elution.
Radiochemical and other contaminants and impurities must be
carefully assessed after each elution (Table 4.14).
Table 4.14
Limitations on Impurities for Generator-Produced Radionuclides
Generator
System
Impurity
Limit
Comment
Ge-
68/Ga-
Radiochemical
<0.001% Ge-68
breakthrough
>95% free Ga-68
<0.001% of nominal activity from
other emitters
Pre-elute generator and discard if
it has not been eluted for >2
days
Chemical
Fe < 10 μg/GBq
Zn < 10 μg/GBq
Biologic
<30 EU/L bacterial
endotoxin
Sr-82/Rb-
Radiochemical
Sr-82
breakthrough
Sr-85
contamination
0.02 μCi/mCi
Rb-82 (0.02
kBq/MBq)
0.2 μCi/mCi Rb-
82 (0.2
kBq/MBq)
Expiration 42 days post-calibration,
often must be replaced after <
month for sufficient activity
Quality Assurance of Technetium-99m–
Labeled Radiopharmaceuticals
It is also important to test the Tc-99m–labeled preparation product for
radiochemical purity and confirm the presence of a product in the
desired form (as was required when testing the radionuclide before
labeling), defined as the percentage of the total radioactivity in a
specimen that is in the specified or desired radiochemical form (Table
4.15). For example, if 5% of the Tc-99m activity remains as free
pertechnetate in a radiolabeling procedure, the radiochemical purity
would be stated as 95%, assuming no other impurities. Each
radiopharmaceutical has a specific radiochemical purity to meet USP
standards or FDA requirements (typically 95%). Causes of
radiochemical impurities include poor initial labeling, radiolysis,
decomposition, pH changes, light exposure, or presence of oxidizing
or reducing agents.
The usual approach to assay radiochemical purity in vitro is thin-
layer chromatography. The solvent and material for the test strip are
chosen based on the contaminants possible. For technetium
radiopharmaceuticals, the impurities tested for are free pertechnetate
and insoluble hydrolyzed reduced technetium.
Consider an example where samples of the radiopharmaceutical Tc-
99m diphosphonate are placed on the end of test strips (Figs. 4.9 and
4.10 ). Free Tc-99m pertechnetate on paper chromatography strips will
migrate with the solvent front in the presence of the solvent acetone,
whereas Tc-99m diphosphonate and hydrolyzed reduced technetium
remain at the origin. For selective testing of hydrolyzed reduced
technetium, a silica gel strip is used, with saline as the solvent. In this
system, both free pertechnetate and Tc-99m diphosphonate move with
the solvent front, and hydrolyzed reduced technetium again stays at
the origin. This combination of procedures allows measurement of
each of the three components. The radiolabel allows quantitative
measurement by simply cutting the chromatography strip into two
pieces and counting each end separately. Chromatography systems
have
been
worked
out
for
each
major
technetium-labeled
radiopharmaceutical.
FIG. 4.9  Thin-layer chromatography. The sample is dotted at the
origin and then placed in a solvent, either saline or methyl ethyl ketone
(MEK). The strips are dried and cut in half, and each is measured in the
dose calibrator. In this example, the radiopharmaceutical passes the
test.
Table 4.15
Radiopharmaceutical Quality Control Parameters
Parameter
Definition
Examples of Contaminants and Problems
Chemical purity
Amount of
unwanted
Alumina (Al3+ or Al2O3) from Tc-99m generator eluate
nonradioactive
chemical in
preparation
Radionuclide
purity
Other types of
radioactive
material besides
the desired
radionuclide
Mo-99 in Tc-99m generator eluate;
I-124 in I-123 dose
Radiochemical
purity
Other forms of the
desired
radionuclide
Changes in oxidation/reduction status altering kit
labeling efficiency.
Free, unbound
Colloids a formed from insoluble Tc-99m as
technetium hydroxides or technetium-labeled
stannous hydroxide form (also known as
hydrolyzed/reduced or 99mTcO2)
Biological purity
Absence of
microorganisms
and pyrogens
(endotoxins)
Sterile; pyrogen-free preparation
Physical status
and other
chemical
properties
Fraction of total
pharmaceutical
in desired
physical form
Correct particle size in Tc-99m MAA or sulfur
colloid; absence of particulate contaminants in
a solution
Issues with the kit used to make the
radiopharmaceutical such as insufficient
stannous ion
Clouded or discolored preparation pH, osmolarity
outside of acceptable limits
a  Colloids formed from insoluble forms of Tc-99m can be taken up by the reticuloendothelial
system in the marrow, liver, and spleen and alter radiopharmaceutical distribution.
FIG. 4.10  Thin-layer chromatography in a case that does not pass
quality assurance testing.
In vivo radiochemical impurities contribute to background activity
or other unwanted localization and degrade image quality. For many
agents, the presence of a radiochemical impurity can be recognized by
altered in vivo biodistribution. For example, colloids formed by the
insoluble forms of Tc-99m can be taken up by the reticuloendothelial
system in the liver, spleen, and marrow.
Quality Control of Non-Technetium-Based
Radiopharmaceuticals
Considerations of radiochemical and radionuclide purity also apply to
other single-photon agents and positron radiopharmaceuticals (see
Box 4.4 and Table 4.15). Radiochemical purity is important for
radioiodinated agents because of the potential for uptake of free
radioiodine by the thyroid gland if the radiolabel disassociates from
the carrier molecule. Other QC procedures are aimed at ensuring the
sterility and apyrogenicity of administered radiopharmaceuticals. QC
monitoring of the dose-calibrator performance is important to ensure
that administered doses are within prescribed amounts.
Sterility and Pyrogen Testing
Sterility implies the absence of living organisms (see Table 4.15).
Apyrogenicity implies the absence of metabolic products such as
endotoxins. Because many radiopharmaceuticals are prepared just
before use, definitive testing before they are administered to the
patient is impractical, which doubles the need for careful aseptic
technique in the nuclear pharmacy.
Autoclaving is a well-known means of sterilization of preparation
vials and other utensils and materials, but it is not useful for
radiopharmaceuticals. When terminal sterilization is required, various
membrane-filtration methods are used. Special filters with pore
diameters smaller than microorganisms have been developed for this
purpose. A filter pore size of 0.22 μm is necessary to sterilize a
solution. It traps bacteria, including small organisms such as
Pseudomonas.
Sterility testing standards have been defined by the USP. Standard
media, including thioglycollate and soybean-casein digest media, are
used for different categories of microorganisms, including aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria and fungi.
Pyrogens
are
protein
or
polysaccharide
metabolites
of
microorganisms or other contaminating substances that cause febrile
reactions. They can be present even in sterile preparations. The typical
clinical syndrome is fever, chills, joint pain, and headache developing
minutes to a few hours after injection. The USP test for pyrogen
testing uses limulus amebocyte lysate. It is based on the observation
that amebocyte lysate preparations from the blood of horseshoe crabs
become opaque in the presence of pyrogens.
