Radiation Accidents (Spills)
In a busy nuclear medicine practice, accidental spills of radioactive
material invariably occur. The spills are divided into minor and major
categories, depending on the radionuclide and the amount spilled. For
I-131, incidents involving less than 1 mCi are considered minor; spills
more than that are considered major. For Tc-99m, Tl-201, and Ga-67, a
major spill is considered to be more than 100 mCi.
The basic principles of responding to both kinds of spills are the
same (Box 4.8). For minor spills, people in the area are warned that the
spill has occurred. Attempts are made to prevent the spread of the
spilled material. Absorbent paper is used to cover the spilled material.
Minor spills can be cleaned up using soap and water, disposable
gloves, and remote handling devices. All contaminated material,
including gloves and other objects, should be disposed of in
designated bags. The area should be continually surveyed until the
reading from a Geiger-Müller (GM) survey meter is at background
levels. All personnel involved should also be monitored, including
hands, shoes, and clothing. The spill must be reported to the
institution’s radiation safety officer.
For major spills, the area is cleared immediately. Attempts are made
to prevent further spread with absorbent pads, and, if possible, the
radioactivity is shielded. The room is sealed off, and the radiation
safety officer is notified immediately. The radiation safety officer
typically directs further response—for example, when and how to
proceed with cleanup and decontamination.
In dealing with both minor and major spills, an attempt is made to
keep radiation exposure of patients, hospital staff, and the
environment to a minimum. The radiation safety officer must restrict
access to the area until it is safe for patients and personnel. However,
no absolute guidelines exist to provide a definitive approach to every
spill. Each laboratory is responsible for developing its own set of
written procedures. The radiation safety officer must restrict access to
the area until it is safe for patients and personnel.
