Receiving Radioactive Packages
Packages containing radioactive materials must be labeled according
to the amount of measured activity at the surface and at 1 m (Table
4.18). Packaging is required to pass rigorous durability testing: drop
test, corner drop test, compression, and water spray for 30 minutes.
The U.S. Department of Transportation sets guidelines for regulations
concerning not only package labeling but also transport rules
concerning air and truck shipments. Placards are required on all sides
of any truck carrying packages in the Level III Yellow label category.
Once a radioactive package has been received, it must be monitored
for contamination within 3 hours from delivery during normal
working hours or within 3 hours of the beginning of the next working
day. An inspection is first done, looking for signs of damage or
leakage. Then an external survey is performed with a GM counter at
the surface and at 1 m. Finally, a wipe test is performed, swabbing 300
cm2 of the surface with absorbent paper and counting in a scintillation
counter. The sender must be notified of any package exceeding limits
(Table 4.19), and records of the survey must be kept, including date,
name of the person performing the survey, survey readings,
manufacturer, lot number, type of product and amount, and time of
calibration.
Table 4.18
Survey Limits for Radioactive Material Package Receipt
Test
Exposure Limits
Surface survey
<200 mR/hr
Activity at 1 m
<10 mR/hr
Wipe test
6600 dpm/300 cm2
Radiation Dosimetry
The amount of radioactivity that can be administered for scintigraphic
procedures performed in clinical nuclear medicine is limited by the
amount of radiation exposure received by the patient. The patient
radiation exposure is determined by the percent localization of the
administered dose in each organ of the body, the time course of
retention in each organ, and the size and relative distribution of the
organs in the body. This information is obtained from biodistribution
and pharmacokinetic studies during the development and regulatory
approval process for a new radiopharmaceutical. For each
radiopharmaceutical, estimates of radiation absorbed doses are made
as part of the approval process and contained in the package insert
(Table 4.20).
Table 4.19
Radioactive Package Labeling Categories
Label category
Exposure
Surface (mR/hr)
At 1 m (mR/hr)
I White
<0.5
—
II Yellow
>0.5 to ≤50
<1
III Yellow
>50 to ≤200
>1 to ≤10
Not Allowed
>200
>10
The radiation absorbed dose (rads) to any organ in the body
depends on biological factors (percent uptake, biological half-life) and
physical factors (amount and nature of emitted radiations from the
radionuclide). One rad is equal to the absorption of 100 ergs per gram
of tissue. The formula for calculating the radiation absorbed dose is:
The formula states that the absorbed dose in a region k resulting
from activity from a source region b is equal to the cumulative
radioactivity given in microcurie-hours in the source region (Ã) times
the mean absorbed dose per unit of cumulative activity in rads per
microcurie-hour (S). The cumulative activity is determined from
experimental measurements of uptake and retention in the different
source regions. The mean absorbed dose per unit of cumulative
activity is based on physical measurements and is determined by
radiations emanating from the radionuclide.
The total absorbed dose to a region or organ is the sum from all
source regions around it and from activity within the target organ. For
example, a calculation of the absorbed dose to the myocardium in a
Tc-99m tetrofosmin scan must take into account contributions from
radioactivity localizing in the myocardium and from radioactivity in
the lung, blood, liver, intestines, kidneys, and general background soft
tissues. The percentage uptake and the biological behavior are
different in each of those tissues. The amount of radiation reaching the
myocardium is also different, depending on the geometry of the
source organ and its distance from the heart. The formula is applied
for each source region, and the individual contributions are summed.
Table 4.20
Radiation Doses From Common Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine Procedures
Radionuclide
(rem)
Agent
Activity
(mCi)
Highest dose (rads)
(organ)
Effective dose
equivalent (rem)
F-18
FDG
5.9 (bladder)
0.7
Ga-67
Citrate
11.8 (bone surface)
1.9
Tc-99m
DISIDA
2.0 (gallbladder)
0.3
HMPAO
2.5 (kidneys)
0.7
MAA
1.0 (lungs)
0.2
MDP
4.7 (bone surface)
0.4
MAG3
8.1 (bladder wall)
0.5
Sestamibi
2.7 (gallbladder)
0.7
Tetrofosmin
2.7 (gallbladder)
0.6
Sulfur colloid
2.2 (spleen)
0.3
In-111
Leukocytes
0.5
10.9 (spleen)
1.2
I-123
Sodium iodide (25%
uptake)
0.2
2.6 (thyroid)
0.2
I-123
MIBG
10.0
0.1 (liver)
0.07
Xe-133
Inert gas
0.06 (lungs)
0.04
Tl-201
Chloride
5.1 (kidneys)
1.2
SI conversion: 1 rem = 0.01 Sv; 1 mCi = 37 MBq.FDG, Fluorodeoxyglucose; HIDA,
hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid; HMPAO, hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime; MAA,
macroaggregated albumin; MDP, methylene diphosphonate; MIBG, meta-iodo-benzyl-
guanidine.
Data from Siegel JA: Guide for Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine and
Radiopharmaceutical Therapy. Reston, VA, Society of Nuclear Medicine,
2004.
Factors that affect dosimetry include the amount of activity
administered originally, the biodistribution in one patient versus
another, the route of administration, the rate of elimination, the size of
the patient, and the presence of pathological processes. For example,
for radiopharmaceuticals cleared by the kidney, radiation exposure is
greater in patients with renal failure. Another example is the differing
percentage uptakes of radioiodine in the thyroid depending on
whether a patient is hyperthyroid, euthyroid, or hypothyroid.
The radiation absorbed dose (rads or Gray) does not describe the
biological effects of different types of radiation. The equivalent dose
(rem or Sievert) relates the absorbed dose in human tissue to the
effective biological damage of the radiation. Not all radiation has the
same biological effect, even for the same amount of absorbed dose. To
determine the equivalent dose, the absorbed dose (rads or Gray) must
be multiplied by a quality factor unique to the type of incident
radiation.
Effective dose is calculated by multiplying actual organ doses by
“risk
weighting
factors”
that
give
each
organ’s
relative
radiosensitivity to developing cancer and adding up the total of all the
numbers, which is the effective whole-body dose or just effective dose.
These weighting factors are designed so that this effective dose
represents the dose that the total body could receive (uniformly) that
would give the same cancer risk as various organs getting different
doses. The effective dose can be used to compare radiation doses of
various imaging modalities.
Estimates
of
radiation-absorbed
dose
for
each
major
radiopharmaceutical are provided in tabular form in the specific
organ system chapters.
Suggested Readings
Holland J.P, Williamson M.J, Lewis J. Unconventional nuclides for radiopharmaceuticals.  Mol
Imaging . 2010;9(1):1–20. doi: 10.2310/7290.2010.00008.
Huclier-Markai S, Alliot C, Varmenot N, Cutler C.S, Barbet J. Alpha-emitters for
immunotherapy: a review of recent developments from chemistry to clinic. 2012;12(23):3.
Jodal L, Le Loirec C, Champion C. Positron range in PET imaging: non-conventional isotopes.
Phys Med Biol . 2014;59:7419–7434.
Lapi S, Radford L. Methods for the production of radionuclides for medicine. Chapter
4. In: Lewis J, Zeglis B, Windhorst A, eds.  Radiopharmaceutical Chemistry . Springer; 2019.
Saha G.  Fundamentals of Nuclear Pharmacy . 7th Ed. Springer International; 2018 Print and
eBook.
Sai K, Zachar Z, Bingham P, Mintz A. Metabolic PET imaging in oncology.  AJR
. 2017;209:270–276.
