Biomarkers
Background
Not only is biopsy invasive and prone to sampling error, but in vitro
analysis cannot represent the full picture of function or extent of
disease. The act of the biopsy itself perturbs the system, and removing
tissue may contribute serial measurement inaccuracies. It is therefore
useful to identify alternate ways to measure a system in vivo with a
biomarker. These are measurable, specific characteristics of the disease
or cellular function being studied that reflect disease status and can
even serve as research protocol surrogate endpoints.
Previously, imaging biomarkers relied on size measurement, as
with the widely used Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST 1.1). F-18 FDG PET/CT incorporation into clinical trials is
now rapidly growing. Standardization of PET reporting as a
biomarker (i.e., PET-RECIST [PERCIST] and Lugano PET Criteria for
lymphoma) is gaining acceptance.
Many parameters of cellular function are potential biomarker
targets in MI: cellular metabolism, proliferation, peptide and
membrane biosynthesis, receptor expression, hypoxia, angiogenesis,
and apoptosis. Both intracellular and extracellular targets have been
successfully used, and existing probes have employed building blocks
of the cell cytoskeleton, existing receptor ligands, antibodies, or
enzymes as their foundation. Some of these agents are listed inTable
5.2.
Cell Metabolism and Proliferation
Glucose Utilization: Fluorine-18
Fluorodeoxyglucose
F-18 FDG, a marker of tumor glycolysis, is successfully used for tumor
staging, therapy monitoring, and restaging, often providing
information superior to CT. Levels of uptake can be predictive of
survival in cancer, correlate with tumor proliferation-associated
antigen (Ki-147), and confirm the diagnosis in dementia. It has been so
successful in cancer that other scintigraphic techniques are always
measured against it. However, F-18 FDG uptake has limitations,
showing little sensitivity in many well-differentiated and slowly
growing tumors as well as poor specificity, accumulating in
inflammatory and infectious processes.
DNA Synthesis: Fluorine-18 Fluorothymidine
Monitoring DNA synthesis as a reflection of cellular proliferation
would increase specificity for malignancy in comparison with F-18
FDG. The pyrimidine nucleoside thymidine is the logical choice
because it is taken up proportionally to DNA synthesis but is not a
precursor of mRNA. The most widely evaluated of radiolabeled
thymidine analog is F-18 fluorothymidine (F-18 FLT). These studies
have made it apparent, however, that F-18 FLT metabolism is more
complex than anticipated.
Both thymidine and F-18 FLT are actively transported into the cell
and essentially tapped once phosphorylated by thymidine kinase 1
(TK1). Unlike thymidine, F-18 FLT is notmetabolized further or
incorporated into DNA. TK1 activity correlates with cellular
proliferation, upregulated in cancers compared with the Ki-147 index
of proliferation, so it is reasonable for F-18 FLT uptake to correlate as
well. However, this TK1-dependent “salvage path” is not the only
way thymidine accumulates.De novo synthesisalso occurs within the
cell from the nucleotide deoxyuridine as a second pathway (Fig. 5.1).
Cells and tumors vary widely in their use of the targeted extrinsic
salvage pathway versus de novo synthesis.
Table 5.2
Functional Imaging Assays With PET and SPECT
Cellular Parameter
Agent
Status a
Glycolysis
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
C
Proliferation
F-18 fluorothymidine (FLT)
T
Biosynthesis
C-11 choline
C-11 acetate
T
T
Amino acid transport and metabolism
F-18 fluciclovine (formerly FACBC)
C-11 methionine
F-18 fluoroethyltyrosine (FET)
F-18 FDOPA
C-11-L-methyltryptophan (AMT)
C
T
T
C b
T
Hypoxia
F-18 fluoromisonidazole (FMISO)
Cu-144 ATSM
F-18 FAZA
T
T
C
Apoptosis
Tc-99m annexin-V
T
Blood flow
O-15 water
P, T
Receptor expression
Somatostatin
In-111 pentetreotide
Ga-148 dotatate
Ga-148 dotatoc
Ga-148 dotanoc
Cu-144 dotatate
C
C
C b
C b
T
PSMA
Ga-148 PSMA
F-18 DCFBC
T
T
C
Hormone
F-18 114α-17β-fluoroestradiol (FES)
F-18 fluorodihydrotestosterone
(FDHT)
T
T
Tyrosine Kinase and Receptor Signal Transduction
Angiogenesis
F-18 galacto-RGD
I-123 VEGF, Zr-89 VEGF
T
T
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
In-111-DTPA-EGF
Ga-148-DOTA-EGF
T
P/T
Human epithelial growth receptor 2
(HER2)
Ga-148-DOTA-F(ab′)2-herceptin
In-111-DTPA-trastuzumab
P
T
Monoclonal antibody/antigen expression
Surface CD20 B-lymphocytes
In-111 ibritumomab tiuxetan
Y-90 ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin)
PSMA
In-111 capromab pendetide
(ProstaScint)
C
C
C
PSMA,prostate-specific membrane antigen;RGD,arginine-glycine-aspartic
acid;VEGF,vascular endothelial growth factor.
a   C,Clinical;T,translational;P,preclinical.
b  Some sites outside of the United States clinically applied.
FIG. 5.1  Thymidine as an imaging biomarker.(Top)Thymidine is taken
up into the cell and phosphorylated by thymidine kinase 1 (TK) in
theexternal salvage pathway.Endogenous thymidinede novo
synthesisoccurs with the enzyme thymidylate synthase (TS) using
deoxyuridine(UMP). (Bottom)Similar to unconjugated thymidine, F-18-
labeled thymidine(FLT)is taken up into the cell, phosphorylated, and
trapped. However, as thedashed arrowssuggest, FLT is not further
metabolized and is not incorporated into DNA.FLT-
D,Difluorothymidine;FLT-M,monofluorothymidine;FLT-
T,trifluorothymidine;P (circled),phosphate.
It’s not surprising that imaging trials have shown mixed results,
with F-18 FLT not always correlating with tumor proliferation.
Although disappointing, this finding could change as imaging trial
protocols
are
standardized
(including
timing
and
dynamic
acquisition) and tumor populations are more carefully selected. In
addition, F-18 FLT has shown the ability to grade gliomas and detect
early tumor response in some cases, particularly in breast cancer. The
true promise of F-18 FLT likely relates to its prognostic ability and
success as an indicator of response, although further investigation is
needed.
Normal F-18 FLT distribution (Fig. 5.2A) differs from that of F-18
FDG: very low in the brain, mildly higher in the liver, and markedly
increased in bone marrow (seeFig. 5.2B). Maximal tumor uptake will
likely be less than F-18 FDG PET (seeFig. 5.2C). In addition, F-18 FLT
does not accumulate to any extent when the blood–brain barrier is
intact. Thus, although it may be useful for high-grade gliomas (Fig.
5.3), sensitivity is poor for low-grade and nonenhancing tumors.
Considered an investigational drug by the FDA, FLT use requires
that an investigational new drug (IND) application is in place. To
promote the development of FLT as a potential clinical tool, the
National Cancer Institute (NCI) of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) developed an IND application for F-18 FLT, and multicenter
trials were started through the American College of Radiology
Imaging Network (ACRIN).
Biosynthesis
Amino Acid Transport, Metabolism, and Peptide Synthesis
In 2016, the radiolabeled analog of L-leucine, F-18 fluciclovine
(Axumin) was approved by the FDA for suspected recurrent prostate
cancer with rising prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Other nonpolar
neutral amino acid derivatives also show uptake in cancer: C-11
methionine, F-18 fluoroethyltyrosine (F-18 FET), 3,4-dihydroxy-14[F-
18]-fluoro-L-phenylalanine (F-18 FDOPA), and I-123 methyltyrosine.
Accumulating via active transporters, independent of blood–brain
barrier (BBB) breakdown, they offer an advantage over F-18 FLT. They
are also more sensitive F-18 FDG in brain tumors (Fig. 5.4 ). Although
F-18 FET use is rapidly growing, F-18 FDOPA is probably best known
among these agents, with uses in well-differentiated neuroendocrine
tumors (especially when Ga-68 somatostatin analogs are negative),
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (with greater accuracy than I-
metaiodobenzylguanidine
[mIBG]),
idiopathic
Parkinson’s
disease, and brain gliomas of all grades. Compared with F-18 FDOPA,
F-18 FET shows higher accumulation rates in brain tumors, although
this may not ultimately affect accuracy. Major neuro-oncology groups
have recommended the use of these agents along with enhanced MRI
in primary and recurrent glioma.
Imaging can be improved by fasting for 4 hours before injection to
decrease nonradiolabeled transporter competition. Administering 200
mg carbidopa orally 1 hour before F-18 FDOPA increases pancreatic
tumor visualization. Dynamic imaging with F-18 FET followed by
static images may improve accuracy, and tumor/brain ratio
calculations may be helpful, with values >2.1 to 2.5 most suspicious.
Although accurate, with a very high positive predictive value (up to
98%), rare false-positive uptake can occur in demyelinating lesions of
multiple sclerosis, hematomas, and ischemic lesions. False negatives
are seen with a sensitivity of perhaps 82%.
Still investigational in the United States, use is quickly growing, and
amino acid PET agents are approved for clinical use in some European
countries (F-18 FDOPA is available commercially as IASOdopa). F-18
FET and F-18 FDOPA have largely replaced methionine due to issues
created by the short T1⁄2of 20 minutes for the C-11 label. However, C-11
methionine has also been used to examine tumors, including prostate
cancer, with some success. Alternate amino acid radiotracer agents are
being evaluated in tumors, such as α-[C-11]-L-methyltryptophan (C-
11 AMT), a marker for serotonin synthesis.
Lipid Metabolism and Phospholipid Synthesis
Tumors increase fatty acid metabolism and lipid biosynthesis during
membrane production, and dividing cells increase expression of fatty
acid synthase and choline kinase for phospholipid production.
Radiolabeled C-11 acetate, C-11 choline, and, more recently, F-18
choline have been studied in several prostate cancer trials, an area of
interest given F-18 FDG limitations in hormonally responsive phases
of the disease. These agents show reasonable sensitivity in primary
prostate cancer, with good discrimination from the bladder because
there is no urinary excretion. They have been used with some success
in detecting metastasis. Choline uptake does not appear to correlate
with tumor grade, and false-positive findings could result from
accumulation in benign prostate conditions.
FIG. 5.2  F-18 fluorothymidine (FLT) in newly diagnosed breast
carcinoma. (A) Maximum-intensity projection image shows expected
intense uptake in the bones, moderate activity in the liver, and very low
uptake in the brain. (B) Axial positron emission tomography (PET) and
computed tomography (CT) images in the same patient show a lack of
radiotracer activity in a sclerotic osseous metastasis. (C) Radiotracer
activity was present in the primary tumor in the left medial breast.
FIG. 5.3  F-18 fluorothymidine (FLT) in glioma. (A) T1-weighted,
gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain
shows a large, enhancing tumor in the right frontoparietal cortex. (B) F-
18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)
image at the same level is deceptive, showing little activity. (C)
However, significant accumulation of F-18 FLT more accurately
represents tumor activity.
Image courtesy of Dr. Mark Muzi, PhD, University of Washington,
Seattle.
Hypoxia
Tumor hypoxia is an important prognostic factor in a wide range of
tumors; its presence predicts recurrence, metastasis, and decreased
survival. Tumor hypoxia is a factor in radiotherapy and systemic
therapy resistance. Hypoxia promotes a more aggressive and resistant
cancer phenotype, mediated by the transcription factor hypoxia-
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), which leads to cell-cycle arrest,
angiogenesis, and accelerated glycolysis.
FIG. 5.4  F-18 fluoroethyltyrosine (FET) positron emission tomography
(PET)/magnetic resonance (MR) brain tumor imaging in a patient with
medulloblastoma. (A) Images 10 to 15 minutes after radiotracer
injection. (B) Postcontrast three-dimensional (3-D) T1-weighted MR.
(C) Three-dimensional fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MR.
(D) Fusion FET and postcontrast MR. Recurrent tumor shows
increased radiotracer activity(white arrow)as suspected on MR. The
area is much larger than the contrast-enhancing portion of
recurrence(arrowhead),consistent with radiotracer transport across
blood–brain barrier by the L-amino transport system.
Image courtesy of Dr. Jonathon McConathy, MD, PhD, and Alyssa
Reddy, MD, University of Alabama at Birmingham.
Fluorine-18 Fluoromisonidazole
The nitroimidazoles are a class of hypoxia compounds. In viable cells,
they are reduced to the RNO2radical. When oxygen is present, the
radical is reoxidized, and uncharged misonidazole diffuses out of the
cell. When oxygen levels are low, the radical is further reduced and is
trapped after binding to intracellular molecules.
Lipophilic F-18 fluoromisonidazole (FMISO) readily diffuses into
cells where nitroreductases generate radical anions. Without oxygen
to reverse this, these radicals bind to tissue macromolecules and are
retained. Thus, after equilibration, typically around 2 hours after
injection, the accumulation of F-18 FMISO indicates tissue sites
lacking oxygen. F-18 FMISO has been evaluated in several tumors
(Fig. 5.5) and, like F-18 FLT, is the subject of an NCI IND to promote
investigations.
Copper-144 ATSM
The other major class of hypoxia imaging agent is based on metal
chelates
of
dithiocarbazones.
Copper(II)-diacetyl-bis(N4-
methylthiosemicarbazone; Cu-ATSM) can be radiolabeled with
different copper isotopes. The half-life of Cu-144 ATSM (12.7 hours) is
well suited for clinical use and commercial distribution. Like F-18
FMISO, Cu-144 ATSM is reduced after entering the cell. The resulting
unstable compound freely diffuses from the cell if reoxidized in the
presence of oxygen. In hypoxic tissues, the copper dissociates from the
chelate and becomes irreversibly trapped.
FIG. 5.5  F-18 fluoromisonidazole (FMISO) tumor hypoxia. T1-
weighted, gadolinium (A) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) (B) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images of the brain
reveal an aggressive-appearing enhancing tumor with mass effect and
edema in the right cortex. (C) F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) does show a peripheral ring of increased
metabolic activity peripherally(arrow).(D) F-18 FMISO images of the
same area show significant hypoxic areas in the tumor(arrow),some
more prominent than on F-18 FDG. Hypoxic areas are likely to be more
resistant to chemotherapy and radiation.
Image courtesy of Dr. Mark Muzi, PhD, University of Washington,
Seattle
Hypoxia Imaging Applications
Studies using the hypoxia agents include Cu-144 ATSM in cervical
cancer and F-18 FMISO in head and neck cancer, non–small cell lung
cancer, and gliomas. In glioblastoma, hypoxia is of particular interest
given a typical hypoxic hypercellular rim around the necrotic tumor
center, with aggressiveness shown to relate to the presence of
hypoxia. Although it is unclear whether F-18 FMISO will be able to
predict outcomes, limited studies suggest it may guide therapy in
different ways, such as by modifying external-beam radiation
planning.
Second-generation agents, such as F-18 fluoroazomycin arabinoside
(F-FAZA), are being studied in preclinical and early translational
trials, decreasing the length of time required to reach optimal target-
to-background ratios and slow washout. F-18 flortanidazole (F-18
HX4), an example of a third-generation agent, shows binding
dependent on tumoral oxygen levels, with a promising dramatic cut
in time to imaging.
Signaling and Expression
Cells interact with their environments through numerous complex
signal transduction pathways. Hormones, antibodies, and effector
proteins bind to transmembrane receptors and other proteins, causing
a cascade of reactions that promote or inhibit activity. When cells
malfunction, they overexpress proteins, which can be exploited as
targets for new treatments.
Many of these new therapies involve cancer and various growth
factor receptor–mediated pathways related to tyrosine kinase receptor
function. One area of interest is the inhibition of new blood vessel
formation (angiogenesis) by interacting with vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) or its receptor (VEGFR). Other treatments
seeking to prevent proliferation and migration can be accomplished
by blocking human epidermal growth factors (EGFs) or their human
epidermal growth factor receptors (HER or avian erythroblastic
leukemia viral oncogene homolog, or erbB), such as HER2 in many
breast cancers.
Additional potential targets include insulin-like growth factors
(IGFs) that inhibit programmed cell death (apoptosis) or the death
factors and death receptors that modulate tumor cell survival.
Apoptosis is the primary method by which old or unneeded cells are
removed from the body in a very different process from the necrotic
cell death associated with tumors, trauma, or infection. Signals initiate
a cascade of intracellular responses in a series of caspases, leading to
changes such as cell-surface expression of phosphatidylserine, which
can be targeted by imaging probes like Tc-99m annexin V.
The ability to directly image signal transduction factors can aid in
tumor diagnosis and therapy. Several small-molecule protein ligands
and steroid hormones have been labeled with PET or SPECT agents
(Table 5.3). In the case of VEGF, for example, radiolabeled forms of the
VEGF molecule as well as the arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)
component of the receptor’s ανβ3integrin have been explored.
However, challenges persist, and some agents are less successful than
others. For example, the apoptosis imaging agent Tc-99m annexin V
suffers from the inability to discriminate between necrosis and
apoptosis as well as high background levels in the abdomen.
Monoclonal Antibody Use
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are playing an increasingly important
role in the treatment of many diseases. Ligands can be bound,
blocking their action, or the mAb can promote or block reactions by
binding cell-surface antigens or receptors. The first FDA-approved
antiangiogenesis drug, bevacizumab (Avastin), is an anti-VEGF
monoclonal antibody that can be used in several cancers. These agents
can serve as a foundation for imaging agents by attaching a radiolabel
with a chelator molecule (Fig. 5.6). Because it takes a long time for
large whole antibodies to clear from background tissues, imaging is
optimized by using a radionuclide with a relatively long half-life
(Table 5.4). In some cases, however, it may be possible to utilize an
antibody fragment, which will clear more rapidly.
Several targeted radiolabeled antibodies previously approved for
clinical use suffered from poor target-to-background ratios as well as
from the limited resolution of single-photon radiotracers and gamma
camera systems. Most of these are either utilized infrequently or have
fallen by the wayside. However, several new PET-labeled agents have
been developed for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, improving
sensitivity and quantitative capabilities. Although background
activity and other limitations still exist, radiolabeled mAbs enable
analysis and targeted-therapy delivery that would be difficult to
perform otherwise.
FIG. 5.6  Radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are emerging as
powerful diagnostic and therapeutic tools. Many agents under
investigation are based on unconjugated therapeutic mAbs already
approved for use. The long half-life of Zirconium-89 (Zr-89) is suitable
for labeling to allow time for background activity of the large unbound
molecule to clear. Care must be taken when constructing the molecules
that the radioisotope and its chelator molecule do not affect binding.
Image courtesy of Dr. Suzanne Lapi, PhD, University of Alabama at
Birmingham.
Table 5.3
Investigational Imaging of Epithelial Growth Hormone and Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor
Immunotherapy Agents
Signal Pathway
Radiolabel(s) Therapy Agent
Target
Use
ErbB/Epithelial Growth Factors
EGFR
F-18
C-11
Gefitinib
Receptor TK-I
NSCLC
EGFR
Zr-89
Cu-144
Cetuximab
Chimeric IgG1
mAb
Metastatic colo
metastatic
NSCLC; he
and neck
EGFR
Zr-89
Cu-144
Panitumumab
Human IgG1
mAb
Renal cell;
metastatic
colon
EGFR
C-11
Erlotinib
Receptor TK-I
Pancreatic;
NSCLC
BCR-ABL
C-11
Imatinib
TK-I
CML; AML;
gastrointes
stromal tum
HER2/EGFR
F-18
Lapatinib
TK-I
Breast with br
metastases
other solid
tumors
HER2
Zr-89
Cu-144
In-111
Trastuzumab
Humanized
IgG1 mAb
Breast; gastric
Angiogenesis
VEGFR
Zr-89
Cu-144
Bevacizumab
Humanized
IgG1 mAb
Ovary; fallopi
tube, cervi
glioblastom
colorectal;
VEGFR/PDGFR/KIT
F-18
Sunitinib
Multitarget
receptor
TK-I
renal cell
VEGFR/PDGFR/KIT/RET/FGFR
C-11
Sorafenib
Multitarget
TK-I
renal cell,
hepatocellu
likely man
others
VEGF
Zr-89
VEGF
Ligand
binding
N/A
Integrin ανβ3
Ga-148
F-18
NOTA-
RGD
Galacto-
Receptor
binding
N/A
RGD
BCR-ABL,Fusion gene product translocated to chromosome 22;EGFR,epithelial growth factor
receptor;ErbB,erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene or, in humans, EGF;FGFR,fibroblast
growth factor receptor;HER2,human epithelial growth receptor;KIT,stem cell
receptor;mAb,monoclonal antibody;NSCLC,non–small lung cancer;PDGFR,platelet-derived
growth factor receptor; RET,proto-oncogene;RGD,arginine-glycine-aspartic acid;TK/TK-
I,tyrosine kinase/inhibitor;VEGF,vascular endothelial growth factor;VEGFR,vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor.
Such radiolabeled mAbs can help assess the pharmacokinetics of
new therapy drugs as well as of the mAb itself. A rapidly growing use
of mAbs is in determining which patients will benefit from a therapy
by identifying if the necessary targets are expressed in the tumor
before therapy is attempted. For example, it is known that if breast
cancers or their metastases do not express HER2, estrogen, and/or
progesterone hormone receptors, the patient will have a worse
prognosis. However, it has also been shown that a significant
proportion of biopsies incorrectly identify the tumor’s receptor status,
and it is known that metastatic lesions can differ from the primary
tumor. The unconjugated mAb Trastuzumab (Herceptin), which is
used clinically to inhibit tumor growth by binding the HER2 receptor,
has been successfully labeled with Zirconium-89 (Zr-89) and is being
studied for its ability to identify which tumors express the target and
might respond to the expensive therapy (Fig. 5.7). In the future, these
antibodies could be used to carry a therapeutic radionuclide to treat
tumors that the diagnostic antibody has identified. Potential
therapeutic radiolabels are listed inTable 5.5.
Table 5.4
Long-Lived Radiolabel Options for Antibody Use
Radiolabel
Half-Life
Main Emissions
Emax(MeV)
Potential mAb label
Potential Labels for Whole-Antibody Imaging
Cu-144
12.7 hr
β+(17.8%)
β–(38.4%)
γ (EC 44%)
0.1414
0.57
1.148/1.34
Yes
Br-714
114.2 hr
β+, (γ)
3.98
Yes
Zr-89
78.5 hr
β+, (γ)
0.90
Yes
I-124
100.3 hr
β+, (γ)
2.14
Yes
Potential Labels for Antibody Fragment Imaging
Ga-148
1.1 hr
β+
1.89
Potential mAb fragment
F-18
1.8 hr
β+
0.143
Potential mAb fragment
In-111
2.8 days
γ
Auger e–
0.171/0.245
0.019
Yes
Receptor Expression
Somatostatin Receptors
Somatostatin receptor (SSTR) imaging with PET and SPECT labeled
somatostatin analogs are frequently used in the clinical arena to image
tumors and are important in the identification of appropriate
candidates for targeted radiotherapy. Octreotide compounds labeled
with beta-emitters, such as Lutetium-177 or Yttrium-90, can serve as
an effective treatment in neuroendocrine and other SSTR-positive
tumors. These agents are entering more widespread investigatory
roles in the United States but are more widely used in Europe.
Steroid Hormone Receptors
Not only is hormone-receptor status key in the treatment of breast
cancer, but androgen-responsive tumors are can also be treated by
depriving the tumor of the hormone through blocking drugs. It is no
surprise that targeting these receptors with radiolabeled probes has
become of interest.
F-18 114β-fluoro-5α-dihydrotestosterone (F-18 FDHT) has been
used in clinical trials to detect androgen receptors in primary prostate
tumors as well metastatic disease. Work has also been done in breast
cancer receptor targeting with F-18 114α-17β-fluoroestradiol (F-18
FES). F-18 FESuptake has been correlated with patient prognosis and
response to aromatase inhibitors. For HER2 receptor assessment, other
agents in addition to Zr-89 trastuzumab are being explored with both
SPECT and PET antibody-based radiotracers. Several different agents,
including In-111 trastuzumab and a Ga-148-labeled F(ab′)2fragment,
are under investigation.
