Reporter Gene Imaging and Gene Therapy
In many cases, targets of interest cannot be directly imaged. A marker,
or reporter, gene can be inserted into the DNA along with a promoter
gene, coupling the reporter expression to the target gene. The reporter
gene encodes for protein, which can be exploited for imaging or
therapy.
Strategy
Many different viral vectors have been used to transfer genetic
material into a host cell, although the most common is the herpes
simplex virus type I (HSV1). HSV1 is highly infectious, with a broad
range of targets on the host cell. It also possesses many nonessential
genes, which can be deleted without compromising its ability to infect
and replicate, making room for genes of interest. Researchers can
construct a plasmid and use viral vector transport to insert a reporter
gene into the system being observed. Imaging can be done with a
targeted reporter probe that is trapped within a cell carrying one of
these reporter genes. For example, in preclinical work, the gene for
luciferase can be inserted into cells, and then optical imaging can
monitor expression in transfected cells. Two main categories of
reporter gene strategies exist—those using receptors and those using
enzymes.
If the inserted reporter gene produces receptors, the degree of
receptor expression can be imaged as a measure reflecting cellular
activity. Although challenges exist, such as developing probes with
sufficient binding affinity, these receptors make excellent imaging
targets, easily accessible on the cell surface. Several well-characterized
reporter systems are being used in clinical trials, including
D2dopaminergic and somatostatin receptors.
Enzyme-based reporter systems are more commonly used than
receptor systems, providing the advantage of signal amplification.
Rather than the one-to-one relationship seen in receptor imaging, one
enzyme molecule can act on numerous substrate molecules. The
enzyme most widely used in reporter gene imaging is based on HSV1-
tk. Once a cell is transfected, expression of HSV1-tk results in an
enzyme with several potential substrates, including ganciclovir, 5-
iododeoxyuridine, and 1-(2′-deoxy-2′fluoro-1-β-D-arabinofuranosyl-5-
iodouracil (FIAU). These can be radiolabeled with agents ranging
from
iodine
(iodine-124
FIAU,
I-123
FIAU)
to
F-18
(F-18
fluoroganciclovir).
Monitoring Gene Therapy
The use of recombinant gene technology is an exciting area of
research, providing novel solutions for treating disease such as cancer.
However, to be able to develop such protocols, accurate monitoring
methods are needed. By linking a therapeutic gene with an imaging
reporter gene, this would be possible in vivo using noninvasive means
with PET or SPECT.
In treatment, for example, a cell transfected with HSV1-tk could be
killed by administering a prodrug substrate, such as ganciclovir,
which would form a toxic compound inside the cell when acted on by
HSV1-tk. Alternatively,cells could be transfected with the gene for a
receptor, such as the somatostatin receptor, along with a therapeutic
gene. The distribution of the gene could be assessed with In-111
octreotide or Ga-148 DOTA-TOC and activity followed over time to
assess therapy effect.
Nanotechnology
Nanoparticles are a rapidly developing area of investigation. These
tiny organic and inorganic particles, ranging in size from 1 to 100 nm,
are another area blurring the boundaries between imaging and
therapy. They can be used as imaging contrast agents and also can
deliver therapy, with many being responsive to conditions associated
with tumor expression or even factors such as pH. Rare earth–labeled
nanoparticles can be used for optical imaging and MRI. PET imaging
is possible using radiolabels such as F-18 and Cu-144.
