Molecular Imaging
Molecular imaging (MI) allows noninvasive visualization and
quantification of functions occurring at the cellular or molecular level.
This can involve several different techniques (Table 5.1), but tagging a
targeted probe with a radioactive molecule is one of the most
important. This label makes imaging and quantitation possible with
only small (or tracer) amounts of the probe, helping to minimize the
impact on the patient or tissues being assessed. In recent years, the
impact of positron emission tomography (PET) with the glucose
analog fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) on cancer
treatment is illustrative of the power of these examinations. Several
new radiopharmaceuticals have recently gained U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval, and multiple other agents are
moving closer to that goal, finding wider acceptance in research and
playing key roles in multicenter trials. Learners not specializing in
nuclear medicine may not find this chapter critical. For those in the
nuclear medicine field, the material in this chapter outlines exciting
new developments and important concepts related to transitioning
imaging research from preclinical research into clinical use. It is
reasonable to expect that the more common examples discussed are
understood, even if not yet FDA approved.
MI assays can be directed at wide-ranging targets to help diagnose
diseases, monitor early treatment response, determine whether the
necessary targets are present in the patient for a directed therapy to be
effective before trying it, or help expedite new-drug development. MI
is central to cutting-edge efforts to provide “precision” medical care,
where therapy is tailored to each individual situation. Some common
terms are listed inBox 5.1.
Imaging Techniques
Radionuclide Imaging
PET offers the benefits of good resolution and high sensitivity. When
combined with computed tomography (CT) or, more recently, with
MR, accuracy is improved as structures are defined. CT attenuation
also allows calculation of the widely used semiquantitative standard
uptake value (SUV) for rapid comparisons. At times, however,
traditional single-photon-emitting agents may be utilized in place of
PET as a less expensive or more readily obtainable alternative. Single-
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) adds contrast
resolution, and single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography (SPECT/CT) can be performed to add
specificity. However, quantitation is much more difficult.
Specialized cameras such as positron emission mammography
(PEM) and Technetium-99m sestamibi single-photon breast-specific
gamma imaging (BSGI)/molecular breast imaging (MBI) cameras
increase sensitivity over whole-body cameras. Micro-PET and micro-
SPECT systems are available for research with smaller animals.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
When polar molecules are in the magnetic field of the magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scanner, they align parallel or antiparallel to
the field as they spin on an axis, and images are formed from the low-
level signals they emit in response to radiofrequency pulse
stimulation. Various applied gradients help localize the signals in
space. Because hydrogen is the most common polar molecule present,
MRI usually creates images by exploiting the water-content
differences of tissues. Although the limited detectable signal means
that the sensitivity of MRI is low compared with nuclear medicine
techniques, it does provide very good anatomical information. The
spatial resolution is on the order of 1 mm (compared with 5 mm with
PET).
To look beyond anatomy, various special functional MRI (fMRI)
techniques can be performed. First, dynamic contrast enhancement
(DCE) can examine the microvascular environment of tumors.
Another fMRI method, diffusion weighting (DW), characterizes
tissues based on differences in water-molecule mobility, with greater
freedom detectable when tissues are less cellular, such as in necrotic
tumors, compared with highly cellular areas. Based on the DW-MR,
an apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value is calculated. Lower
ADC values have been shown in tumors with poorer prognosis, such
as glioblastomas. Blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) fMRI can
differentiate
paramagnetic
deoxyhemoglobin
from
nonpolar
oxygenated hemoglobin, showing increased T2 signal in regions with
higher concentrations of oxygen. This can be used to detect perfused
areas in a tumor or look at increased neuronal activity related to some
cognitive task.
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) offers the advantage of
tracking metabolites in living organisms using molecules already in
place. Because only polar molecules will emit signal, polar isotopes of
common atoms, such as H-1, C-13, or P-31, are used. Molecules other
than H-1 are not present in high concentrations, and polar isotopes
even less so. For example, only 1% of carbon exists as C-13, and it is
only 25% as available compared with H-1. Therefore, in order to
image critical metabolites such as citrate, choline, and pyruvate, high-
field-strength
magnets
and
newer
techniques
such
as
hyperpolarization are required for detection. Imaging such low signal
levels works best with a very homogeneous magnetic field, which is
best found when imaging tumors in the breast, prostate, or brain.
Table 5.1
Functional and Molecular Imaging Modalities
Modality
Advantages
Disadvantages
PET
• High sensitivity:
• Radiation
• Concentrations 10–10to 10–12
• Highly quantitative
• Temporal monitoring possible
• Many translational agents under
development
• Cyclotron on site for short-
lived agents
• Spatial resolution relatively
low
SPECT
• Widely available
• Many probes
• Lower spatial resolution and
less quantitative than PET
• Ionizing radiation
Optical
imaging
• High spatial resolution possible
• High sensitivity
• Concentrations 10–9to 10–114
• Quick and inexpensive
• Limited detection depth
• Limited clinical use
MRS
• No ionizing radiation
• Native molecules, no contrast needed
• Limited region examined
• Limited sensitivity
• Concentrations 10–9to 10–114
• Weak signal
MRI
• High resolution
• Lower temporal resolution
• Sensitivity lower
Ultrasound
with
contrast
• Portable
• No radiation
• Low cost
• High frequency with microbubbles
provides good spatial resolution
• Real-time temporal monitoring
• Microbubbles research only
• Sensitivity lower
• Quantitative ability low
MRI,Magnetic resonance imaging;MRS,magnetic resonance spectroscopy;PET,positron
emission tomography;SPECT,single-photon emission computed tomography.
Optical Imaging
Bioluminescence and fluorescence optical imaging techniques are
limited to preclinical work with small animals (usually mice) or very
superficial targets (seen during endoscopy or surgery), because soft
tissues attenuate and scatter the relatively low-energy light photons.
However, it is inexpensive, flexible, and sensitive.
Bioluminescent glow in fireflies, jellyfish, and some bacteria
involves the enzyme luciferase. When luciferase is placed into the
DNA of cells as a reporter gene and the substrate,D-luciferin, is
administered, a chemical reaction results in low-level emissions.
BOX 5.1 Molecular Imaging Definitions
Apoptosis:Programmed cell death, which is the way the body
disposes of damaged, old, or unwanted cells.
Pharmacodynamics:Study of the effects of a drug on a living
organism, including relationship between the drug dose and
its effect.
Pharmacogenetics:Study of how a body reacts to a drug
based on an individual’s genetic makeup.
Pharmacokinetics:Study of how living tissues process drugs,
including alterations in chemical makeup and drug
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. This may
involve tagging a drug with a probe or radiotracer.
Reporter gene system:Engineered genes that encode a
product that can be easily assayed to assess a process being
monitored after the genes are transfected into cells.
Signal amplification:Use of enzymes to activate contrast
agent (e.g., protease activation optical agents).
Target identification—DNA microarray:Efficient method for
identifying potential targets by detecting mRNA expression.
Further target validation needed because posttranscriptional
and posttranslational processing means proteins are not
always expressed.
Target identification—genomics:The study of DNA
sequences, genes, and their control and expression.
Target identification—proteomics:High-throughput methods
to quantitatively determine tissue protein expression
(alternative to DNA microarray). Mass spectrometry–based
proteomics using cell lines or tissue samples or
immunohistochemistry of diseased or unaffected tissues can
be used in tissue arrays.
Target validation:Once the target is identified, expression and
subcellular localization are evaluated in a variety of tissues.
Translational medicine:The process of moving basic
laboratory research into clinical practice, including necessary
