The Skeletal System
Made up of inorganic calcium hydroxyapatite (Ca10[PO4]6[OH]2)
crystal and an organic matrix of collagen and blood vessels, the
skeleton is constantly changing and remodeling. This physiological
activity can be imaged with radioactive analogs of calcium,
phosphate, or hydroxyl ions (OH–) that can localize to the bone, with
areas of growth or repair resulting in increased turnover. Whereas
conventional imaging methods such as radiographs and computed
tomography (CT) examine the anatomical features of structures,
nuclear medicine techniques are often much more sensitive for disease
because they evaluate function in an organ or system.
The bone scan uses a radiopharmaceutical composed of radioactive
component, technetium-99m (Tc-99m), joined with a localizing carrier
molecule, e.g., methylene diphosphonate (MDP). It is a highly
versatile examination, able to assess the effects of tumor, infection,
trauma, arthritis, and metabolic bone disease. Because of its ability to
image the entire skeleton with high sensitivity at a reasonable cost, it
remains widely used decades after its introduction, despite
technological advances in CT and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging.
Scintigraphic image quality has improved dramatically over time,
due to advances in camera detector technology and processing
software. Accuracy is also improved through the use of three-
dimensional (3-D) single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT). In addition, as uptake may be the result of many different
processes, CT correlation can be used to explain the etiology of
nonspecific abnormal activity. Fusing the CT to the SPECT is
especially helpful in correcting the low specificity of the bone scan.
This fusion will very often be better when images are acquired on a
hybrid SPECT/CT scanner.
Positron emission tomography (PET) images are generally superior
to those produced from traditional single-photon imaging agents such
as Tc-99m MDP. In recent years, the rapid spread of fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) PET/CT has changed how many
diseases are assessed, particularly cancer. F-18 FDG examinations
often complement or supplement the abilities of the bone scan.
Another PET agent, F-18 sodium fluoride (F-18 NaF), is a highly
sensitive bone-imaging radiopharmaceutical that can produce images
in a much shorter time than is possible with Tc-99m MDP. Although
uptake is not specific, occurring in benign and malignant processes,
sodium fluoride PET/CT has also demonstrated greater accuracy than
bone scan. Clinical use of F-18 NaF, however, has been limited in the
United States because of issues with reimbursement.
This chapter examines common scintigraphic bone-imaging
techniques, using Tc-99m MDP, radiolabeled white blood cells, Tc-
99m sulfur colloid bone marrow scan, and F-18 NaF PET/CT (F-18
FDG PET is more thoroughly covered in Chapter 13). In addition,
targeted radionuclide therapy of metastatic disease with bone-
localizing beta-emitters (i.e., strontium-89 [Sr-89], samarium-153 [Sm-
153], rhenium-186 [Rh-186], and phosphorus-32 [P-32]) and the more
recently approved alpha-emitter radium-223 (Ra-223) is discussed.
Finally, osteoporosis and bone-density measurement with dual-
energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) will be reviewed.
Radionuclide Imaging of the Skeleton:
Radiopharmaceuticals
An ideal radiopharmaceutical must be inexpensive, remain stable,
rapidly accumulate at the target, and quickly clear from background
tissues. It should also have favorable imaging and dosimetry
characteristics. For single-photon gamma camera imaging, Tc-99m
meets these criteria, with its desirable 140-keV gamma photon and 6-
hour half-life. In the case of PET, all agents emit two 511-keV
annihilation photons that travel at 180 degrees from each other.
Imaging is most commonly performed with fluorine-18. The 109.8-
minute half-life is short enough to minimize patient dose yet long
enough to allow for production and distribution from offsite cyclotron
and radiopharmacy facilities in addition to the time required for the
exam.
Technetium-99m MDP
The combination of Tc-99m with a phosphate analog carrier molecule
creates an agent that can demonstrate skeletal turnover. Initially,
pyrophosphates (Tc-99m PYP) were used, characterized by their P–O–
P bond (Fig. 6.1). However, agents containing a diphosphonate
structure were ultimately found superior: Their P–C–P bond is more
stable and allows faster background clearance by renal excretion. Tc-
99m hydroxymethylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m HMDP or HDP) and
Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP) are both able to
demonstrate a high level of detail, although Tc-99m MDP is more
commonly used (Fig. 6.2).
FIG. 6.1  Chemical structure of pyrophosphate and diphosphonates.
FIG. 6.2  Normal Tc-99m MDP whole-body bone scan in an adult. A
high level of anatomical detail can be visualized. Some areas of
relatively increased activity are normal, including some uptake in joints
such as the sacroiliac and sternoclavicular joints. A small dose
infiltration at the injection site is seen in the left antecubital fossa soft
tissues.
Preparation
Tc-99m MDP can be prepared from a simple kit. Tc-99m, in the form
of sodium pertechnetate (Na99mTcO4) obtained from the technetium-
molybdenum generator, is injected into a vial containing MDP,
stabilizers, and stannous ion. Stannous tin (Sn II) acts as a reducing
agent, allowing the Tc-99m pertechnetate to form a chelate bond with
the MDP carrier molecule.
Incomplete labeling may occur if air is introduced into the vial
because oxygen causes hydrolysis of the stannous ion (from Sn II to Sn
IV). Insufficient stannous ion results in free technetium pertechnetate
(“free tech”), causing image degradation with increased background
soft tissue activity and uptake in the thyroid, stomach, and salivary
glands. Tc-99m MDP should be used within 2 to 3 hours of
preparation, or radiopharmaceutical breakdown may also yield free
technetium pertechnetate. Excess alumina from the technetium
generator eluate may lead to colloid formation, which can be seen as
uptake in the reticuloendothelial system of the liver.
Uptake and Pharmacokinetics
The injected Tc-99m MDP rapidly distributes into the extracellular
fluid and is quickly taken up into bone. Although accumulation
relates to the amount of blood flow to a region, uptake is primarily the
result of osteogenic activity, being much higher in areas of active bone
formation and repair than in mature bone (Fig. 6.3). Tc-99m MDP
binding occurs by chemisorption in the hydroxyapatite mineral
component of the osseous matrix. Accumulation in areas of
amorphous calcium phosphate may account for the Tc-99m MDP
uptake sometimes seen in sites outside the bone, such as dystrophic
soft tissue ossification. Decreased activity is seen in areas of reduced
or absent blood flow or infarction. Diminished uptake or cold areas
are also often seen in lytic metastases.
Approximately 50% of the dose is localized to the bone, with the
remainder excreted by the kidneys. Although peak bone uptake
occurs approximately 1 hour after injection, the highest target-to-
background ratios are seen after 6 to 12 hours. Images are typically
taken at approximately 3 hours to balance the need for background
clearance with the relatively short 6-hour half-life of Tc-99m and
patient convenience. Also, the radiotracer half-life limits imaging to a
maximum of 24 hours after injection. Radiopharmaceutical dosimetry
is discussed in Appendix 1.
Imaging Protocol of Tc-99m MDP
The patient should be well hydrated and, after injection, should be
instructed to drink several cups of fluid to improve background
clearance. Frequent bladder voiding reduces the radiation dose. Care
must be used because urinary contamination can cause confusion or
mask potential lesion sites.
There are three main phases that can be imaged with a bone scan.
The first phase involves rapid dynamic image acquisition immediately
after injection to assess blood flow to an area of concern. This can be
followed by the second, soft tissue, phase, which lasts a few minutes.
Delayed images that visualize the bones make up the third phase.
Occasionally, further delay, a so-called fourth phase, is still needed at
18 to 24 hours to clear soft tissue activity and maximize target-to-
background ratios.
Before injection, a decision must be made as to whether or not blood
flow and soft tissues need to be evaluated as part of a three-phase
examination or if routine delayed images alone will suffice. Box 6.1
lists uses for both acquisition protocols. Metastatic disease and back
pain assessment can be done by delayed imaging alone. The presence
of increased arterial blood flow and abnormal soft tissue activity can
aid in the diagnosis of several additional acute problems:
osteomyelitis, painful joint prosthesis, fracture, avascular necrosis (or
osteonecrosis), bone graft status, and complex regional pain syndrome
(previously called reflex sympathetic dystrophy). A sample protocol
for three-phase and routine delayed scanning is listed in Box 6.2, and
an example of the parameters used for SPECT imaging is summarized
in Box 6.3.
FIG. 6.3  Prostate cancer metastatic disease. (A) Numerous foci of
increased activity, largely in the axial skeleton. (B) Two years later, with
disease progression, diffuse increased activity is seen in the spine,
ribs, and pelvis, and multiple new lesions are seen in the skull and
proximal long bones. In some areas such as the pelvis, the bones
appear almost normal in a pattern referred to as a superscan or a
beautiful bone scan, corresponding to the now nearly confluent
sclerotic lesions that had also visibly progressed on computed
tomography (CT).
Box 6.1 Bone-Scan Applications
Three-Phase Bone Scan
Infection
Osteomyelitis
Cellulitis
Diabetic ulcers and Charcot joint with potential
osteomyelitis
Septic joint
Painful joint prosthesis—infection or loosening
Fracture
Posttraumatic
Shin splints/stress fracture
Occult hip fracture in the elderly
Avascular necrosis/osteonecrosis
Regional pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic dystrophy)
Bone-graft status
Heterotopic bone maturity in paralyzed patient
Routine Bone-Scan Applications (delayed
imaging only)
Metastatic disease
Evaluation of lower back pain (underlying vessel background
limits use in early phases)
Spondylolisthesis (single-photon emission computed
tomography [SPECT] highly important)
Discitis/vertebral osteomyelitis
Compression fracture assessment
Suitability for vertebroplasty
Investigate possible relationship to metastases, identify
lesions elsewhere
If dynamic three-phase scanning is to be performed, a bolus of Tc-
99m MDP is injected intravenously with the area in question under
the camera (Fig. 6.4). The injection site should be chosen to avoid any
suspected pathological condition. For example, if comparison with the
opposite hand may be needed at any time, injection in a site such as
the foot should be considered. The first phase consists of serial 1- to 4-
second dynamic blood flow images acquired for 60 seconds. Then
blood pool or soft tissue second-phase images are obtained of the
main region and any secondary areas of interest, such as in patients
with arthritis or multiple stress injuries. The timing of delayed images
may vary, from 2 hours in younger patients up to 3 to 4 hours in the
elderly, obese, and in those with poor renal function.
Using a low-energy, high-resolution collimator, delayed planar
images can be obtained by whole-body scan or spot views. The whole-
body scan allows rapid, seamless coverage as the camera moves over
the patient at a predetermined rate. On the other hand, spot views,
with the camera fixed over each area to be imaged, provide greater
resolution and detail. In most centers, a whole-body scan is
performed, with high-count spot views reserved for symptomatic
areas or additional views of suspicious-appearing regions (Fig. 6.5).
Other modifications can be performed. Magnified views with a
pinhole collimator can better visualize joints in children, osteonecrosis
of the hips, and trauma to the carpal bones. In SPECT, a volume of
data is acquired from camera detectors orbiting the area of interest,
and the reconstructed 3D images can be formatted in transaxial,
sagittal, and coronal planes. SPECT images provide better resolution,
more precise localization, and improved contrast of cold and hot
lesions (Fig. 6.6). Not only can this increase sensitivity, but more exact
localization can increase specificity by avoiding confusion with benign
uptake (Fig. 6.7).
Box 6.2 Sample Whole-Body Survey and Single-Photon
Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) Skeletal
Scintigraphy Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
Well-hydrated patient
Void bladder immediately before study (and frequently for
next several hours).
Remove metal objects (jewelry, coins, keys) before imaging.
Radiopharmaceutical Administration
Select injection site to avoid possible sites of pathology.
Adult dose: 20 mCi (740 MBq), intravenously
Pediatric dose: 0.25 mCi/kg (9.3 MBq/kg), with a minimum
dose of 1.0 mCi (37 MBq)
Acquisition
Low-energy high-resolution collimator
Energy window centered at 140 keV with 15% to 20% window
width
If three-phase exam desired:
Phase 1: Perfusion
Camera over area of interest. Inject bolus, begin imaging
as activity 1 to 3 sec/frame for 1 minute, 64 × 64 or 128 ×
128 matrix.
Phase 2: Blood pool
Image immediately after flow (multiple areas possible for
3-5 minutes), 150,000 to 300,000 counts/image, 128 × 128
matrix.
Phase 3: Routine delayed images
Whole-body planar images: Camera detectors anterior
and posterior to patient; detector speed set at 10 to 15
cm/min; matrix 1024 × 256
Planar spot views (optional): 4 to 10 minutes each (based
on time required for 500,000 count images of the chest
300,000 to 1,000,000);  150,000 to 250,000 counts for
images of the skull and distal extremities
Additional Options
Extended delay planar images (fourth phase): 6 to 24 hours
postinjection
Pinhole collimator images: 75,000 to 100,000 count/image;
zoom magnification
High resolution and magnified for children and small
joints
SPECT
Detectors 360°degree circular orbit, 60 to 120 stops, 15 to 30
sec/stop, 128 × 128 matrix (or greater)
CT acquisition for dedicated SPECT/CT: multislice spiral or
cone-beam, 512 × 512 matrix, tube 80 to 120 kV and 3 to 300
mAs (varies but recommend use of dose-reduction software)
Reconstruction
Two possible methods:
3-D iterative reconstruction with 3 to 5 iterations and 8 to 10
subsets; attenuation correction using the CT images;
manufacturer’s resolution recovery software
Filtered back-projection
Postprocessing filter: Butterworth (cutoff 0.4, power 7) or
gaussian
Display
2-D axial, coronal, sagittal planes, fused or unfused to CT
Box 6.3 Sample Protocol F-18 Sodium Fluoride (F-18
NaF) Positron Emission Tomography With Computed
Tomography (PET/CT)
Patient Preparation
Hydrate (e.g., 1-2 cups water), voids bladder prior to going on
scanner
Note: F-18 FDG rules concerning insulin and fasting do not
apply.
Radiopharmaceutical Dose
Adults: 0.04 to 0.1 mCi/kg (1.5-3.7 MBq/kg) intravenously,
typical dose 5 to dose 10 mCi (185 to 370 MBq); maximum
dose considered for obese patients
Pediatric: 0.06 mCi/kg (2.2 MBq/kg); minimum 0.05 mCi (18.5
MBq), maximum 5 mCi (185 MBq)
Acquisition and Processing
30- to 60-min postinjection delay (90-120 min for extremities)
1- to 2-min/bed position (time-of-flight scanner); 128 × 128
matrix
CT for attenuation correction/localization: 30 mA/120 kVp,
rotation 0.5 sec, and pitch 1.0
Reconstruction parameters similar to F-18 FDG PET.
Correlating findings with CT is often key to making the correct
diagnosis. When no radiographic abnormality is seen to explain
activity, suspicion is increased that uptake is the result of early
metastasis. Although commercially available software can fuse the
SPECT with a CT obtained at another time, studies acquired on a
hybrid SPECT/CT scanner usually result in superior results because of
the more uniform slice thickness and positioning between the two
examinations and because of the elimination of the chance that the
pathology will change in the interval between studies.
F-18 Sodium Fluoride (F-18 NaF) PET/CT
F-18
NaF
was
originally
approved
as
a
bone-imaging
radiopharmaceutical by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in 1972. However, the high-energy 511-keV photons of the PET
tracer were not well suited for use with the gamma cameras available
at the time, and F-18 NaF was replaced following the introduction of
technetium-99m–labeled radiopharmaceuticals. F-18 NaF was listed as
a discontinued drug in 1984, remaining out of general use until
dedicated PET and then PET/CT cameras became widely available
nearly two decades later. Reexamination of sodium fluoride PET/CT
demonstrated high sensitivity for tumor involvement in bone (Fig.
6.8).
FIG. 6.4  Three-phase bone scan in a patient with a painful right knee
prosthesis for several months. (A) Normal perfusion to the knees is
seen in dynamic images taken at 1- to 2-second intervals for 1 minute.
(B) Blood-pool soft tissue activity shows mild activity around a
photopenic left prosthesis, with greater activity around the right knee
prosthesis medial to the right femoral condyle and below the lateral
tibial component. (C) Images performed 3 hours later reveal activity
concentrating below the right lateral tibial component (arrow),
corresponding to bone lateral to a focal lucency on the radiograph (D).
Although acute infection varies in appearance, the blood flow is
classically increased. This case has a more chronic appearance, felt to
be from loosening.
Clinical use of sodium fluoride has been limited by issues with
reimbursement. The U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS)
recently
ruled
there
was
insufficient
evidence
to
support
reimbursement of these scans, despite a large multicenter trial
performed as part of the National Oncologic PET Registry (NOPR)
that showed a significant impact of F-18 NaF on patient management.
Additionally, after shortages of Tc-99m occurred due to serious issues
with the aging nuclear reactors used to produce many medical
radioisotopes, F-18 NaF was touted as a potentially critical alternative
to Tc-99m, as F-18 is made in a cyclotron rather than a reactor.
F-18 NaF Imaging Protocol
After intravenous injection, F-18 NaF localizes to areas of new bone
formation through chemisorption, in a similar fashion to that of Tc-
99m MDP. However, sodium fluoride is not highly protein bound in
the blood, resulting in rapid renal clearance.This allows imaging to
begin as early as 30 to 45 minutes (although a longer delay, 60-90
minutes, will result in superior images). Given the high target-to-
background ratios and excellent resolution, PET images can be
performed without CT attenuation correction. However, intensity is
more uniform with attenuation correction, preventing bones in areas
subject to less attenuation from falsely appearing more intense than
those where photons are more likely absorbed or scattered. CT is also
very useful to localize lesions to areas of bone pathology and
differentiate malignancy from benign processes.
The low-dose whole-body CT requires only seconds. This is
followed by the emission PET scan data, collected as the patient
moves through the scanner in a series of bed positions, each covering
several centimeters at 1 to 2 minutes per bed position. A few sites
have advocated the use of a “cocktail” combining F-18 FDG and F-18
NaF in order to assess the bones and soft tissues in one session.
FIG. 6.5  (A) Anterior and posterior whole-body images of a patient
with breast carcinoma have the advantage of depicting the entire
skeleton in a single view. Note the abnormal activity in one of the lower
left ribs. (B) High-count-density left posterior oblique spot view of the
same patient. The location and appearance of lesions are often clearer
on the spot view. In this case, the lesion tracking along the rib is classic
for a metastatic lesion.
FIG. 6.6  Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate (MDP)
bone-scan planar anterior (A) and posterior (B) spot views of the pelvis
show what appears to be radiotracer in the urinary bladder and
probable skin contamination on the genitalia. (C) Fused SPECT/CT
reveals that one of the areas actually corresponds to metastasis in the
right superior pubic ramus.
Patients should be well hydrated, void their bladders frequently,
and continue to drink extra fluids for a few hours after injection to
minimize radiation to the bladder. Although the higher energy of PET
photons can lead to increased radiation doses to the patient, its
relatively short half-life of 109.8 minutes helps limit exposure, which
is outlined in Appendix 1.
Image Interpretation
Normal and Altered Distribution
The appearance of the bones varies dramatically with age. Most
notably, the growing skeleton will concentrate radiotracer at all active
growth plates (Fig. 6.9). These areas are also often the critical sites in
trauma, primary bone tumors, and osteomyelitis. Therefore, it is
essential that children are immobilized and positioned symmetrically
in terms of rotation and distance from the camera face. By adulthood,
growth-plate uptake diminishes and disappears. Normal activity can
persist in some areas, such as residual ossification centers in the
sternum and the sternomanubrial joint.
FIG. 6.7  Improved specificity of single-photon emission computed
tomography with CT (SPECT/CT). (A) Planar anterior and posterior
whole-body technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate
(MDP) images (left) show uptake in the posterior C-spine (red arrow
heads) and right face (yellow arrow). (B) Axial SPECT/CT slices of the
head with SPECT (right column), CT (middle column), and fused (left
column) images show that the uptake on whole-body image in the face
(top row) localizes to the right temporomandibular joint (yellow arrow),
with no bone abnormality—likely inflammatory activity. (C) Axial
SPECT/CT shows that the c-spine activity has two components. The
most significant is the result of a metastatic lytic lesion in the eroded C5
spinous process and left posterior lamina from thyroid cancer (blue
arrow) and not from the mild degenerative facet change seen just
anterior to the uptake anteriorly or from (D) degenerative disc changes
(red arrowhead) on sagittal views, which show mildly increased benign
activity.
Some bones, such the sacroiliac joints, the iliac wings, or a lordotic
spine, normally appear more intense because of their greater density
or closer proximity to the camera. Increased uptake bilaterally in the
frontal bones of the calvarium may occur from benign hyperostosis
frontalis interna. Increased activity, sometimes asymmetrical, is
occasionally seen where the sphenoid ridge meets the calvarium along
the lateral orbits. The costochondral junction is another common site
of benign uptake and is an unlikely location for metastasis unless
uptake extends along the rib.
Osteoarthritic changes are routinely seen and usually identifiable by
a classic distribution. Arthritis is frequently bilateral and often
involves both sides of the joint. The areas typically involved are the
spine, knee (particularly the medial compartment), feet, shoulder,
wrist (especially at the base of the first metacarpal), (Fig. 6.10). Uptake
in the patella may result from chondromalacia and degenerative
change. Mild asymmetry has been noted in the shoulders, apparently
affected by handedness and use. Of note with F-18 FDG PET, arthritis
rarely shows the high levels of uptake seen on bone scan. F-18 sodium
fluoride, on the other hand, is often very abnormal in sites of arthritis
and other benign lesions (Fig. 6.11).
Assessment of spinal uptake frequently requires radiographic
correlation with CT (or MR) in addition to SPECT. Some of the
changes that can occur from degenerative arthritis include facet
hypertrophy, disk space narrowing, osteophyte formation, and
Schmorl’s nodes. Osteoporosis may result in classic insufficiency
vertebral compression fractures (Fig. 6.12). Abnormal uptake in the
vertebra may be seen before radiographic changes occur and may not
resolve, particularly in the elderly (Fig. 6.13). Positive uptake has
sometimes been used to help determine which patients might obtain
symptomatic relief from the injection of bone cement (vertebroplasty).
The H-shaped insufficiency fracture occurring in the sacrum (Fig.
6.14) is frequently seen only on scintigraphic studies and not
detectable on CT or MR.
The effects of trauma are often identifiable on bone scan. In the ribs,
vertically aligned focal uptake in multiple, often successive ribs is a
classic finding (Fig. 6.15). Metastatic lesions, on the other hand, tend
to track along the bone, as shown in Fig. 6.5. When fractures are
present, a poorly defined lytic lesion or aggressive periosteal change
favors a pathological fracture, whereas regular callous formation is
seen in a healing benign posttraumatic fracture. In some cases, the
cause of a fracture may be difficult to determine without follow-up.
FIG. 6.8  F-18 sodium fluoride (F-18 NaF) scan is more sensitive than
bone scan. (A) Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate
(MDP) bone scan from a woman with advanced triple-negative breast
cancer shows very subtle uptake in a left upper rib in an area negative
on computed tomography (CT). (B) F-18 NaF positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) maximal-intensity
projection (MIP) image better demonstrates the rib lesion, later proven
a false positive on biopsy and stable on follow-up. Interestingly, this
lesion showed only low uptake with fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-
18 FDG), similar to bone scan. The lack of specificity with NaF often
involves arthritis, as demonstrated in the right antecubital fossa, which
localized to the elbow joint on CT. (C) F-18 NaF MIP images performed
6 months apart in a patient with prostate cancer demonstrate the
excellent resolution of detail, with numerous small metastases
worsening over time, despite using only a 40-minute delay.
Soft Tissues
The appearance of the soft tissues on bone scan is of critical
importance. Normally, the kidneys and bladder show excreted
activity from radiotracer in the urine. Abnormal increased or
decreased activity must be explained (Box 6.4). Soft tissues (e.g., breast
or abdominal fat) and implants attenuate the intensity of the
underlying bones. Abnormal increased uptake outside of bone may be
subtle or difficult to differentiate from true bone lesions.
FIG. 6.9  Normal radiotracer distribution in the immature skeleton. An
anterior whole-body image shows increased uptake in the growth
centers. Uptake is seen in the anterior rib ends, sternal ossification
centers, and major joints.
FIG. 6.10  Characteristic appearance of osteoarthritis in the hands and
wrists. Uptake is increased in multiple distal interphalangeal joints and
is particularly intense at the base of the first left metacarpal, a common
place for osteoarthritis.
In some instances, abnormal soft tissue uptake may be present from
hemorrhage or necrosis, likely as a result of a combination of
ossification and agent binding to macromolecules. The effects of
recent surgery may be evident, and tumors (primary and metastatic)
may be seen (Figs. 6.16 and 6.17). In the right lower chest and upper
abdomen, abnormal soft tissue activity may be a result of breast
tumor, malignant pleural effusion, or metastatic adenocarcinoma of
the breast or colon to the liver. Correlation with CT is helpful to
uncover the disease that may be causing Tc-99m MDP accumulation
(Fig. 6.18). In addition to the effects of disease, abnormal activity in
the liver may be the result of improper radiopharmaceutical
preparation resulting in a colloid that is then taken up by the hepatic
reticuloendothelial system. Radiopharmaceutical quality control tests
can identify these cases.
When a three-phase scan technique is used, markedly increased
perfusion indicates that the disease or trauma affecting the area is
acute because chronic processes cause little or no asymmetry in blood
flow, as shown in Fig. 6.4. Increased blood flow and blood-pooling
activity can result from cellulitis, abscess, or synovitis in the soft
tissues (Fig. 6.19). However, the changes can also occur as a result of
disease in the underlying bone or joint, such as fracture or
osteomyelitis.
Comparing Different Imaging Methods
Comparing the sensitivity of scintigraphic imaging with traditional
modalities, it should be noted that bone scan requires as little as 5%
bone turnover for a lesion to be detected, compared with the 50%
needed on x-ray. Therefore lesions are often visualized on bone scan
but not on x-ray. Bone scan is also usually more sensitive than CT.
FIG. 6.11  Nonspecific radiotracer accumulation in areas of
degenerative change can be significant with technetium-99m (Tc-99m)
methylene diphosphonate (MDP). Although fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) activity is usually not so marked, F-18
NaF positron emission tomography with (PET/CT) may be fairly
intense. (A) Lumbar Tc-99m MDP bone-scan sagittal single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT), computed tomography (CT),
and fused images (left to right) show focal activity in osteophytes. (B)
F-18 sodium fluoride (F-18 NaF) sagittal PET, CT, and fused images
(left to right) from a different patient show significant activity from
degenerative disc disease (arrows) that corresponds to changes on the
maximal-intensity projection (MIP) image (far right).
MR is more sensitive than planar bone scan and potentially more
specific. Its high-resolution images are often able to directly visualize
disease-related signal changes in the marrow, and it can optimally
evaluate soft tissue structures. However, when SPECT/CT is
performed, the accuracy of MR and bone scan for skeletal disease is
comparable. It is also difficult for MR to replace bone scan in several
situations: obese patients and those who have claustrophobia,
difficulty lying on the camera table for lengthy examinations,
implanted metallic devices incompatible with the powerful magnetic
gradients (e.g., pacemakers), intravenous contrast sensitivity, or renal
insufficiency. The whole-body scanning desirable for metastatic
disease evaluation is not widely available or practical at this time with
MR.
Several small studies have shown that SPECT is more sensitive than
planar bone-scan images and better able to localize lesions. The
studies have also shown that the use of SPECT/CT improves
specificity, leaving fewer indeterminate lesions in the end. As
previously noted, images performed with PET are superior to studies
from a gamma camera. Compared with bone scan, F-18 NaF has
demonstrated higher lesion sensitivity overall, and F-18 FDG PET
better detects aggressive, lytic lesions. The resolution of single-photon
agents is lower than with PET/CT, but the use of SPECT/CT narrows
or eliminates the gap in accuracy between the methods. In some cases,
additional tests or short-interval follow-up will be needed to establish
a diagnosis, whether the examination is performed with PET/CT or
one of the bone-scan techniques.
FIG. 6.12  Osteoporosis on surveillance images obtained several
months apart. (A) The initial study shows a vertebral compression
fracture (arrow) caused by osteoporosis involving the lower thoracic
spine. (B) The subsequent study shows healing with normalization of
uptake in the initial abnormality. Three new compression fractures are
seen in the thoracic and lumbar spine.
FIG. 6.13  Spinal compression fractures may show persistent
abnormal activity on technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene
