diphosphonate (MDP) bone scan even when very old, as in this patient
(A) with classic linear activity in the spine on the whole-body planar
image. (B) This localized to a vertebra with marked loss of height
appearing sclerotic on axial (left) and sagittal (right) single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) images.
FIG. 6.14  Posterior spot view of a patient with osteoporosis. The
patient has a characteristic H-type pattern of a sacral insufficiency
fracture with a horizontal band of increased uptake across the body of
the sacrum and bilaterally increased uptake in the sacral alae. Such
lesions are often undetectable with CT or MR.
Clinical Uses of Skeletal Scintigraphy
Metastatic Disease
A significant fraction of patients with known malignancy will develop
osseous metastasis. Patients may present with bone pain (50%-80%)
and elevated alkaline phosphatase (77%), but these findings are
nonspecific. The evaluation of osseous metastatic disease is the most
common use of skeletal scintigraphy. Determining whether a bone
scan is appropriate depends on factors such as tumor and stage,
history of pain, and radiographic abnormalities.
FIG. 6.15  Typical appearance of traumatic rib fractures. (A) Posterior
views of the chest reveal focal uptake in a vertical alignment in the right
lower ribs and a recent left nephrectomy with resection of some lower
left ribs. (B) A follow-up study 18 months later shows resolution of the
right rib uptake as the fractures healed.
FIG. 6.16  Abnormal mild uptake in the distended abdomen is
characteristic of malignant ascites on bone scan.
FIG. 6.17  Bone-scan images following chemoradiation for non–small-
cell lung cancer demonstrates mild hazy uptake outside of the skeleton
in an area of pleural thickening and residual tumor in the left upper
thorax. In addition, decreased uptake is seen in the T-spine
corresponding to the radiation port. Two probably posttraumatic rib
lesions on the left show focal increased uptake.
FIG. 6.18  Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate
(MDP) accumulation in the right upper quadrant on bone scan such as
in (A) could be the result of malignant pleural effusion, colloid formed
from inadequate radiopharmaceutical preparation taken up by the
reticuloendothelial system of the liver, or from accumulation in hepatic
metastases from breast or colon cancer. (B) Patchy hepatic Tc-99m
MDP uptake in a different patient with breast cancer corresponded to
liver metastases on (C) fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG)
positron emission tomography with CT (PET/CT).
Box 6.4 Reported Causes of Bilaterally Increased and
Decreased Renal Visualization on Skeletal
Scintigrams
Increased Uptake
Nephrotoxic antibiotics
Urinary tract obstruction
Chemotherapy (doxorubicin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide)
Nephrocalcinosis
Hypercalcemia
Radiation nephritis
Acute tubular necrosis
Thalassemia
Decreased Uptake
Renal failure
Superscan
Metastatic disease
Metabolic bone disease
Paget disease
Osteomalacia
Hyperparathyroidism
Myelofibrosis
Nephrectomy
Prolonged delays in imaging
More than 90% of osseous metastases distribute to the red marrow,
which is found in the axial skeleton and the proximal portions of the
humeri and femurs in adults (as shown in Fig. 6.3, A). As the tumor
enlarges, the cortex becomes involved. Tc-99m MDP binds to areas of
attempted repair, not the tumor itself. Bone scan is said to be up to
95% sensitive, but this sensitivity depends on several factors, such as
tumor type and tumor stage.
Scintigraphic Patterns in Metastatic Disease
The scintigraphic patterns encountered in skeletal metastatic disease
are summarized in Box 6.5. Multiple focal lesions distributed
randomly in the skeleton provide a high degree of clinical certainty in
the diagnosis of metastases. However, other causes can also show
multiple areas of uptake (Box 6.6). Often, different features and
patterns can help identify these causes. For example, Paget disease
may be differentiated from metastasis by a coarse expansion of the
bone.
The chance that a solitary lesion is a result of malignancy varies by
location (Table 6.1), and some features of primary bone lesions are
outlined in Table 6.2. Very focal uptake in one rib is likely from
trauma. Even in a patient with known cancer, it has only a 10% to 20%
chance of being malignant, whereas uptake in the central skeleton has
a much higher likelihood of being from metastasis. Primary bone
tumors, such as osteosarcoma, must be suspected, especially in
younger patients, when long-bone involvement is seen. Common
benign causes for a solitary lesion include arthritis and trauma. Some
benign bone lesions, such as enchondroma, osteoma, fibrous
dysplasia, osteomyelitis, and monostotic Paget disease, can also cause
solitary abnormalities. Rarely, a benign bone island or a spinal
hemangioma will accumulate some Tc-99m MDP. Stability over time
can prove a lesion benign, and hemangiomas show a characteristic
pattern on CT imaging, with striations or prominent trabecula.
Blastic Metastases: Sites that are predominantly osteoblastic are
more easily seen with Tc-99m MDP and F-18 NaF PET (Fig.
6.20). With F-18 FDG PET, blastic lesions show variable
activity, but uptake is often very low or at background (Figs.
6.21 and 6.22). In response to treatment, lesions will show
decreasing uptake, often occurring along with increasing
sclerosis on CT imaging.
Cold Lesions: Lesions that are aggressive, purely lytic, or
completely replaced by tumor may show decreased uptake or
appear “cold.” A list of possible causes for cold defects is
provided in Box 6.7. These photon-deficient areas may be
difficult to spot because of overlying or adjacent activity,
although SPECT and SPECT/CT increase sensitivity. In some
cases, Tc-99m MDP bone scan and F-18 FDG PET/CT may be
complementary tests, with blastic lesions often better seen
with bone scan while F-18 FDG is superior for lytic areas. (Fig.
6.23). With high sensitivity for lytic and blastic lesions, F-18
NaF PET/CT may also be useful in difficult cases. However,
false negatives can occur, particularly in small lytic lesions in
the spine. Other causes for decreased uptake such as metal
attenuation artifact, radiation ports, compromised blood flow
early in a pediatric septic joint, or very early infarct or
avascular necrosis should be considered in the differential.
FIG. 6.19  Three-phase bone scan in soft tissue infection. The
right knee in a diabetic patient with a nonhealing ulcer after
trauma showed mild increased flow on anterior perfusion images
(A) and mild diffuse soft tissue activity in the right leg with a more
focal soft tissue lesion anteriorly (B and C). Delayed
anterior/posterior (D) and lateral (E) images show mild diffuse
uptake more typical of arthritis in the joint but no bone
involvement in the underlying metadiaphysis to suggest
osteomyelitis. The ulcer and cellulitis healed with a short course
of intravenous antibiotics.
Box 6.5 Scintigraphic Patterns in Metastatic
Disease
Multiple focal lesions
Central skeleton (i.e., areas with red
marrow) skull, spine, pelvis proximal
long bones
Distal extremities uncommon but can
be seen with lung cancer
Solitary focal lesion
Diffuse involvement (“superscan”)
Cold lesion (photon deficient)
Normal (false negative)
Flare phenomenon post chemotherapy
treatment
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (formerly
hypertrophic pulmonary
osteoarthropathy)
Soft tissue lesions
Box 6.6 Differential Diagnoses of Multiple Focal
Bone-Scan Lesions
Metastatic disease
Arthritis
Trauma
Osteoporotic insufficiency fractures
Paget disease
Fibrous dysplasia
Infarction (sickle cell disease)
Osteomyelitis
Multiple enchondromas
Metabolic bone diseases
Superscan: A potentially problematic scintigraphic pattern is the
“superscan” or “beautiful bone scan.” Fairly homogeneous
increased activity is seen in the bones, with absent or only
faint visualization of the kidneys and bladder (e.g., Fig. 6.3, B).
The differential diagnosis of the pattern is provided in Box 6.8,
but most commonly, the cause is either diffuse prostate cancer
metastases or metabolic change from severe renal failure
causing hyperparathyroidism (Fig. 6.24). Confusion from a
superscan is a less common interpretive problem than in the
past because of improved technology and image quality, and
it should be pos sible to discriminate diffuse metastasis.
Reviewing the available radiographs on each patient will help
prevent mistakes.
Table 6.1
Metastatic Disease Presenting as a Solitary Lesion by Location
Site
Percentage (%)
Spine and pelvis
60-70
Skull
40-50
Rib
10-20
Sternum (in breast cancer)
55-75
Table 6.2
Common Locations of Primary Bone Tumors
Lesion Type
Most Common locations
Features
Multiple
myeloma
Rarely confined to one bone;
spine is common
Areas of hematopoiesis:
vertebra, skull, pelvis,
chest wall, proximal long
bones
Age: >45 years
80% initially have bone
involvement: osteoporosis,
punched-out lytic lesion, or
fracture
Osteosarcoma
Femur 42% (75% distal
femur)Tibia 19% (80%
proximal)Humerus 10% (90%
proximal)
Age: Bimodal peak: 10-14 years
and then >65 years
Involves metaphysis
May be a secondary cancer in
Paget
Chondrosarcoma
Common: pelvis up to 30%,
femur, humerus
More unusual: skull base,
sacrum
Age: 30-70 years
85%-90% are primary tumor,
10%-15% arising from
osteochondromas,
enchondroma, fibrous
dysplasia
Ewing sarcoma
Pelvis 26%
Femur 20%
Tibia 10%
Chest wall 16%
May occur bones foot, hand,
jaw, spine (all <10%)
Age: 10-20 years
Involves diaphysis
70% of cases originate in bone
Paget disease
• Pelvis most common
• Vertebra: picture frame,
ivory vertebra
• Skull: osteoporosis
circumscripta (lysis frontal
or occipital skull) or
sclerosis (inner and outer
table)
• Long bones: “blade of grass
lesion”
• Age: >55 years
• Lesion types: iliopectineal
line thickening
• Risk osteosarcoma
0.2%-1.0%
Fibrous
dysplasia
Ribs, femur, skull (around
20%-28% each)
Can occur any bone
Any age, monostotic;
polyostotic usually < 10
years
Ground glass, can also appear
sclerotic, deformed,
expanded
Enchondroma
Metacarpals, metatarsals, femur,
humerus, tibia
• Age: 10-20 years most
common but can be found
any age
• Expansile, lucent
FIG. 6.20  Sclerotic metastases usually show increased activity
with technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate (MDP)
and F-18 sodium fluoride (F-18 NaF) positron emission
tomography (PET) when active, and this uptake will decrease in
response to treatment. The treated lesion will show increasing
sclerosis on CT. Care must be taken because uptake may be
more intense with sodium fluoride than on bone scan. (A) Marked
activity in a sclerotic right iliac metastasis from prostate cancer.
(B) Follow-up images 6 months later show that despite some
enlargement, once treated, uptake decreases in intensity from
partial response. However, multiple new lesions were identified,
as seen in the sacrum, from overall disease progression.
FIG. 6.21  Diffuse prostate metastatic disease shows marked
technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate (MDP)
activity (A) on whole-body bone-scan images. (B) Fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) positron emission tomography
with CT (PET/CT) performed 2 weeks later shows largely absent
activity in the sclerotic lesions, with only a few FDG-avid foci
seen. When prostate cancer becomes aggressive and no longer
controlled with hormone-blocking medications, then FDG PET
becomes useful, showing marked uptake in lesions.
FIG. 6.22  Sagittal images of the T-spine from fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) positron emission tomography
with CT (PET/CT) performed after chemotherapy for metastatic
colon carcinoma show persistent active disease. Uptake is
greater in a mildly sclerotic lesion, and below this, new uptake
developed from disease progression in the posterior aspect of a
vertebral body and its posterior elements, which are less sclerotic
than treated disease anteriorly.
Box 6.7 Differential Diagnoses for Cold Lesions on
Bone Scan
Metal attenuation artifact
Radiation changes
Barium in bowel
Early osteonecrosis (or avascular necrosis)
Early infarct
Multiple myeloma
Osseous metastases
Renal cell carcinoma
Thyroid cancer
Anaplastic tumors
Neuroblastoma
Breast and lung cancer (often mixed
lytic and blastic)
Tumor involvement in marrow
Lymphoma
Leukemia
Benign tumor, cysts
Flare Phenomenon: When patients have a good response to
chemotherapy, they sometimes experience increased pain, and
the bone scan may paradoxically worsen, with a flare of
increased activity (Fig. 6.25). If these lesions are followed over
2 to 6 months, CT imaging shows increased sclerosis from an
osteoblastic response as the bone begins to heal. Activity
should regress by 4 to 6 months after the flare. This
phenomenon reinforces the fact that tracer uptake is not in the
tumor but rather in the surrounding bone.
Imaging Findings in Specific Cancers
Prostate Carcinoma
Skeletal scintigraphy is generally best for the detection of prostate
cancer metastases, and until the introduction of the prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) blood test, bone scan was considered the most sensitive
technique
for
detecting
bone
involvement.
Serum
alkaline
phosphatase measurement detects only half the cases detected by
scintigraphy. Radiographs may be normal 30% of the time.
The likelihood of an abnormal scintigram correlates with clinical
stage, Gleason score, and PSA level. In early stage I disease,
scintigrams demonstrate metastases less than 5% of the time. The
incidence increases to 10% in stage II disease and 20% in stage III. In
patients with PSA levels less than 10 ng/mL, bone metastases are
rarely found (<1% of the time). Even if the risk is lower, scintigraphy
is still indicated to evaluate symptomatic patients and suspicious
areas seen radiographically. With increasing PSA levels, the chance of
detecting metastatic disease increases. In cases where recurrent
prostate cancer is a concern, bone scan may be used to supplement the
detection of soft tissue involvement performed with F-18 fluciclovine
(Axumin). Although F-18 NaF PET may be useful, F-18 FDG is most
often not.
Breast Carcinoma
Despite increased screening with mammography, a large number of
patients with breast cancer are initially diagnosed with advanced
disease. Autopsy studies have shown osseous metastases in 50% to
80% of patients with breast carcinoma. As in prostate cancer, the stage
of disease correlates with the incidence of osseous metastases on bone
scan: 0.5% in stage I, 2% to 3% in stage II, 8% in stage III, and 13% in
stage IV. Bone scans are not generally performed in patients with
stage I or II disease.
Skeletal scintigraphy is highly sensitive in breast cancer. Patients
may show local invasion of the ribs or sternum or disseminated
disease. Although activity in the sternum is most often benign, a high
incidence of metastatic disease is seen in patients with breast cancer
(>75%-80%). Abnormal soft tissue activity can be seen from tumor or
surgery in the breast, in disease that is metastatic to the liver (see Fig.
6.18, B), and in malignant pleural effusions. F-18 FDG PET is also
useful, particularly for lytic lesions and those in marrow but some
blastic lesions may be harder to see.
FIG. 6.23  (A) Bone-scan images show a barely perceptible cold lesion
in the right ileum (arrow) corresponding to a large soft tissue mass
involving bone on (B) fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG)
positron emission tomography with CT.
Lung Carcinoma
Although up to 50% of patients who die from a primary lung cancer
have osseous metastasis at autopsy, no complete agreement exists on
when to use skeletal scintigraphy. Staging is generally done with CT,
surgery (including mediastinoscopy and video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery), and in some cases with F-18 FDG PET/CT. Skeletal
scintigraphy is useful in a patient who develops pain during or after
treatment.
FIG. 6.24  Severe hyperparathyroidism, most commonly from severe
renal failure, can sometimes result in a superscan. (A) Anterior and (B)
posterior whole-body images show more advanced changes from
secondary hyperparathyroidism. Note the lack of renal cortex or
excreted urine. In addition to increased uptake with a smooth
appearance in many bones and activity in the skull, activity in the
metaphyseal regions around the knees and ankles in this 52-year-old
give an appearance that could be confused with images from a child.
Box 6.8 Causes for Superscan Pattern
Common
Metastatic disease (especially prostate cancer)
Renal osteodystrophy
Prolonged delay prior to imaging
Less Common
Severe hyperparathyroidism (rare in primary
hyperparathyroidism)
Osteomalacia
Paget disease
Interesting patterns of disease may occur on scintigrams in lung
cancer. Because these tumors can easily invade the vasculature,
arterial metastases are more common. These tumor emboli can reach
the distal extremities. Thus appendicular involvement is more
common with aggressive lung cancer than cancer of the breast or
prostate. Also, increased cortical activity, prominent in the extremities,
can be seen in lung cancer as a result of hypertrophic
osteoarthropathy (Figs. 6.26 and 6.27). In addition, patients exhibit a
range of findings on physical examination, including clubbing of the
fingers. Although lung adenocarcinoma is most commonly the cause
of this change, other cardiopulmonary etiologies and occasionally
hepatic and gastrointestinal disorders can cause similar findings (Box
6.9).
FIG. 6.25  Flare phenomena on bone scan. (A) Metastatic lesions in a
patient with breast cancer appear to progress during therapy on (B)
bone scan 4 months later. However, this does not represent actual
worsening disease, and marked improvement is seen (C) on a scan
after 6 months. Pelvic CT images obtained at the time of the first bone
scan (D) show lytic lesions initially but fairly diffuse sclerosis on a
follow-up CT (E) performed after the third bone scan, corresponding to
treatment response.
Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma has a neural crest origin and is the most common
solid tumor to metastasize to bone in children. Tc-99m MDP
scintigraphy is twice as sensitive as radiographs on a lesion-by-lesion
basis. MR is better than bone scan for determining lesion extent.
Iodine-123 metaiodo-benzyl-guanidine (I-123 MIBG) scan is more
sensitive than bone scan for metastases, although the combination of
MIBG and bone scan gives the highest sensitivity. Although data are
more limited on the use of gallium-68 (Ga-68) dotatate, the
somatostatin receptor PET-imaging agent used for neuroendocrine
tumor imaging, it has shown good results in neuroblastoma.
Lesions are typically multifocal and occur in the metaphyses.
However, involvement in the skull, vertebrae, ribs, and pelvis is also
common. Early involvement may be symmetrical and therefore
difficult to diagnose on the bone scan because of the normal intense
activity in the ends of growing bones. A unique characteristic of
neuroblastoma is the avidity of Tc-99m diphosphonates for the
primary tumor (Fig. 6.28). Approximately 30% to 50% of primary
tumors
are
demonstrated
scintigraphically.
Occasionally,
neuroblastomas are discovered in children undergoing radionuclide
imaging to evaluate another condition.
Other Tumors
Numerous other tumors metastasize to bone. The sensitivity for renal
cell carcinoma is low and best assessed by MR or CT. F-18 FDG
PET/CT can be useful, but sensitivity is also lower, in the range of 50%
to 70%. Likewise, thyroid cancer is rarely detected on skeletal
scintigraphy and is better evaluated with iodine-131 (I-131) or, if
noniodine
avid,
F-18
FDG
PET.
Gastrointestinal
tract
and
gynecological cancers do not commonly metastasize to bone early in
their courses. As a result of longer survival and control of local and
regional metastases that usually cause death, bone metastases can
manifest.
FIG. 6.26  Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in a patient with
bronchogenic lung carcinoma. (A) Whole-body scintigrams reveal
classic uptake in the periosteal region of the long bones. (B) Follow-up
9 months later shows increased activity in a treated left apical lung
mass. Radiation therapy changes of decreased uptake in the upper
thoracic spine are seen. With successful treatment, the findings of
hypertrophic osteoarthropathy have resolved. (C) Spot views of the
femurs more clearly show the abnormal uptake (upper) that later
resolves (lower).
FIG. 6.27  Florid hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. (A) Bones of the
upper and lower extremities are diffusely involved, as are the clavicles,
mandible, and skull. Although the pattern may be confusing, the patient
did not have skeletal metastatic disease. Involvement of the extremities
is one clue. (B) Chest radiograph reveals a bronchogenic carcinoma in
the right upper lobe involving the right hilum. (C) Radiograph of the
femurs shows characteristic periosteal new bone bilaterally on both the
medial and lateral aspects of the femoral shaft.
Primary Bone Tumors
Malignant Tumors
Sarcomas of the Bone
Osteosarcoma is the most common primary skeletal malignancy after
multiple myeloma and is particularly common at the ends of long
bones in children (Figs. 6.29 and 6.30). Rarely, it occurs as a multifocal
process and occasionally can occur as an extraosseous tumor.
Metastases
frequently
develop
in
the
lungs,
although
in
approximately 15% they can occur in the bones before being detected
in the lungs.
After osteosarcoma, the most common primary bone tumor in
children is Ewing sarcoma. Approximately 25% of tumors arise in soft
tissues rather than bone. At diagnosis, 25% have metastases.
Metastatic lesions involve the lungs in 50%, bones in 25%, and
marrow in 20%. Chondrosarcoma tends to be more common in adults
and ranks third among all primary bone neoplasms, after multiple
myeloma and osteosarcoma. Chondrosarcoma can present in several
ways and may originate as either a primary tumor or a secondary
tumor from degeneration of a benign lesion.
Box 6.9 Causes of Hypertrophic Osteoarthropathy
Pulmonary
Adenocarcinoma of lung (up to 53% of cases)
Mesothelioma
Cystic fibrosis
Interstitial lung disease
Cardiac
Cyanotic heart disease
Myoma
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Aortic graft infection
Hepatic
Cirrhosis
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Biliary atresia
Bowel
Inflammatory bowel disease
Amebic dysentery
Colonic polyposis
Esophageal cancer
Primary malignant bone tumors such as osteosarcoma, Ewing
sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma have avid uptake of the bone-seeking
radiopharmaceuticals. Bone scan tends to overestimate the extent of
tumor but can identify skip lesions in osteosarcoma or the
involvement of other bones. In addition, both thallium-201 (Tl-201)
and Tc-99m sestamibi have been used for sarcoma imaging. They may
help determine whether the primary tumor is high or low grade, can
serve as a baseline to evaluate response to therapy, and may show
better definition of tumor margin. However, MR is the primary
modality for osteosarcoma evaluation, providing detailed anatomical
information and allowing assessment of soft tissue involvement. CT is
generally used for the surveillance of lung metastases. In addition to
the detection of osseous metastases, the occasional polyostotic tumor
would be missed without a whole-body survey of some kind (Fig.
6.31). Increasingly, however, that role also may be filled by F-18 FDG
PET-CT, which can be used during staging or for restaging and
assessment of therapeutic response.
Multiple Myeloma
The most common primary bone tumor in adults is multiple
myeloma. It is a tumor of the marrow and typically involves the
vertebrae, pelvis, ribs, and skull. Radiographs may show only
osteopenia or a permeative pattern that can be confused with
metastatic disease. Although bone scan will show 46% to 65% of the
lesions as areas of decreased and sometimes increased uptake, this is
lower than the 75% to 91% sensitivity of radiographs. This likely
relates to the lack of reactive bone formation in response to the lesions.
Although patients are often screened by CT (or radiographic skeletal
survey), MR has a positive predictive value of 88%, and when F-18
FDG PET/CT is additionally performed, this further increases to
nearly 100%. In some cases, PET/CT alone can be used because it
allows rapid assessment of the entire body, including the detection of
any soft tissue involvement (Fig. 6.32).
FIG. 6.28  Neuroblastoma metastases commonly spread to bone.
Although iodine-123 metaiodo-benzyl-guanidine (I-123 MIBG) is more
sensitive, technetium-99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate (MDP)
can complement results and is more sensitive than x-rays. (A) Bone-
scan images in a patient with bone metastases in the femur and skull
(B) also showed radiotracer accumulation in the primary abdominal
tumor in the left lower quadrant. (C) Coronal enhanced CT image
shows the large primary tumor, a soft tissue mass lying between the
aorta and left ureter.
FIG. 6.29  Osteosarcoma typically shows high levels of technetium-
99m (Tc-99m) methylene diphosphonate (MDP) uptake, as in this case
involving the right lower femur (A). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
is key to the evaluation of osteosarcoma. (B) On coronal T1-weighted
images (left), the low-signal lesion corresponds to the bone-scan
changes. Axial fast spin-echo fat saturation images show tumor
enhancement when comparing the lesion precontrast (top right) and
postcontrast (bottom right).
Leukemia and Lymphoma
Bone scan plays a very limited role in the evaluation of leukemia.
Patients with leukemia imaged with Tc-99m MDP may show focal
increased uptake in areas of marrow infiltration. In blast crisis,
diffusely increased uptake that is greater at the ends of the long bones
may be present.
Hodgkin disease will involve the skeleton approximately one-third
of the time, and bone scan may show focal or diffuse uptake of Tc-
99m MDP. Skeletal scintigraphy is less useful in non-Hodgkin
lymphoma. In general, lymphoma is best evaluated with F-18 FDG
PET/CT and CT.
Histiocytosis
The sensitivity of bone scan varies with the spectrum of disease in
histiocytosis. Although uptake is reliably seen in eosinophilic
granuloma, detection of histiocytosis is limited, with lesions seen from
one-third to two-thirds of the time. Frequently, decreased uptake is
encountered.
Benign Bone Tumors
Usually, benign bone tumors are characterized by their radiographic
appearance and typically are not positive with bone scan. However,
some benign tumors have intense uptake that can be confused with
malignancy. These include osteoid osteomas, giant-cell tumors, and
fibrous dysplasia. Other tumors may show a characteristic pattern,
such as a peripheral rim of activity around a cold central area in
aneurismal bone cyst. Benign bone tumors are variable in appearance;
selected benign bone tumors are listed in Table 6.3.
Osteoid osteoma classically presents in adolescents and young
adults as severe pain at night. Commonly occurring in the proximal
femur and spine, the lesions may be difficult to detect with
conventional radiography. The diagnosis on radiographs can be made
if a central lucent nidus is seen surrounded by sclerosis (Fig. 6.33).
Skeletal scintigraphy is very sensitive, and the lesion will show
increased uptake (Fig. 6.34). SPECT adds to this sensitivity and is
particularly useful in the spine. Surgeons can use an intraoperative
probe to localize the lesion with its increased activity. However, CT
and MR have largely eliminated the need for the bone scan.
Bone islands rarely accumulate Tc-99m MDP, so bone scan may be
useful in assessing an atypical bone island on radiographs. If the
sclerotic lesion on radiograph does not show increased activity, it is
unlikely to be malignant.
Osteochondromas, common cartilage-containing benign tumors,
may show variable uptake that diminishes as the skeleton matures.
Rarely, osteochondromas will show malignant transformation,
usually into a chondrosarcoma. This degeneration occurs less than 1%
to 5% of the time in a solitary lesion but more frequently in hereditary
multiple
osteochondromatosis
(hereditary
multiple
exostoses).
Although bone scan can exclude malignancy if no increased uptake is
seen, the presence of increased activity does not differentiate benign
from malignant lesions. Any new uptake in a lesion that previously
had none is suspicious. Osteochondromas are usually best evaluated
with CT and MR.
FIG. 6.30  (A) Osteosarcoma of the left distal femur and a metastatic
lesion in the left proximal femur. (B) Coronal T1-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) reveals superior anatomical information
about the osseous and soft tissue extent of the tumor. However, it
missed the second lesion that was out of the field of view.
Enchondromas usually present as a cystic lesion in the hands or a
sclerotic area reminiscent of a bone infarct elsewhere. They are benign
but can degenerate into a malignant tumor. This degeneration is more
common in multiple enchondromatosis (Ollier disease). Bone scan
may help identify multiple lesions, but the role is otherwise very
limited.
FIG. 6.31  Osteosarcoma arising in the right medial thigh shows widely
disseminated metastases to bone and extraosseous locations in lung
and soft tissues on (A) anterior and (B) posterior bone scan. This study
is a dramatic example of the ability of skeletal scintigraphy to survey
the entire body.
Fibrous Dysplasia
Numerous bone dysplasias demonstrate increased skeletal tracer
uptake. Fibrous dysplasia is the most commonly encountered of these
and may be monostotic or polyostotic (Fig. 6.35), typically with
activity levels rivaling that seen in Paget disease. Distinguishing
features are the younger patient age and different patterns of
involvement. When Paget involves a long bone, it invariably extends
to at least one end of the bone, whereas fibrous dysplasia frequently
does not involve the epiphysis. Other dysplasias associated with
increased tracer uptake are listed in Box 6.10.
Metabolic Bone Disease
Metabolic bone diseases cause altered bone structure, mineralization,
and/or mass. The most common of these disorders is osteoporosis.
Other disorders include renal osteodystrophy, hyperparathyroidism,
vitamin D deficiency osteomalacia, and Paget disease.
Paget Disease
Paget disease is often included in the metabolic bone disease category,
although mechanisms causing this disorder are not entirely
understood, with genetic and environmental causes proposed.
Typically, a chronic disease of the elderly, patients have areas of focal
excessive bone remodeling leading to overgrowth and deformity.
Patients may experience pain, arthritis, and neurological symptoms
related to changes in the bone. Congestive heart failure can occur, and
rarely (1%) patients develop osteosarcomas.
FIG. 6.32  Markedly positive multiple myeloma lesions on fluorine-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) positron emission tomography with CT
(PET/CT). (A) Maximal-intensity projection image shows numerous
active lesions in the bone. Because the bone scan is often negative,
patients have been routinely assessed by radiographic skeletal survey
and CT. However, PET is clearly useful, showing uptake before
changes on CT, as seen here on single-photon emission computed
tomography with CT (SPECT/CT) images (B) with fused (top), CT
(middle), and PET (bottom).
The disease has three phases: the early resorptive, mixed middle,
and final sclerotic phases. The diagnosis usually can be made by
radiographs, which reveal lytic lesions in early cases and coarsened,
expanded bones as the disease progresses to the final phase. Although
CT and MR can be used to assess complications, bone scan is highly
sensitive and useful to evaluate the extent of disease. Increased uptake
is seen in all stages of untreated disease, although sensitivity is lower
in the early lytic stage. Activity decreases with effective therapy. In
addition, the patterns of Paget disease must be recognized because it
may be found incidentally because many patients are asymptomatic
and undiagnosed.
The scintigraphic appearance is striking, with intensely increased
tracer localization (Figs. 6.36 and 6.37). Bone often appears expanded.
When the tibia is involved, bowing is often seen, and in the spine,
fractures can happen. The pelvis is the most commonly involved site,
followed by the spine, skull, femur, scapula, tibia, and humerus. In
osteoporosis circumscripta, a characteristic rim of increased uptake
borders the lesion.
FIG. 6.33  Osteoid osteoma on radiograph. (A) Conventional
tomogram of the right proximal femur reveals a characteristic
radiolucent nidus surrounded by sclerotic bone. (B) Specimen
radiograph confirms the complete excision of the nidus.
FIG. 6.34  Osteoid osteoma on magnified pinhole images. Internal and
external rotation pinhole spot views of the proximal femur in a patient
with suspected osteoid osteoma. An area of abnormally increased
uptake demonstrated just lateral to the lesser trochanter confirms the
clinical suspicion.
Table 6.3
Benign Bone Lesions on Skeletal Scintigraphy
Etiology
Malignant
Potential
Comments
Intense Uptake
Aneurysmal bone
cyst
No
Donut-sign pattern
Chondroblastoma
Almost always
benign
Positive bone scan does not diagnose malignancy
Giant-cell tumor
10%
Fibrous dysplasia
<1%
May be difficult to differentiate from Paget on scan
Osteoma
No
Gardner syndrome
Osteoblastoma >2 cm
Osteoid osteoma
No
Pain, especially at night, relieved with nonsteroidal
painkillers
Isointense/Mild Uptake
Bone island
No
Enchondroma
For solitary <5%
Common in hands and feet, especially phalanges, also in
long bones with proximal humerus frequent; rare in
flat bones; most lesions have chondroid matrix, and
many have calcifications
Multiple
enchondromas
50% lifetime
risk
Multiple occur in syndrome: enchondromatosis
No cortical disruption unless malignant
Chondrosarcoma is most common type of cancer
Nonossifying
fibroma
No
Variable Uptake
Osteochondroma
<1%
Hereditary
multiple
exostosis
5%-25%
Autosomal dominant condition with multiple
osteochondromas
Eosinophilic
granuloma
No, but may
cause
multisystem
disease
May be monostotic or polyostotic; one of histiocytosis
group of diseases
Bone scan negative 30%, F-18 FDG PET sensitive
Hemangioma
No
Usually negative on bone scan
If activity seen, CT pattern diagnostic-prominent
trabeculae
Low Uptake
Unicameral bone
cyst
No
CT, Computed tomography; F-18 FDG, fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron
emission tomography.
FIG. 6.35  Fibrous dysplasia. (A) Uptake is markedly increased in the
distal humerus, most of the forearm, and focal areas in the hand. (B)
Corresponding radiograph of the left elbow reveals characteristic
expansile lesions of fibrous dysplasia.
Box 6.10 Bone Dysplasias Associated With Increased
Skeletal Tracer Uptake
Fibrous dysplasia
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteopetrosis
Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia (Engelmann disease)
Hereditary multiple diaphyseal sclerosis (Ribbing disease)
Melorheostosis
Hyperparathyroidism and Renal Osteodystrophy
Some other metabolic conditions can also cause patterns of increased
scintigraphic uptake: osteomalacia, hyperparathyroidism, renal
osteodystrophy, and hypervitaminosis D (Table 6.4). Although they
must be recognized in order to avoid confusion with pathological
conditions such as metastatic disease, bone scan has no role in the
diagnosis and management of these processes.
Inadequate osseous mineralization from deficiencies in vitamin D,
calcium, or phosphate results in osteomalacia. Radiographically,
bones have a washed-out, chalky appearance, with decreased
trabeculae. Although adults are affected, findings in the growing
skeleton, known as rickets, are most striking. Changes at the growth
plates (fraying, widening, cupping) of the proximal humerus, distal
femur, distal tibia, and distal forearm and findings such as beading at
the costochondral junctions are common. Bone scan shows a
generalized increased uptake in the axial skeleton, including the skull
and mandible. Uptake in the sternum is often increased in a “tie”
pattern, with lines at the segmental junctions. Pseudofractures,
beading of the costochondral junctions, and real fractures are common
(Fig. 6.38).
FIG. 6.36  Multifocal Paget disease. (A) Abnormal uptake in the left
hemipelvis, upper lumbar spine, and, to a lesser extent, right hip in a
patient with Paget disease. When Paget disease involves the axial
bones, it must be differentiated from metastatic disease by the location
and bone expansion. Radiographic correlation will show the typical
coarsened trabeculae. (B) When the sites are more numerous, the
diagnosis is obvious based on the typical distribution of lesions.
FIG. 6.37  Monostotic Paget disease of the spine in a man with
prostate cancer and back pain. (A) Whole-body bone scan shows the
intense activity, with the bone appearing more expanded than would be
expected from metastasis. (B) The shape on the spot view is the
“Mickey Mouse” sign based on its shape. (C) Fused single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) sagittal and (D) axial images show the underlying sclerotic
and lytic changes and expansive character.
Table 6.4
Metabolic Bone Disorders
Osteoporosis
Primary (idiopathic)
Senile, postmenopausal
Secondary
Disuse
Drugs
Corticosteroids, chemotherapy, anticonvulsants
Endocrine
Hyperthyroidism, primary hyperparathyroidism, Cushing
disease, hypogonadism
Osteomalacia
Vitamin D
Vitamin D deficiency, hereditary disorders of vitamin D
metabolism
Decreased calcium
Calcium malabsorption, inadequate intake, calcitonin-secreting
tumors
Phosphate loss
Renal tubular disease, hemodialysis, transplant
Other
Liver disease, phenytoin, prematurity
Hyperparathyroidism
Primary
Parathyroid adenoma, parathyroid hyperplasia
Secondary
Chronic renal insufficiency, phosphate metabolism abnormalities,
parathyroid hyperplasia
Tertiary
Autonomous parathyroid glands from long-standing secondary
hyperparathyroidism
Renal
osteodystrophy
Chronic renal failure
Hypoparathyroidism
Iatrogenic loss/damage parathyroid glands during
thyroidectomy; pseudohypoparathyroidism genetic end-organ
resistance
Metal Toxicities
Aluminum-induced bone disease
Fluorosis
Heavy metal poisoning
Hyperparathyroidism may be primary, as from a parathyroid
adenoma secreting parathormone (PTH); secondary, as a response to
the hypocalcemia of chronic renal disease; or tertiary, when PTH is
secreted
by
autonomously
functioning
tissue.
Patients
with
uncomplicated primary hyperparathyroidism usually have normal
bone scans. In more severe cases, any form of hyperparathyroidism
can lead to increased bone turnover and increased activity (Box 6.11).
As noted previously, severe hyperparathyroidism may cause a
markedly increased ratio of skeleton to soft tissue, poor renal
visualization, and high levels of uptake in the axial skeleton and
proximal long bones in a superscan pattern (Fig. 6.39, A; see also Fig.
6.24), seen in metastatic disease (see Fig. 6.3). In other cases, an
unusual pattern can occur, with diffuse uptake in the skull, mandible,
sternum, and periarticular regions (see Fig. 6.39, B). These same
findings may be seen to a varying degree in differing types
hyperparathyroidism and osteomalacia, and the conditions may be
present in the same patient (Fig. 6.40). The bone scan in long-standing
renal osteodystrophy and secondary hyperparathyroidism often has
the most extreme appearance.
FIG. 6.38  Osteomalacia. Anterior (A) and posterior (B) views. The
patient was referred to rule out metastatic disease. The unusually large
number of rib lesions raised the suspicion of metabolic bone disease
rather than metastases.
Extraskeletal uptake is not uncommon as a result of an increased
ratio of serum calcium to phosphate. In hyperparathyroidism,
especially with renal disease, a classic pattern of soft tissue uptake is
seen in the lungs, stomach, and kidneys as a result of imbalances in
calcium and phosphate. Other soft tissues may also be involved, such
as the region of the heart (Fig. 6.41). Uptake in the heart or
pericardium can occur for many other reasons, as can soft tissue
uptake in the soft tissues in general (Box 6.12).
Skeletal Trauma
Although bone scan is highly sensitive for fracture (Fig. 6.42),
radiographs, CT, and MR are usually used when acute fractures are
suspected. MR is not only sensitive but also provides information on
surrounding soft tissues. When patients cannot undergo MR, when
MR and CT findings are negative, or when a precise area of concern is
not known, a bone scan may be used to detect occult fracture.
Box 6.11 Distribution of Increased Skeletal Uptake in
Hyperparathyroidism
Diffuse in axial and proximal long bones (“superscan”)
Periarticular
Skull
Mandible, fascial bones
Costochondral junctions
Sternum
Lungs
Stomach
Acute fractures generally result in a three-phase positive scintigram,
with chronic or partially healed fractures typically positive only on
delayed images. Approximately 80% of fractures can be visualized by
24 hours after trauma. Ninety-five percent of fractures are positive
after 3 days, and in patients under the age of 65, essentially all
fractures are positive by this time (Table 6.5). Advanced age and
debilitation are factors contributing to delayed visualization of
fractures. The maximum degree of fracture uptake occurs 7 or more
days after trauma, and delayed imaging in this time frame is
recommended in difficult or equivocal cases. Occasionally, decreased
uptake is seen acutely as a result of compromised vascular supply
(Fig. 6.43).
The time a fracture takes to return to normal on the bone scan
depends on location, stability, and the degree of damage to the
skeleton. Approximately 60% to 80% of nondisplaced, uncomplicated
fractures revert to normal in 1 year, and more than 95% revert in 3
years (Table 6.6). However, in many instances, displaced fractures
remained
positive
indefinitely.
Structural
deformity
and
posttraumatic arthritis were the most common reasons for prolonged
positive studies. Patients undergoing metastatic skeletal survey
should be routinely asked about prior trauma. This includes prior
radiation therapy (which can cause decreased uptake chronically) and
surgery likely to cause fracture (e.g., thoracotomy) or if bone
resection/amputation occurred.
FIG. 6.39  Renal failure and secondary hyperparathyroidism can lead
to increased activity in the bones, with variable patterns. (A) The
“superscan” pattern can vary, appearing very homogeneous and
normal, although the distal long bones are more clearly seen than
usual, and the joints appear prominent. (B) In other cases, changes
include significant activity in the skull, mandible, and sternum (the
mandible activity is also noted in Fig. 6.24). The higher soft tissue
background is often seen with poorly functioning kidneys.
FIG. 6.40  Renal osteodystrophy can result in various changes from
osteomalacia and hyperparathyroidism. Whole-body (A) and spot
images (B) of a patient with long-standing renal failure show classic
skeletal changes of severe renal osteodystrophy. Abnormal activity is
seen in the face and skull and the distal ends of the long bones. The rib
tip activity has been called the rachitic “rosary bead” configuration.
Focal uptake in the left scapula was a fracture, although brown tumors
can have a similar appearance.
FIG. 6.41  Soft tissue uptake can occur in secondary or primary
hyperparathyroidism. (A) Whole-body views of a patient with severe
renal failure show diffusely increased uptake in the lungs, stomach, and
heart. (B) Whole-body bone scan from an elderly patient with chronic
renal failure, anemia, chronic heart failure, and signs of
hyperparathyroidism shows diffuse activity in the skull and mandible
and tiny, faint areas on each side of the T-spine from atrophic native
kidneys. Patchy uptake is also seen in the region of the heart (C). This
can be seen not only as a result of hyperparathyroidism but also
myocardial infarction, cardioversion, heart failure, and amyloidosis.
Child Abuse
The high sensitivity of skeletal scintigraphy would seem to make it an
ideal survey test in cases of suspected child abuse. However, in
practice, a radiographic skeletal survey is more sensitive than bone
scintigraphy because of its ability to demonstrate old fractures that
have healed, subtle fractures along growth plates with their normally
high levels of uptake, and calvarial fractures that may be difficult to
see in young children on bone scan. Scintigraphy is often reserved for
cases of suspected child abuse when radiographs are unrevealing. In
these cases, symmetrical positioning of the patient is critical.
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
Complex regional pain syndrome, previously known as reflex
sympathetic dystrophy, is an exaggerated response to injury and
immobilization with sensory, motor, and autonomic features.
Although the presentation is variable, patients typically have pain,
edema, and muscle wasting in an affected extremity.
FIG. 6.42  Trauma to the distal extremity. (A) Skeletal scintigram of a
patient who had sustained direct trauma to the right foot and ankle
reveals multiple focal areas of abnormal tracer accumulation from
fracture. (B) The radiograph illustrates fractures of the base of the fifth
metatarsal and lateral cuneiform.
FIG. 6.43  Planar images of the pelvis (A) in an elderly man with hip
pain after a fall in the hospital show decreased uptake in the right
femoral head and neck (arrow) corresponding to a displaced femoral
neck fracture in osteoporotic bone on CT (B).
Table 6.5
Time Required for Bone Scan to Turn Positive After Fracture
Time
Percentage Positive Bone Scan (All Percentage Positive Bone Scan in Patients
(days)
Ages)
<65 Years
Data from Matin P. The appearance of bone scans following fractures,
including immediate and long-term studies. J Nucl Med.
1979;20(12):1227–1231.
Box 6.12 Causes of Soft Tissue Uptake on Delayed
Bone-Scan Images
Traumatic
Surgery, healing hematoma
Rhabdomyolysis
Myositis ossificans
Heterotopic ossification adjacent to fracture/joint replacement
and in hemiplegia
Malignant
Metastases
Malignant effusion
Malignant ascites
Cardiac disease
Pericarditis
Myocardial infarct
Amyloidosis
Congestive heart failure
Cardioversion or post-resuscitation
Infarct
Hemorrhagic infarct
Infarcted spleen (sickle cell disease)
Metabolic
Secondary and tertiary hyperparathyroidism,
Active and treated long-standing renal osteodystrophy
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Artifact
Colloid formation (poor radiopharmaceutical preparation)
Free sodium pertechnetate or “free tech”
Recent prior nuclear medicine exam
Infection/inflammation
Table 6.6
Skeletal Scintigraphy in Trauma: Time Course to Normal After Fracture 1
Fracture Type and Site
Normal Bone Scans (%)
Nonmanipulated and Closed Fractures
1 Year
3 Years
Vertebra
Long bone
Rib
All fractures∗
<1 year
2-5 years
>5 years
All sites
Modified from Kim HR, Thrall JH, Keyes JW Jr. Skeletal scintigraphy
following incidental trauma. Radiology. 1979;130(2):447–451.
Scintigraphic findings are variable depending on the stage of
disease. The classic pattern of unilaterally increased flow and blood-
pool activity with increased periarticular uptake through a whole
region on delayed images is seen less than 50% of the time but
provides the highest diagnostic accuracy. Early disease (up to 5-6
months) usually shows increased blood flow (Fig. 6.44), but blood
flow may be normal or decreased later in the course of the disease.
The periarticular uptake on delayed images is found in most cases
(>95%), although specificity is lower if this finding is seen without the
increased blood flow. Infection and arthritis could cause false-positive
results. Some variants have been found, including cold areas or
decreased uptake in some adults. Children often have normal or
decreased uptake.
Stress Fractures
A significant change in activity level or a repetitive activity may lead
to injury to the bone. This may be seen in “shin splints,” a term
applied generically to describe stress-related leg soreness along the
medial or posteromedial aspect of the tibia. In nuclear medicine, the
term is used for a specific combination of clinical and scintigraphic
findings: peripheral, linear tracer uptake is seen on the scintigram,
typically involving a large portion of the middle to distal tibia (Fig.
6.45). If the process causing injury is allowed to continue to the point
of overt fracture, healing predictably takes several months or more,
compared with the several weeks required for healing of an early
stress reaction (Table 6.7). Therefore prompt diagnosis and
appropriate change in activity are critical. Exquisitely sensitive,
skeletal scintigraphy reveals characteristic intense uptake at the
fracture site ranging from the earlier oval or fusiform uptake to
activity traversing the bone in outright fracture (Fig. 6.46). Stress
fracture can become positive on all three phases of the bone scan (Fig.
6.47), and findings are often seen before radiographs reveal the
cortical thickening in injury and fracture lines as disease progresses.
Stress injury is not uncommonly multifocal; thus additional sites of
involvement may be detected.
A phenomenon perhaps related to shin splints is activity-induced
enthesopathy. In athletes, repeated microtears with subsequent
healing reaction can result in increased tracer uptake at the site of
tendon or ligament attachment. Osteitis pubis, plantar fasciitis,
Achilles tendonitis, and some cases of pulled hamstring muscles are
examples. A periosteal reaction develops at the site of stress,
sometimes resulting in increased skeletal tracer localization.
Stress injuries can also occur in the spine. Spondylolysis occurs in the
lumbar spine in the pars articularis, often seen as a result of repetitive
trauma in young athletes. Most commonly the abnormality occurs at
L4 to L5. In some instances, all examinations, including radiographs,
MR, and planar bone scan, may be normal, but a SPECT study may
reveal the pathological condition (Fig. 6.48). When available,
SPECT/CT can provide an optimal assessment.
Rhabdomyolysis
Another athletic injury that is seen in this day of marathons and
triathlons is rhabdomyolysis. The localization of skeletal tracers in
exercise-damaged skeletal muscle is similar to the localization in
damaged myocardium. Calcium buildup in damaged tissue provides
a site for radionuclide deposition when combined with phosphate.
The scintigraphic pattern reflects the muscle groups undergoing
injury (Fig. 6.49). In marathon runners, the most striking uptake is
usually in the muscles of the thigh. Rhabdomyolysis induced by renal
failure is generally diffuse. The time course of scintigraphic
abnormality appears to be similar to that for acute myocardial
infarction. The greatest degree of uptake is seen at 24 to 48 hours after
injury. The changes resolve by 1 week.
Heterotopic Bone Formation
Heterotopic bone formation can occur in the muscle as a result of
numerous conditions. It is most often a direct result of trauma to the
muscle in myositis ossificans (Fig. 6.50). The appearance can vary, and
lesions can even be confused with a mass from sarcoma. In such cases,
typical benign calcifications may be seen on CT or x-ray.
Heterotopic ossification is a potentially serious complication in
paralyzed muscles and prolonged immobilization, leading to
seriously decreased mobility from severely contracted and ossified
muscles. Calcifications form in the soft tissues outside the joint
capsule, most commonly around the hip in quadriplegia. A three-
phase bone is most sensitive for early changes, and it is also used to
determine when disease has matured (and thus less likely to recur
after resection). Early on, the blood flow and immediate blood-pool
images will show increased activity, and as the disease progresses,
uptake will increase on the delayed images. Coarse calcifications
develop on CT or x-ray. The flow and blood-pool activity resolve after
some weeks, and decreases are seen on delayed-phase images after a
couple of months (Fig. 6.51). Activity typically returns to normal
within a year.
Bone Infarction and Osteonecrosis
Necrosis of the bone has numerous causes (Box 6.13), and the
appearance changes as the process evolves. Immediately after blood
supply is interrupted, newly infarcted bone appears cold, with
decreased activity. In the postinfarct healing phase, osteogenesis and
radiotracer activity increase at the margins of the affected area.
Uptake can become intense as healing progresses, and if arthritis
develops, the abnormal uptake may persist indefinitely, classically
involving both sides of the joint over time.
FIG. 6.44  Complex regional pain syndrome in a young patient after
trauma months previously shows clearly increased blood flow (A) and
blood-pool (B) activity in the left arm, with mild periarticular uptake on
the delayed image (C) in the left hand on a three-phase bone scan.
Activity varies but may be much more asymmetrical on delayed
images.
Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease
Most commonly affecting children between 5 and 9 years of age, with
a 4:1 to 5:1 predilection for boys, Legg-Calvé-Perthes is a form of
osteochondrosis that results in avascular necrosis of the capital
femoral epiphysis. The precise mechanism is unknown, but the blood
supply to the femoral head is especially vulnerable in the affected age
group.
Magnified pinhole images with the patient in a frog-leg position can
help identify abnormalities. Early in the disease, a discrete, lentiform
photon-deficient area is seen in the upper outer portion of the bone
(Fig. 6.52). SPECT and SPECT/CT imaging may optimally identify
subtle abnormalities. As repair occurs, uptake increases peripherally,
with activity then gradually filling in the defect. The increased activity
persists for many months or more and may not revert to normal in
severe cases.
FIG. 6.45  Stress injury from repetitive trauma can occur in many
locations. The forelegs are a common site, “shin splints.” (A) Lateral
images of the lower legs show superficial, linear activity along the
posterior left tibia (left side of image) from stress injury. On the right,
more focal activity is seen more distally, typical of a developing stress
fracture. Although stress injury most often occurs in the tibia, the fibula
can also be involved. (B) A frontal image shows abnormal, superficial
activity in both tibias and a more focal area laterally in the left leg
(arrow) from stress fracture in the fibula.
Table 6.7
Sequence of Findings in Stress Reaction and Stress Fracture
Injury Stage
Bone Activity
Clinical Symptoms X-Ray Scintigram
Normal
Resorption = replacement
–
–
–
Accelerated remodeling
Resorption > replacement
+/–
–
+
Fatigue
Resorption >> replacement
+
+/–
+++
Exhaustion
Resorption >>> replacement
++
+
++++
Cortical fracture
Disruption/attempts at repair
++++
++++
++++
Data from Roub LW, et al. Bone stress: a radionuclide imaging
perspective. Radiology. 1979;132(2):431–438.
Osteonecrosis
Osteonecrosis of the bone can occur for many reasons, but trauma and
steroids are two commonly seen etiologies. Although the pathogenesis
is still debated, osteonecrosis related to steroid use is a chronic process
manifested by microfractures and repair. In some cases, trauma
disrupts a tenuous blood supply, such as to the proximal femur in
children and the scaphoid bone of the wrist.
FIG. 6.46  Whole-body bone-scan images in a runner with leg pain
reveal a fusiform, superficial lesion in the left medial femur from stress
injury. On delayed images, uptake in the right hand is due to the
injection site.
FIG. 6.47  Three-phase bone-scan images in a runner with marked
focal pain in the right foot show focal increased flow (A), blood pool (B),
and delayed images (C) with bone localization to the second and third
right metatarsals traversing the bone, consistent with acute stress
fracture. Bone scan may be positive well before radiographs.
Affected bones will initially show, in the very acute stages (<24
hours typically), decreased blood flow on bone scan, and the area of
avascular necrosis will appear cold on the delayed view (Fig. 6.53).
Within 1 to 3 days, blood flow typically increases as inflammation in
the surrounding tissues and early remodeling begin. Many patients do
not present until disease is advanced, with marked uptake on delayed
bone images and collapse of the bone and sclerosis on radiographs
and CT. Osteoarthritic changes in the region may include subchondral
cysts and osteophyte formation in addition to the sclerosis (Fig. 6.54).
Blood flow will usually normalize, but delayed uptake may persist
indefinitely.
MR is currently the modality of choice for the evaluation of
osteonecrosis. In addition to having a sensitivity comparable to or
higher than that of bone scan, MR also provides information on the
soft tissues and detailed visualization of the bony anatomy. The
ability to assess articular cartilage, acetabular labral tears, and
metaphyseal cysts aids in determining prognosis.
Sickle Cell Anemia
Bone scans are sometimes performed in patients with sickle cell
anemia to help differentiate infarct from osteomyelitis, or they may be
part of a routine metastatic disease workup in patients with cancer.
Several characteristic features may be seen and are important not to
confuse with other disease. Expanded marrow from the attempts to
correct the anemia results in bilaterally increased calvarial activity
(Fig. 6.55). In normal adults, red marrow extends only to the proximal
portions of the femurs and humeri. In sickle cell anemia, the
extremities may manifest marrow expansion as increased uptake near
the joints (Fig. 6.56).
Changes in the spleen and kidneys are frequently present. The
kidneys are frequently small and scarred or even nonvisualized, but
they may be enlarged, with prominent cortical activity, in less severe
or chronic cases. Avid accumulation of skeletal tracer is frequently
seen in the spleen, often as a small area above the left kidney,
presumably because of prior splenic infarction and calcification.
FIG. 6.48  Spondylolysis. (A) Planar bone-scan images are normal in
a 20-year-old gymnast with severe low back pain and negative
radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). (B) However,
transverse and coronal single-photon emission tomography (SPECT)
images show focal abnormal activity in the right posterior elements of
L5 to S1 (arrow), consistent with spondylolysis. (C) Oblique lumbar
spine (LS) radiograph from a different patient shows a pars
interarticularis defect at L5.
FIG. 6.49  Rhabdomyolysis. Marked pectoral muscle uptake on bone
scan after injury from repetitive strenuous weight lifting.
Infarctions in bone result in both acute and long-standing changes.
Cortical infarcts may appear normal on bone scan acutely. Within a
few days, as healing begins, the scan typically demonstrates increased
uptake. If the involvement is primarily in the marrow space, the
skeletal scintigram may not reveal the extent of the lesion because it
does not involve the cortex where Tc-99m MDP binds. Bone-marrow
scans using Tc-99m sulfur colloid are sensitive, with cold defects
appearing immediately after the infarct. As the defects from prior
bone marrow infarctions persist, the significance of a photon-deficient
area on marrow scanning is somewhat uncertain unless a recent
baseline study is available for comparison. In these situations, MR has
an advantage in its ability to distinguish acute from chronic changes.
The correlation between the marrow scan and the bone scan is also
important in the differentiation of acute osteomyelitis from infarct. If
the marrow shows a defect in the region of increased bone-scan
activity, it is consistent with infarct. If the marrow shows no change,
then any increased activity on the bone scan in an acute situation is
most likely osteomyelitis.
Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis can involve the bone through hematogenous spread or
through the direct extension of an area of cellulitis, such as in a
diabetic foot ulcer. In most patients, diagnosis usually involves
radiographs and enhanced MR. MR is extremely sensitive and
provides a high level of detail on the joint and soft tissue structures
and on the bone abnormality. Enhancement is seen as areas of
increased signal between the pre- and postcontrast images, and
nonspecific fluid signal will be seen in the marrow and tissues. Areas
of bone will often show cortical attenuation in the early stages when a
joint is involved, and eventually destruction can occur with more
extensive loss and bony deformity. Radiographs are far less sensitive
but frequently performed as a rapid method of assessment. The effects
of infection will cause bone loss, including cortical erosion and lucent
areas of destruction.
FIG. 6.50  Myositis ossificans. Anterior and posterior whole-body
scintigrams with extensive myositis ossificans involvement in the legs.
The three-phase Tc-99m MDP bone scan is highly sensitive for acute
osteomyelitis and is frequently performed in cases where MR is
contraindicated, when polyostotic sites may be involved, or when the
clinical findings are not well localized and the source of infection is
uncertain. Bone scan is often used in the assessment of a painful joint
prosthesis or in the diabetic foot. Other scintigraphic techniques can
be used, including the radiolabeled white blood cell (WBC) scan with
Tc-99m hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) or indium-111
(In-111), gallium-67 (Ga-67), and F-18 FDG PET/CT.
In some patients, especially children, increased pressure in the
marrow space or thrombosis of blood vessels results in paradoxically
decreased tracer uptake and a cold or photon-deficient lesion. False-
negative scintigraphic studies are unusual but have been reported in
infants under the age of 1 year. Other causes of false-negative
examinations are imaging very early in the course of disease and
failure to recognize the significance of photon-deficient areas.
FIG. 6.51  Heterotopic ossification in the hips in a patient with spinal
cord injury are seen on bone scan performed for assessment before
resection. Waiting for disease to mature on bone scan can help prevent
recurrence. Although blood flow (A) has already normalized, blood-pool
images (B, top) show mild residual uptake, and moderate activity is still
seen on delayed views (B, bottom) and posterior planar images. (C)
Single-photon emission computed tomography with CT (SPECT/CT)
fused (axial, top; coronal, lower) images show that the uptake lies in
coarse calcifications outside of the bones and expected joint.
Box 6.13 Causes of Aseptic Bone Necrosis
Trauma (accidental, iatrogenic)
Drug therapy (steroids)
Hypercoagulable states
Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease and variants)
After radiation therapy (orthovoltage)
Caisson disease
Osteochondrosis (pediatric age group; Legg-Calvé-Perthes
disease)
Polycythemia
Leukemia
Gaucher disease
Alcoholism
Pancreatitis
Idiopathic
FIG. 6.52  Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease. Bone scan images in a child
with a painful left hip. (A) Standard parallel-hole collimator images (Top
Row) fail to show the abnormality. Pinhole images (Bottom Row) reveal
the characteristic changes in the left hip, with a lentiform area of
decreased uptake in the femoral epiphysis. (B) Corresponding
radiograph obtained months later reveals deformity of the left femoral
epiphysis, with subtle flattening, increased density, and increased
distance between the epiphysis and the acetabulum.
Bone-Scan Findings of Osteomyelitis
Although the appearance of increased activity can be expected on
delayed Tc-99m MDP images (Fig. 6.57), three-phase scintigraphy is
typically performed for the evaluation of osteomyelitis. Perfusion
images help differentiate acute from more chronic disease. If arterial
blood flow is not abnormal, then areas of uptake in the bones or soft
tissues are the result of a more chronic process. It is important to note
that the arterial flow is seen in the earliest frames of the blood-flow
images, with venous uptake following. Acute infection in the soft
tissues (i.e., cellulitis and abscess) will show abnormal activity during
the first two phases but no accumulation in the underlying bones on
delayed images. Acute osteomyelitis, on the other hand, will be
markedly positive on all three phases (Fig. 6.58). Even in cases where
the soft tissues are also abnormal, such as in a septic joint, the delayed
images frequently show progressive accumulation compared with the
blood-pool image. In other cases, the soft tissue activity may be more
intense from the more extreme cellulitis or joint involvement, with the
delayed images revealing bone involvement at an earlier phase (Fig.
6.59). The diagnostic criteria for osteomyelitis are shown in Box 6.14.
FIG. 6.53  Acute changes of avascular necrosis in the left femoral
head are seen in a patient with normal blood flow (A) and blood-pool
(B) activity and a focal cold spot in the lateral left epiphysis. Over time
(C), increased blood flow will likely develop as collapse or sclerosis and
remodeling occur.
FIG. 6.54  Chronic osteoarthritic changes in with osteonecrosis. (A)
Planar bone-scan in a patient with prostate cancer revealed multiple
focal areas of activity from degenerative changes in the spine and
moderate uptake in the anterior right femoral head. (B) Single-photon
emission computed tomography with CT (SPECT/CT) axial (top row)
and coronal (bottom row) hip images show marked SPECT uptake (left
image) corresponding to joint-space loss, subchondral cysts, and mild
sclerosis on both sides of the joint on CT (middle) and fused (right side
of image) images.
The bone scan is not specific. The same sequence of image findings
seen in osteomyelitis can occur in conditions such as neuropathic joint
disease (Fig. 6.60), gout, fracture (including stress fractures), and
rheumatoid arthritis. Common conditions that can cause a three-phase
positive result potentially mimicking osteomyelitis are listed in Box
6.15. Improved specificity can be achieved by comparing the three-
phase bone scan to radiographs or CT.
Imaging with a Tc-99m HMPAO or In-111 WBC scan can identify
sites of infection with a higher degree of specificity. Caution must be
used in cases with marked neuropathic destruction because WBCs
may be increased in the region without infection. Joint-replacement
surgery can also shift or alter the appearance of the marrow. In such
cases, areas of increased WBC activity could represent cells in normal
marrow. Therefore in cases where there is concern for infection in
Charcot joint or joint replacement, areas of abnormal WBC activity
most often need to be compared with a Tc-99m sulfur colloid marrow
scan. If the WBC scan shows activity greater than the marrow, then
infection is likely present.
Although the WBC scan can be performed first or alone, an initial
three-phase bone scan can help identify areas of concern where count
rates are normally lower, such as the toes. Bone scan is also potentially
useful when an infection is chronic or already being treated with
antibiotics, which result in significant decreases in the sensitivity of
the WBC scan.
Although highly useful, WBC scans demonstrate decreased
sensitivity in the spine, reportedly only 40% for discitis/osteomyelitis.
In cases of discitis and possible osteomyelitis in the spine, when MR
cannot be performed or is inconclusive, a three-phase bone scan may
