Reconstruction: Ordered-subset expectation maximization; 8
iterations, 4 subsets
Postreconstruction filter: Three-dimensional (3-D)
Butterworth; cutoff 0.8 cycles/cm, order 9
SPECT, Single-photon emission computed tomography.
Image Interpretation
VQ interpretation criteria originally required comparison with a chest
radiograph less than 24 hours old, although a CT is now also
acceptable. Not only can the radiograph reveal alternate diagnoses
and change scan interpretation, but it may also influence which
imaging protocol is chosen. When the radiograph is normal, the scan
is usually diagnostic, and a low-dose perfusion-only scan might be
suitable. Abnormal chest radiographs can make interpretation less
certain; however, even when significantly abnormal, a diagnosis can
often be made by VQ.
VQ interpretation is complex. Experienced readers combine many
factors beyond strict criteria into their interpretation, referred to as
Gestalt. Less experienced readers should interpret the study based on
a standard criterion. All readers are encouraged to use a holistic
approach, that is, one that includes clinical information, such as D-
dimer, Wells score, and clinical suspicion.
FIG. 7.8  Injected blood clot artifact. During the Tc-99m
macroaggregated albumin (MAA) injection process, some blood was
drawn back into the syringe, forming blood clots, appearing here as hot
spots. They have a variable appearance but can be quite large. (Top
row, left to right): POST, posterior; RPO, right posterior oblique; R LAT,
right lateral. (Bottom row) ANT, anterior; LAT, left lateral; LPO, left
posterior oblique.
Box 7.8 Tc-99m Technegas Ventilation Scintigraphy
Patient Preparation
Chest radiograph within 24 hours
Dose Administration
40 to 150 MBq (1–4 mCi) Tc-99m MAA IV; for SPECT, 100 to 120
MBq (2–3 mCi) ideal
Pediatric: 1.11 MBq/kg (0.03 mCi/Kg) with minimum 14.8
MBq/kg (0.04 mCi/kg) if no ventilation performed or 2.59
MBq/kg (0.07 mCi/kg) with Tc-99m ventilation
Instrumentation
Collimator: Low energy, parallel hole
Photopeak: 20% window centered at 140 keV
Positioning
Place nose clamps and connect mouthpiece with patient
semisupine.
Center camera over chest.
Image Acquisition
Planar: Acquire posterior image for 250,000 counts; obtain
other views for this same time: anterior and posterior,
anterior and posterior obliques, right and left lateral.
SPECT: 3 degrees/step, 64 steps/head, 10 seconds/view, 360
degrees total
Reconstruction: Ordered-subset expectation maximization; 8
iterations, 4 subsets
Postreconstruction filter: Three-dimensional (3-D)
Butterworth; cutoff 0.8 cycles/cm, order 9
IV, intravenous; MAA, macroaggregated albumin; SPECT, single-
photon emission computed tomography.
Perfusion Image Findings
Normal perfusion is homogeneous, has relatively higher count
density in the bases and dependent lower lobes, and is decreased in
the areas of the mediastinal structures. Persistent Tc-99m DTPA
ventilation activity can sometimes be seen in the trachea and central
airways, and swallowed radiotracer may be seen in the esophagus
and stomach. The absorbed Tc-99m can result in excreted activity in
the kidneys and bladder, and the thyroid may accumulate free Tc-99m
pertechnetate. However, these areas are not normally intense, and free
pertechnetate cannot cross the blood–brain barrier. Tc-99m MAA
activity in the brain is diagnostic of a right-to-left cardiac shunt (Fig.
7.9).
FIG. 7.9  Right-to-left cardiac shunt. Intravenously injected Tc-99m
macroaggregated albumin (MAA) images reveal abnormal uptake in
the brain, thyroid, kidneys, and salivary glands, whereas free Tc-99m
pertechnetate could accumulate in the salivary glands and thyroid and
be cleared in the urine. However, the cerebral activity should not be
seen be seen, because free pertechnetate cannot cross the intact
blood–brain barrier. Heterogeneous activity in the abdomen is also
from shunting.
Perfusion deficits are described in terms of number, size, location,
shape, and intensity. Decreased activity is considered abnormal, not
only absent perfusion. Then each abnormality is compared with
ventilation and characterized as matched or mismatched. Because
more than 90% of PEs are multiple and over 85% are bilateral,
multiple mismatched perfusion abnormalities can be expected on the
VQ (Fig. 7.10) if symptoms are acute, especially if less than 24 hours in
duration. The timing of symptom onset should be considered because
in very rare instances, PE can induce bronchoconstriction in the first 4
to 6 hours, leading to perfusion defects appearing matched. Wedge-
shaped mismatched defects extending to the periphery and confined
to the contours and shape of the vascular segments are expected in PE.
Defects that do not respect the segmental boundaries are usually
caused by diseases other than emboli.
A proper description of findings requires familiarity with the
appearance of the segments on each of the views (Fig. 7.11). Real
segmental perfusion defects are usually visible on more than one view
and extend to the pleural surface. Possible exceptions to this can occur
in the lingual segments (sometimes only be visible on the left anterior
oblique view or with SPECT) and in the medial basal segments (which
might be seen only with SPECT).
A perfusion abnormality may encompass an entire lobe, a segment,
or a subsegment. As noted in Box 7.8, subsegmental lesions are graded
by size: large >75% of the segment, moderate 25% to 75%, and small
<25%. Because large or moderate defects are considered most
suspicious for PE, size is an important factor to assess. However, these
are subjective estimates.
Objects outside of the bronchopulmonary segments that can cause
VQ abnormalities include an enlarged heart, ectatic aorta, pleural
effusion, and metal artifact (Fig. 7.12 and 7.13). Pleural effusions can
be especially problematic because they may vary significantly with
positional changes between the VQ and chest radiograph. Common
causes of such nonsegmental defects are listed in Box 7.9.
Emboli can be intermittent or recurrent. They are often only
partially obstructing and gradually break down over time. Thus, a
mix of large and small defects or ill-defined mismatches are often
present. At a later stage, secondary atelectasis may lead to perfusion
lesions becoming matched. However, perfusion does not usually
normalize in less than 24 hours (Fig. 7.14). In young patients,
clearance is typically more rapid (i.e., in days or weeks). In certain
patients, particularly in the elderly and in those with underlying
cardiopulmonary disease, some defects may never disappear; those
persisting more than a few months are unlikely to ever clear.
FIG. 7.10  High-probability ventilation–perfusion (VQ) image. Posterior
oblique Xe-133 ventilation images (A) are normal. Multiview Tc-99m
macroaggregated albumin (MAA) perfusion images (B) reveal multiple
large and moderate perfusion defects bilaterally. This mismatched
pattern is consistent with PE.
Ventilation Image Findings
Tc-99m DTPA and Tc-99m Technegas images normally appear
homogeneous. Xe-133 activity is slightly fainter on the initial single-
breath image because of lower counts, then rapidly increases with
further breathing. Xe-133 washout should be rapid, usually clearing
within 90 to 120 seconds. Regions are abnormal on a Xe-133 image
when there is an area of either significantly decreased activity on any
phase, even if it normalizes later, or when activity does not clear
normally during washout from regional air trapping. Care must be
taken to not confuse Xe-133 retention in a fatty liver with air trapping
