FIG. 7.3  Effect of embolus position on downstream perfusion. Larger
emboli (top) lodge more centrally, causing greater effect and making
them easier to detect. Smaller clots (bottom) or showers of smaller
clots caused by breakdown of more proximal clots lodge more distally.
In both, the effects extend to the pleural surface.
Although technical advances have led to a marked increase in
CTPA and MRA utilization, the nuclear medicine VQ lung scan
remains an important tool. It is particularly useful in patients who
cannot tolerate intravenous contrast, have renal dysfunction, or in
whom an adequate CTPA or MRA examination could not be obtained.
It frequently provides a definitive answer while minimizing radiation
to the patient.
VQ interpretation may seem challenging at first and requires a solid
understanding of lung anatomy and physiology as well as of
standardized
interpretation
criteria.
Imaging
equipment
and
ventilation agents have improved over the years, and techniques such
as single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and single-
photon emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) are reported to improve VQ accuracy. Although the
general impression is that CTPA offers greater accuracy over VQ,
investigations directly comparing CTPA and VQ have found little or
no difference in accuracy or patient outcomes between the two.
VQ Background
During the perfusion portion of the VQ scan, intravenously
administered radiolabeled albumen particles are either normally
trapped in distal capillaries or are prevented from reaching the lung
periphery if they meet an obstruction, such as a clot. The emboli result
in regions of decreased perfusion in the territory fed by the obstructed
vessels: lobe, segment, or subsegments depending on whether the clot
lodges centrally or distally (Fig. 7.3).
PE diagnosis is complicated by the fact that the body normally
shunts blood away from areas of the lung that are not properly
ventilated. This means that causes other than PE can also lead to
regions of decreased perfusion. Most commonly these are lung
diseases, such as emphysema, interstitial lung disease, and asthma.
Box 7.2 lists some causes of abnormal ventilation. Comparing
ventilation to the perfusion pattern can help determine whether the
diagnosis is PE. With emboli, tissues usually remain ventilated, at
least for some time. So, the VQ will demonstrate normal ventilation in
the areas of perfusion deficit from the embolus, resulting in a
“mismatched” defect (Fig. 7.4). Airway diseases, on the other hand,
show ventilation abnormalities that coincide with the perfusion
defects. These “matched” defects are unlikely to be caused by an acute
PE. Box 7.3 contains definitions of some important terms applied to
VQ scintigraphy.
Box 7.2 Causes of Ventilation and Perfusion (VQ)
Defects
Primary Vascular Lesions
Pulmonary thromboembolism
Septic, fat, and air emboli
Vasculitis
Congenital vascular anomalies
