in the right lung base (Fig. 7.15). The initial single breath alone will
identify abnormal areas in the majority of cases. The washout images,
however, frequently best demonstrate air trapping (Fig. 7.16). The
sensitivity for COPD is high, approximately 90%.
PIOPED
VQ scan criteria content and naming conventions have evolved over
the years (Box 7.10). The multicenter Prospective Investigation of
Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis (PIOPED or PIOPED I) study,
published in 1990, sought to assess VQ scan accuracy, optimize
interpretation criteria, and standardize result reporting. The
interpretation criteria used grouped findings into levels of probability
that PE is present based on the number and size of matched and
mismatched perfusion defects in conjunction with the chest
radiograph findings. Scans were then interpreted as follows:
Normal
No perfusion defects
High probability
Findings highly likely to be caused by PE
PE likely present in over 80% of the cases
Low probability
Findings unlikely to be from PE
PE in less than 20% of cases
Intermediate probability
Findings more nonspecific,
Risk between high and low (20–80%)
All patients then underwent pulmonary angiography and clinical
follow-up to determine the actual final diagnosis. Based on the data, a
few key changes were made to increase the accuracy of the originally
proposed criteria. The resulting Modified PIOPED Criteria became
standard (Table 7.3).
FIG. 7.11  Segmental anatomy of the lungs. The right lung is made up
of three lobes. The right upper lobe contains the apical, posterior, and
anterior segments. The right middle lobe consists of the medial and
lateral segments. The right lower lobe contains the superior, medial
basal, anterior basal, lateral basal, and posterior basal segments. The
left lung is made up of the upper and lower lobes, with the lingual part
of the upper lobe. The left upper lobe consists of the apicoposterior and
anterior segments as well as the superior and inferior segments in the
lingula. The left lower lobe comprises the superior, anteromedial basal,
lateral basal, and posterior basal segments.
The PIOPED trial confirmed that a normal examination virtually
excluded PE, and the 90% positive predictive value of a high-
probability study usually allowed treatment without further workup.
However, setting the limit of a low-probability scan at an up to 19%
chance of PE also meant the risk would be too great for most to ignore
without further workup, making it a less useful as a distinct category.
In addition, only 41% of documented PEs occurred in patients with
high-probability scans, with the majority of PEs occurring in scans
read as low or intermediate (Table 7.4). Only 28% of patients received
a definitive normal or high-probability VQ diagnosis. Although a
subsequent study with a more balanced population of outpatients and
inpatients found a definite diagnosis in 46% of patients, this still
meant a majority of patients received a “nondiagnostic” intermediate
or low-probability result.
In order to decrease the number of nondiagnostic examinations,
scan patterns with a <10% likely risk of PE from the PIOPED I data
were identified and used to create a very low-probability category.
This significantly decreased nondiagnostic results, pulling cases from
the low- and indeterminate-probability groups. Clinicians might
watch these near-normal cases rather than start treatment, making it a
more useful category than low probability. Efforts were then also
made to simplify the criteria by combining the remaining
intermediate-
and
low-probability
patterns
into
a
new
“nondiagnostic”
category,
eliminating
the
confusing
term
“intermediate probability.” The final Modified PIOPED II criteria
consisted of normal, high probability, very low probability, and
nondiagnostic.
FIG. 7.12  Nonsegmental perfusion defects. (A) Portable chest
radiograph shows a hazy density throughout the right lung compared
with the left from a pleural effusion layering posteriorly due to supine
positioning. (B) Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) lung
perfusion images reveal a corresponding decrease in activity on the
right as well as a defect from the pacemaker (arrow). Although
perfusion on the right looks diffusely decreased on anterior and
posterior images, it is much less severe on other views, tipping off the
observer to the explanation.
FIG. 7.13  Fissure sign. Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA)
perfusion images show a curvilinear defect in the right lung (arrows)
from fluid tracking into the major fissure.
Box 7.9 Potential Causes of Nonsegmental Perfusion
Defects
Pacemaker artifact
Tumor
Pleural effusion
Cardiomegaly
Hilar adenopathy
Aortic ectasia or aneurysm
Bullae
Linear atelectasis
Pneumonia
The validity of the very low-probability category was then
retrospectively examined using data from the subsequent PIOPED II
trial, a trial designed to assess the accuracy of CTPA and CT
venography. Although the VQ scans had been used in this trial as part
of the initial diagnostic evaluation, data suggested the new rules were
valid. The Modified PIOPED II criteria have become the most widely
used set of VQ interpretation rules in the United States (see Table 7.3).
FIG. 7.14  Resolving pulmonary embolus (PE). (A) Normal posterior
ventilation images (left) and abnormal perfusion images from PE (right)
from a patient with PE. (B) Ten years later, the patient returned with
recurrent symptoms. The ventilation was normal, but the perfusion is
again abnormal on the right. However, no new baseline had been
done, and it was difficult to tell which areas might be acute. (C) The
patient was anticoagulated, and images 7 days later show near
complete perfusion defect resolution (right), confirming the acute nature
of the defects.
FIG. 7.15  Xe-133 accumulation in the liver. Posterior images show
delayed washout of the lung bases and significant xenon uptake in the
region of the liver (arrow).
Diagnostic Interpretation Categories
Normal
When a study is completely normal (see Figs. 7.1 and 7.2), the
diagnosis of PE is essentially excluded, with an incidence of 1.3% in
the PIOPED II data and 1% to 3% in other reports. Significant
morbidity from PE was found to be less than 1% based on follow-up
performed on patients with normal VQ scans. When clinical pretest
suspicion is low, the chance of PE is near 0.
High Probability
A high-probability scan is typically fairly obvious (Figs. 7.17; see also
Figs. 7.4, 7.10, and 7.14). In order to ensure a scan is sufficiently
specific, the Modified PIOPED and Modified PIOPED II criteria
require two or more large (>75%) mismatched segmental perfusion
defects, or their equivalent in moderate and large-sized defects (small
mismatched defects are not counted) with a clear radiograph in the
mismatched areas.
Although the category was devised to carry a risk of PE ≥80%, in
reality, it is actually higher, at least 85% to 95%. Because the pretest
probability affects results, it is not surprising that this rises to 96% to
98% when clinical suspicion is also high, concordant with scan results.
Although unusual, false-positive high-probability scans can occur for
several reasons (Box 7.11). The most common cause is a prior PE that
did not resolve. Therefore comparison with a prior study, if available,
is important. A repeat scan in 1 to 2 weeks after PE is helpful to
establish a new baseline in case symptoms later recur.
Considerations Involving Near-Normal to Nondiagnostic Scans
Under the Modified PIOPED I criteria, most scans with matched
defects went into the low-probability category, even when extensive.
Small perfusion defects were all considered low risk as well, with
ventilation status less important. For example, such small perfusion
defects can sometimes be mismatched in restrictive airway disease.
FIG. 7.16  Air trapping on ventilation–perfusion (VQ) images. (A) Xe-
133 ventilation images show normal initial and equilibrium images but
bibasilar retained radiotracer during washout consistent with air
trapping. (B) Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) perfusion
reveals a large perfusion defect in the left lower lobe (arrow), which is
matched by the ventilation examination, lowering suspicion for
pulmonary embolus (PE). Although washout is very sensitive for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), abnormal ventilation
on any phase is counted as abnormal, even if it is normal on other
phases.
Box 7.10 Lung Scan Interpretation Criteria
Biello criteria—used as foundation for criteria tested
Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis
(PIOPED) or PIOPED I
Revised PIOPED criteria
Modified PIOPED II criteria
The very low-probability category of the Modified PIOPED II
criteria may seem much more complicated at first. However, it may
help to remember that most cases that do not appear suspicious or are
near normal are probably at the <10% risk of very low probability
rather than the higher risk of the nondiagnostic category. Several
lower-risk items are fairly obvious: nonsegmental defects related to
structures outside the bronchovascular segments (e.g., enlarged
cardiovascular structures, elevated diaphragm, and large bullae) and
situations with a “stripe sign,” a strip of blood flow peripheral to a
defect (Fig. 7.18). The investigators also found that when moderate to
large-sized matched defects are multiple (≥2) or when small perfusion
abnormalities were limited to one to three in number, the case could
move from low into very low probability.
However, in a few situations, matched defects are associated with
higher risk. Most notably this involves some triple-matched
abnormalities (perfusion, ventilation, and radiographic defect).
Hemorrhagic infarct or atelectasis from a PE can cause radiographic
opacities of equal or lesser size compared with the perfusion
abnormality. However, the radiographic abnormality is unlikely from
emboli if it is larger than the perfusion defect. In the past, triple
matches were all classified as intermediate risk. Now, only a triple
match in the lower lung fields is considered nondiagnostic (and still in
the intermediate-probability range), whereas such abnormalities in the
upper lung fields can be called very low probability (Fig. 7.19).
Special Considerations
Severe Unilateral Lung Involvement
Occasionally, absent or severely decreased perfusion involves only
one lung (Fig. 7.20). Although this technically involves multiple large
segmental areas, it is extremely rare for this pattern to be the result of
a large central saddle embolus. Matching VQ abnormalities are the
result of the most common causes of unilateral decreased perfusion,
surgery, or mucous plug. If the perfusion defect is not matched, then a
central bronchogenic carcinoma or a hilar mass that impinges on
vessels but spares the bronchial airway must be sought on the
radiograph or CT. Some potential etiologies for this pattern are listed
in Box 7.12.
Pleural Effusions
Small pleural effusions are frequently found in patients with PE. A
chronic effusion is considered an anatomical defect. Under Modified
PIOPED II guidelines, an acute small effusion (<1/3 of the hemithorax)
belongs with the nondiagnostic group, tiny effusions can usually be
ignored, and large effusions are placed in the very low-probability
category. However, some limited past data beyond the PIOPED
reviews suggested larger acute effusions might belong in the
nondiagnostic group if no other etiology is evident.
Criteria Use and Development
As mentioned previously, the chance that the VQ (or even CT) result
will accurately identify or exclude PE differs, depending on the
clinical suspicion or pretest probability (Table 7.5). For example, a
low-probability VQ in a patient with high clinical suspicion has a
much >20% chance of PE, maybe closer to 40%. However, the risk is
near 2% when clinical suspicion is low/very low. With a very low-
probability interpretation, most clinicians will observe rather than
treat or pursue additional workup. If the pretest clinical suspicion is
also low, a very low-probability result essentially eliminates PE from
the differential. There are some data showing fairly similar outcomes
between patients with normal and very low-probability studies, and a
case can be made for calling all of these examinations negative for PE.
Table 7.3
VQ Interpretation Criteria for Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis
Modified PIOPED
(PIOPED) a
Modified PIOPED II a
EANM VQ Guidelines
(SPECT or SPECT/CT) b
High Probability
High Probability
(PE Present)
PE Present
≥2 large
mismatched
defects
2 moderate
segments = a
large segment
≥2 large mismatched
defects
2 moderate segments = a
large segment
VQ mismatch in
≥1 segment OR
≥ 2 subsegments conforming to the
pulmonary vascular anatomy
Intermediate
Probability
Nondiagnostic
Nondiagnostic
1 large or 2
moderate
mismatched
defects
Difficult to
characterize as
high or low
All other findings not
categorized as high,
low, very low, or
normal probability
Multiple VQ abnormalities not typical of
specific diseases
Borderline Low
Probability
Very Low Probability
1 matched defect,
(–)CXR
Solitary large pleural
effusion (≥{1/3}) with
no other Q defects
Low Probability
Very Low Probability
Multiple matched
defects with
(–)CXR
Nonsegmental Q defect
Q defect <CXR lesion
Stripe sign
Q defect <<CXR
lesion
Any number of
small Q
defects
1–3 small Q defects
Solitary triple-matched
defect (VQ/CXR) in
upper or mid-lung
≥2 matched VQ defect
(–)CXR
Very Low Probability
Normal
Nonsegmental Q
defect
Nonsegmental Q
defect
Q defect <CXR
defect
Stripe sing
1–3 small Q
defects
(PE absent)
No perfusion defects
PE absent
ormalNo
Q defects
Normal perfusion
Matched VQ or reverse mismatch
(V>Q) defects of any size, shape,
or number in the absence of
mismatch
VQ mismatch not in a lobar,
segmental, or subsegmental
pattern
CXR, Chest radiograph; EANM, European Association of Nuclear Medicine; PE, pulmonary
embolus; PIOPED, Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis; Q, perfusion;
SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography; SPECT/CT, single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography; V, ventilation, (–), clear/normal.
a  Modified from Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging (SNMMI) Procedure
Guideline 4.0. Reston, VA: SNMMI; 2012; and Sostman HD, Miniati M, Gottschalk A, et al.
Sensitivity and specificity of perfusion scintigraphy combined with chest radiography for acute
pulmonary embolism in PIOPED II. J Nucl Med. 2008;49:1741–1748.
b  From European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) ventilation/perfusion guidelines.
Vienna, Austria: EANM; 2009.
Table 7.4
PIOPED I and II Breakdown of Results
PIOPED
Modified PIOPED II
VQ
PE+
PE–
PE+
PE–
High
102 (41%)
14 (3%)
89 (53%)
13 (2%)
Intermediate
105 (41%)
217 (45%)
47 (27%)
105 (14%)
Low
39 (16%)
199 (41%)
6 (4%)
83 (11%)
Very low
NA
NA
24 (15%)
391 (53%)
Normal
5 (2%)
50 (11%)
2 (1%)
150 (20%)
Total patients
PIOPED, Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis.
Many readers continue to advocate for continued simplification of
VQ criteria: calling studies positive (PE present), negative (PE absent),
or nondiagnostic. Although the use of such a Trinary approach has
been limited, simplification may be useful. The use of likelihood or
probability has confused referring physicians since the original
PIOPED trial decades ago, and most tests are reported in terms of the
presence or absence of disease.
Criteria development also continues to examine the significance of
the single-segment mismatch. Whereas the Modified PIOPED and
Modified PIOPED II criteria call for two segmental mismatches, one
such defect might be sufficient for a high-probability reading under
appropriate conditions. Some alternative interpretation protocols have
recognized this in such situations as a patient with no prior
cardiopulmonary disease and a clear chest radiograph (Fig. 7.21). In
addition, newer criteria being advocated for SPECT have considered a
single mismatched defect in such situations enough for a positive scan
reading.
FIG. 7.17  Magnetic resonance arteriogram (MRA) of pulmonary
embolus (PE). (A) Ventilation and (B) perfusion images from a
ventilation–perfusion (VQ) scan reveal a large area of mismatched
decreased perfusion in the right upper lung and smaller areas of
decreased perfusion in the right lower lobe in a patient with a clear
chest radiograph, interpreted as high probability for PE. An MRA was
performed 48 hours later due to worsened symptoms. (C) Axial
gadoteridol enhanced T1-weighted gradient echo fat suppression
(three-dimensional [3-D] spoiled gradient echo [GRE]) images
demonstrate a filling defect in the distal right lobar and the interlobar
pulmonary arteries in the upper lobe. More distal, subsegmental
defects were also seen in the right lower lobe but are not well
visualized on these limited slices.
FIG. 7.18  Stripe sign. On the right lateral view, perfusion is seen
along the periphery of the lung (arrow) beyond an extensive defect,
strongly suggesting the adjacent decreased activity is not from a
pulmonary embolus (PE).
Box 7.11 Conditions Associated With Ventilation–
Perfusion Mismatch
Acute pulmonary embolus
Chronic pulmonary embolus
Hilar mass/lesion obstructing pulmonary arteries or veins
Mediastinal or hilar adenopathy
Bronchogenic carcinoma (and other tumors)
Radiation therapy
Acute cocaine/drug effects
Vasculitis
Other causes of embolism: septic, fat
Pulmonary artery hypoplasia or surgery
Swyer–James syndrome
SPECT in Ventilation–Perfusion Scintigraphy
In Europe, SPECT has become the standard of care, as stated in the
European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) 2009 Guidelines for
Ventilation/Perfusion Scintigraphy (see Table 7.3). As proven in many
types of scans, SPECT improves contrast resolution and sensitivity,
and the same holds true with SPECT VQ (Figs. 7.22 and 7.23). In the
lungs, the lack of overlap with adjacent segments makes defects not
only easier to detect (particularly in the medial basal segments) but
also easier to characterize in size, shape, and relation to the vascular
segmental anatomy than is often possible on planar images.
EANM SPECT criteria require at least one large (or moderate to
large) segmental mismatched defect in order for a study to be called
positive for PE. Findings negative for PE include mismatched defects
not conforming to a segmental configuration, all matched defects (no
matter the size or number), and any reverse mismatched defect (Q
smaller than V). Comparison with CT or performing the examination
with SPECT/CT is recommended to avoid incorrect interpretations
from findings such as nonsegmental decreased perfusion in the area
of the pulmonary fissures, dependent lungs with pulmonary edema,
or when secondary to an identifiable cause (Fig. 7.24).
SPECT VQ data are more limited and largely retrospective.
However, data stated in the EANM guidelines describe results from
over 3000 patients with a sensitivity of 96% to 99%, specificities of 91%
to 98%, and negative predictive value (NPV) of 97% to 99% (Bajc et al.,
2009). Nondiagnostic examinations were reported in only 1% to 3% in
their reports, and other trials have confirmed a low rate of
nondiagnostic studies (less than 5%). More recent reports continue to
show very promising results. It is likely that SPECT will become the
method of choice in the United States once Tc-99m Technegas is
approved by the FDA.
Comparisons of Planar VQ, CTPA, and SPECT
VQ
In the PIOPED II trial, multidetector CTPA (MDCT) had a sensitivity
of 83% and a specificity of 96%, although this value excluded 6%
technically inadequate examinations (51/824 patients). Some have
noted that technology has improved since the PIOPED II data.
However, sensitivities reported in the literature for CTPA vary widely
(57–100%), likely not as high as commonly believed. Specificity values
are good (range 78–100%), and very high NPVs are generally seen. If
the pretest clinical suspicion is not concordant with the scan findings,
CTPA results are far less reliable (as was previously noted with VQ
scans). For example, studies have shown that although the positive
predictive value (PPV) of CTPA is high when clinical suspicion for PE
is also high (96%), it is only 58% when clinical suspicion is low. When
technically adequate, CTPA is more accurate than planar VQ,
although some experts note that the superiority does not translate to
improved clinical outcomes. In fact, planar VQ is able to provide
similar results with a lower radiation dose. However, radiation doses
from CTPA have improved, and the acquisition time is extremely fast.
Critical assessment of SPECT VQ has been limited by the lack of
large prospective comparison trials with CTPA and planar VQ
utilizing a true gold standard. However, SPECT VQ clearly provides
superior images and few nondiagnostic results compared with planar
VQ. The increased accuracy may not be significant in terms of clinical
outcomes, with both tests having similar NPV values (1.1–1.2%). VQ
SPECT comparison to CTPA is also limited. However, early data
suggest both show a high degree of accuracy, sensitivity, and
specificity, often >90%. In a couple of studies, CTPA seems more
specific (98% vs. 91%, 100% vs. 88%) and SPECT VQ more sensitive
(97% vs. 86%, 97% vs. 68%), with both tests being accurate (93–94%).
Some sites also now favor SPECT/CT over SPECT because it allows
identification of other underlying disease and can improve specificity.
However, SPECTCT without contrast cannot identify many of the
alternate causes of the chest pain, such as aortic dissection.
FIG. 7.19  Triple-matched defect. (A) Chest radiograph and (B)
nonenhanced computed tomography (CT) reveal a large left upper lobe
density in a patient with shortness of breath who could not have
contrast due to poor renal function. A corresponding matched defect is
seen on perfusion (C) and ventilation (D) lung scan images. Originally,
Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis (PIOPED)
classified triple-matched defects as intermediate probability. With
Modified PIOPED II, only those in the lower lung fields are actually high
enough risk to place in the nondiagnostic group, whereas those in the
upper and mid-lung fields are actually very low probability. This patient
was found to have aspergillosis, and findings rapidly cleared within
days of starting treatment.
FIG. 7.20  Severe unilateral lung involvement. Near-absent ventilation
to the right lung with Tc-99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
(DTPA) (A) and markedly decreased Tc-99m macroaggregated
albumin (MAA) perfusion (B) in a patient with a clear radiograph (not
shown). Even extensive perfusion defects are low probability by
Modified Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis
(PIOPED) criteria if they are matched, there is at least some perfusion
somewhere, and the radiograph is clear. According to Modified
