Radiopharmaceuticals
Perfusion: Tc-99m MAA
Technetium-99m macroaggregated albumin (Tc-99m MAA) is the only
lung-perfusion agent clinically available in the United States.
Radiolabeled particles must be larger than the red blood cells so that
they will be trapped in the lungs on the first pass but should not be so
large that they lodge centrally. Although MAA particles range in size
from 5 to 100 μm, 60% to 80% of the particles are between 20 and 80
μm. Once in the lung, particles gradually degrade and are
phagocytized with a biological half-life (T1⁄2) of 2 to 3 hours.
Considerations for Tc-99m MAA particle administration are listed
in Box 7.4. In adults, 200,000 to 600,000 particles are typically used
(100,000 minimum to maintain image quality). This obstructs only a
small fraction of vessels and should result in no ill effects. However,
in some situations, particle-number reduction is recommended to
ensure safety. In children, modifications are usually done as a
reflection of age or weight. In pregnancy, the particles are limited to
the minimum. Particle numbers are also decreased in pulmonary
hypertension and in right-to-left cardiac shunts. Although it may
seem alarming that particles will occlude capillaries in the brain and
other organs in such shunts, Tc-99m MAA has long been used to
actually calculate cardiac shunts without significant problem.
Ventilation Agents
A comparison of ventilation radiopharmaceuticals is listed in Table
7.2. Of these, two aerosols are the most commonly used currently: Tc-
99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Tc-99m DTPA) in the United
States and Tc-99m Technegas (Cyclomedica) in Europe and Australia.
Tc-99m Technegas images are generally superior; however, approval
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has been delayed
for years in the United States. Although krypton-81 (Kr-81) gas may
be used in some sites outside the United States, Xe-133 is the only gas
ventilation available currently for routine clinical use in the United
States.
FIG. 7.4  Mismatched perfusion–ventilation defects. Posterior
ventilation (A) and perfusion (B) images show an extensive
mismatched defect in the right upper lung as well in the left lower lobe
in a high-probability scan.
Xe-133
Gas ventilation agents disperse more easily in the lungs than Tc-99m
DTPA aerosol, allowing for superior images in cases where airflow is
abnormal. Xe-133 gas is fat soluble, moving from the lung into blood
and tissues. As it recirculates, gas exchange allows rapid clearance
from the body with a 30- to 45-second biologic T1⁄2. The ability to
image washout significantly increases the sensitivity for air trapping
in obstructive lung disease, improving overall examination specificity
(Fig. 7.5 ). However, the low photopeak of 81 keV leads to lower-
quality images from greater soft tissue attenuation and scatter. It is
also sometimes difficult to tell if perfusion defects are matched
because the views obtained before washout are limited. Because most
PEs occur in the lower lobes, ventilation was usually done only
posteriorly in the past, whereas perfusion could be visualized in
multiple projections. The wide availability of two-headed cameras
today has resulted in more flexibility, and some systems allow
simultaneous imaging in the left posterior oblique (LPO) and right
posterior oblique (RPO) projections, thereby visualizing three pleural
surfaces of each lung. Rooms used for Xe-133 are equipped with a
special xenon trap (a system of shielded charcoal filters and tubing
that retains the gas until safely decayed), and scanning is performed
in a negative-pressure room with a ventilation system that rapidly
clears the radioactive gas to the outside.
Box 7.3 Ventilation–Perfusion (VQ) Scan Terminology
Gestalt: Process of holistic interpretation performed by
experienced VQ readers that includes more than the use of
strict criteria to achieve a more accurate result.
Matched defect: Abnormality of both scans in same area and of
same size.
Mismatched defect: Perfusion abnormality in region of normal
ventilation.
Reverse mismatched defect: Ventilation abnormality in area with
normal perfusion.
Triple-match defect: A matched VQ lesion within the
bronchopulmonary segments occurring in the area of a
similar sized radiographic abnormality.
Segmental defect: Corresponds to the segmental lung anatomy;
often wedge-shaped and extending to pleura.
Large: >75% of the segment involved
Moderate: 25% to 75% of segment
Small: <25% of the segment
Subsegmental defect: Perfusion defect involving less than a
segment of lung parenchyma.
Nonsegmental defect: Lesion does not correspond to segmental
anatomy, caused by objects outside of the lung tissue,
generally not wedge-shaped.
Box 7.4 Considerations for Tc-99m MAA Particle Use
≈500,000 particles in a 185-MBq (5-mCi) dose
For Adults
Minimum: 60,000 to 100,000 particles
Standard: 200,000 to 700,000 particles
≈300 million arterioles and 280 billion pulmonary capillaries
Obstructs <0.1% to 0.3% of vessels
Consider Particle Number Reduction
Pulmonary hypertension: 100,000 to 250,000 particles
Have far fewer functional capillaries
Right-to-left cardiac shunt: 100,000 to 150,000 particles
Pregnancy: 100,000 particles (decreasing radiation dose)
Use fresh Tc-99m MAA particles.
For Children
Modifications done as a reflection of age
Neonate: 10,000 particles
<5 years: 50,000 to 150,000 particles
MAA, Macroaggregated albumin.
Tc-99m DTPA
Aerosolized Tc-99m DTPA has recently received FDA approval for
clinical use after having been used by physicians “off-label” for
decades. The liquid radiopharmaceutical is placed into a nebulizer,
producing small particles ranging in size from 0.5 to 2 μm, which are
normally able to travel to the lung periphery. However, in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or when patients
cannot cooperate fully with technique, airway turbulence produces
large airway deposition and central clumping. Not only does this limit
peripheral visualization, but activity shine-through onto the
subsequent perfusion scan can obscure perfusion defects (Fig. 7.6).
With time, Tc-99m DTPA is broken down in the lungs and
absorbed, ultimately cleared by the kidneys. The biologic T1⁄2 varies
but has been estimated at 80 minutes (±20 minutes) in healthy
nonsmokers.
Clearances
dramatically
increase
when
alveolar
membranes are damaged. In healthy smokers, the biologic T1⁄2 is only
24 minutes (±9 minutes). Damage to the lungs from toxins or
inflammatory processes like adult respiratory distress syndrome can
be diagnosed by measuring abnormally rapid Tc-99m DTPA clearance
rates.
Tc-99m Technegas
Tc-99m Technegas is an aerosolized suspension of solid carbon
particles that are smaller than those of Tc-99m DTPA, small enough to
behave as a gas in the lungs. Tc-99m pertechnetate is placed into the
crucible of a dedicated machine and incinerated in the presence of
100% argon gas and carbon, resulting in a thin layer of metallic
technetium encapsulating carbon particles typically 30 to 60 nm in size
(reported range of 5–200 nm, with 80% being less than 100 nm). These
particles easily travel to the lung periphery after only a couple
inspirations. Images are generally superior to Tc-99m DTPA, with
central bronchial clumping infrequently seen. Unlike the clearance
seen with Tc-99m DTPA, these particles lodge in a stable distribution,
allowing not only for multiview planar images (in the same
projections as the perfusion) but for superior SPECT images as well
(Fig. 7.7 ).
FIG. 7.5  Matched ventilation and perfusion defects on anterior and
posterior Tc-99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) aerosol
(A) and Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) perfusion (B)
images.
FIG. 7.6  Suboptimal Tc-99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
(DTPA) distribution (A). Poor peripheral distribution can make it difficult
to tell if perfusion defects are matched, and retained central radiotracer
shine-through onto subsequent Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin
(MAA; B) scans can obscure areas of abnormal decreased perfusion.
FIG. 7.7  Normal single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) lung scan in coronal (top two rows), sagittal (middle two
rows), and axial (bottom two rows) projections. Tc-99m
macroaggregated albumin (MAA) perfusion (top half of each row) and
Tc-99m Technegas ventilation images (bottom half of each row) show
good detail, particularly in the medial lungs, which are difficult to see on
planar images. Technegas stability in the lungs makes it superior to Tc-
99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) for SPECT, avoiding
potential problems clearance might create when comparing defects.
Images courtesy of Khun Visith Keu, MD, Hôpital de la Cité-de-la-Santé
de Laval, Canada.
Table 7.2
Comparison of VQ Scan Ventilation Agents
Gas Ventilation Agents
Aerosolized Ventilation Agents
Comparison Factor Xenon-
Krypton-81m
Tc-99m DTPA
Aerosol
Tc-99m
Technegas
Tc-99m Sulfur
Colloid
Decay mode
Beta-
minus
Isomeric
Isomeric
Isomeric
Isomeric
Physical T1⁄2
53 days
13 sec
6 hr
6 hr
6 hr
Biologic T1⁄2
30 sec
(Continuous
intake)
80 mina
135 hr
Photon energy
81 keV
190 keV
140 keV
140 keV
140 keV
Multiple-view
imaging
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Optimal for
SPECT
No
No
+/–
Yes
Yes
Useful for COPD
Yes
Yes
+/–
Yes
+/–
Used after
perfusion scan
No
Yes
No
No
No
COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid;
SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography; VQ, ventilation–perfusion.
Rates vary: biological half-life = 60 to 100 minutes in nonsmokers and
16 to 45 minutes in healthy smokers.
Radiation Exposure: VQ Versus CTPA
Newer low-dose CTPA techniques have generally reduced the
radiation dose, narrowing the gap with VQ. Although the CTPA
effective whole-body dose is sometimes as low as 2 to 3 mSv,
significantly higher doses are often still used (3–9.0 mSv), and VQ
doses, usually less than 1.5 mSv (1.1–2.0 mSv), still compare favorably.
Given the radiation sensitivity of the breast, it may be most important
to note that VQ results in a much lower breast dose of 0.8 mGy (0.2–
1.2 mGy) as opposed to perhaps 5 mGy from CTPA (roughly 3–34
mGy in literature, depending on technique). In pregnancy, radiation
doses to the fetus, although low, are reportedly higher from VQ
compared with CTPA. However, fetal exposure may be comparable or
even lower when using suggested VQ protocol modifications, such as
low-dose perfusion only or 2-day protocols, where a perfusion scan is
done on day 1 and the ventilation study is performed on day 2 only
for those cases requiring it due to perfusion abnormalities.
Radiopharmaceutical dosimetry is outlined in Appendix 1.
