Pulmonary Embolism
Diagnosis
The clinical diagnosis of pulmonary embolus (PE) can be difficult
because of the wide range of presenting signs and symptoms as well
as the limitations of available diagnostic tests. Although correct
identification and prompt treatment can significantly improve
mortality rates (from approximately 30% to 10%) and help prevent
recurrence, treatment regimens also expose patients to potential harm.
It is important to understand the tests used to diagnose PE. The
accuracy of any test depends not only on its sensitivity and specificity
but also on pretest probabilities according to principles of Bayes’
theorem (i.e., a positive test result is more likely a true positive if
pretest suspicion is high, but the likelihood dramatically drops if
suspicion is low). Therefore referring physicians should perform
patient risk stratification to assess the overall likelihood of PE before
ordering an extensive workup using validated criteria, such as the
Modified Wells Scoring System (Table 7.1), which objectively assign
points based on patient history, symptoms, and physical findings.
Patients are at greatest risk of a pulmonary embolus from
immobilization, recent surgery, and hypercoagulable states. The
chance of PE is also significantly increased with a history of prior PE
and in the presence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Among patients
with symptomatic DVT, 30% to 50% result in a PE, and 70% to 90% of
patients with PE have had a DVT. Pregnancy and hormone use are
more moderate risk factors.
Chest radiographs are frequently ordered and often identify other
causes for the patient’s symptoms. However, findings from a PE are
highly variable (Box 7.1). Serum D-dimer is sensitive but nonspecific.
Doppler ultrasound is an excellent way to noninvasively diagnose
venous thrombosis in the lower extremities, making it a frequent
component in the workup of possible PE. Further testing beyond these
examinations depends on the level of clinical suspicion.
The historical imaging gold standard, pulmonary angiography, is
very rarely performed today. It is not only invasive but also requires
significant facility resources and may not visualize chronic emboli. In
recent
years,
multislice
computed
tomography
pulmonary
angiography (CTPA) has become the dominant imaging tool for
definitive PE diagnosis. As its use has dramatically escalated, there
has been a corresponding significant increase in PE diagnosis. Despite
this trend, mortality from PE has not substantially decreased,
suggesting that many emboli now found are actually of little or no
clinical significance. The potential risks of ionizing radiation exposure
from this often-overutilized procedure have also been in the spotlight
recently, and the scans themselves may be limited by insufficient
contrast bolus density and patient motion. Some patients may not be
able to undergo CTPA due to contraindications such as iodinated
contrast allergy or poor renal function.
Table 7.1
Wells Scoring for Pretest Determination of PE Probability a
Criteria
Modified Wells (Points)
Clinical signs of DVT
3.0
Recent surgery or immobilization
1.5
Heart rate >100 beats/min
1.5
Previous vascular thromboemboli
1.5
Hemoptysis
1.0
Malignancy
1.0
PE most likely diagnosis
3.0
Pregnancy
0 (not included in Wells score)
Clinical Risk Assessment
Risk
Total Score (Points)
PE in Wells Patients
High
>6
41%
Moderate
2–6
16%
Low
<2
3.4%
DVT, Deep vein thrombosis; PE, pulmonary embolus.
a  Modified from Wells PS, Anderson DR, Roger M, et al. Excluding pulmonary embolism at
the bedside without diagnostic imaging: management of patients with suspected pulmonary
embolism presenting to the emergency department by using a simple clinical model and D-
dimer. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:98–107.
Box 7.1 Chest Radiograph Findings in Pulmonary
Embolus
Most common:
Atelectasis
Opacity/infiltrate (localized or regional)
Pleural effusion (usually small to moderate)
Also seen:
Pulmonary artery proximal distention (Fleischner’ sign)
Oligemia (Westermark’ sign)
Pleural-based density (Hampton’ hump)
Normal/negative
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) images the vasculature
without
ionizing
radiation
or
iodinated
contrast.
Obtaining
diagnostic-quality images in a reasonable amount of time is a
significant challenge associated with this modality, although many
improvements have occurred in recent years. Some experienced
centers now report excellent results, with only a small percentage of
inadequate examinations. Demand will likely continue growing, in
part because of American College of Radiology (ACR) Contrast
Manual guideline changes in 2017 supporting the use of group II
gadolinium-based contrast agents (e.g., gadoteridol [ProHance]) in
cases of decreased renal function. However, at present, MRA is not
routinely used in most practices.
FIG. 7.3  Effect of embolus position on downstream perfusion. Larger
emboli (top) lodge more centrally, causing greater effect and making
them easier to detect. Smaller clots (bottom) or showers of smaller
clots caused by breakdown of more proximal clots lodge more distally.
In both, the effects extend to the pleural surface.
Although technical advances have led to a marked increase in
CTPA and MRA utilization, the nuclear medicine VQ lung scan
remains an important tool. It is particularly useful in patients who
cannot tolerate intravenous contrast, have renal dysfunction, or in
whom an adequate CTPA or MRA examination could not be obtained.
It frequently provides a definitive answer while minimizing radiation
to the patient.
VQ interpretation may seem challenging at first and requires a solid
understanding of lung anatomy and physiology as well as of
standardized
interpretation
criteria.
Imaging
equipment
and
ventilation agents have improved over the years, and techniques such
as single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and single-
photon emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) are reported to improve VQ accuracy. Although the
general impression is that CTPA offers greater accuracy over VQ,
investigations directly comparing CTPA and VQ have found little or
no difference in accuracy or patient outcomes between the two.
