On whole-body FDG PET/CT performed for oncological staging or
surveillance of nonthyroid tumors, uptake is sometimes seen in the
thyroid. Diffuse gland uptake is usually caused by chronic thyroiditis
(Hashimoto disease) and less frequently subacute thyroiditis, or
Graves. Focal increased FDG uptake in a thyroid nodule, seen on the
CT portion, has approximately a 30% likelihood of primary thyroid
malignancy. Ultrasonography and biopsy are indicated.
Parathyroid Scintigraphy
Parathyroid scintigraphy is a routine part of the preoperative workup
of patients with the clinical diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism
(elevated serum calcium and serum parathormone [PTH] level).
Normally there is feedback between the serum calcium and serum
PTH. Patients with hypercalcemia due to causes other than
hyperparathyroidism (e.g., bone metastases) have low or suppressed
PTH. PTH production is autonomous in hyperparathyroidism, and
the serum PTH level is increased in spite of an increased serum
calcium. The purpose of the parathyroid scan is to localize the
hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland(s) before surgery, thus making
minimally invasive surgery possible.
Anatomy and Embryology
There are usually four parathyroid glands, two superior and two
inferior, measuring approximately 6 × 3 mm and weighing 35 to 40 mg
each. A fifth supernumerary gland occurs in less than 10% of
individuals. The inferior glands arise embryologically from the third
brachial pouch and migrate caudally with the thymus. Their ultimate
normal location is somewhat variable, with 60% located immediately
posterior and lateral to the thyroid lower poles and 40% in the cervical
portion of the thymus gland (Fig. 8.28). The superior glands arise from
the
fourth
brachial
pouch
and
migrate
with
the
thyroid.
Approximately 75% are posterior to the midpoles of the thyroid and
25% posterior to the upper poles. The distinction between superior
and inferior glands has surgical implications because the inferior
glands are anterior to and the superior glands posterior to the
recurrent laryngeal nerve. Resection of the superior glands poses a
potential risk for nerve damage. The term ectopic refers to glands that
have descended to an unusual location. Ectopic glands can be found
as far cephalad as the carotid bifurcation, inferior to the mediastinum
and pericardium, anterior to the thyroid, or posterior in the superior
mediastinum into the tracheoesophageal groove and paraesophageal
region (Fig. 8.29).
FIG. 8.27  F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) scan for thyroid cancer. Patient had elevated serum
thyroglobulin but a negative I-123 whole-body scan. On the FDG PET
study, multiple hypermetabolic lymph nodes from levels II to IV in the
right neck and levels III to IV in the left neck, right paratracheal region,
and left hilum consistent with thyroid cancer metastases.
FIG. 8.28  Normal parathyroid gland locations. The superior pair of
glands (purple circles on left image) usually lie within the fascial
covering of the posterior aspect of the thyroid gland outside the
capsule. They are located just posterior to the superior pole or midpole
of the thyroid. Intrathyroidal locations are rare. Most are adjacent to the
thyroid or cricothyroid cartilage. Inferior glands (purple circles on right
image) are located immediately posterior or lateral to the inferior pole of
the thyroid or in the thyrothymic ligament (right).
Physiology of the Parathyroid Gland
PTH is an 84-amino acid polypeptide hormone synthesized, stored,
and secreted by the chief cells of the parathyroid glands. PTH
regulates calcium and phosphorus homeostasis by its action on bone,
the small intestine, and the kidneys.
Primary
hyperparathyroidism
is
caused
by
autonomous
hyperfunction of a parathyroid adenoma or, less frequently, four-
gland hyperplasia. Adenomas are caused by somatic mutations with
clonal expansion of the mutated cells; primary hyperplasia is a
polyclonal proliferation. More than 85% of patients have a single
adenoma, < 5% have two adenomas, and approximately 10% have
four-gland hyperplasia (Table 8.7). Patients with multiple endocrine
neoplasia syndrome may develop hyperparathyroidism as one of its
manifestations due to multigland hyperplasia. Parathyroid carcinoma
occurs in < 1% of patients with hyperparathyroidism. It typically
presents with very elevated serum calcium, a palpable neck mass,
bone pain, fractures, and renal colic.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism occurs in all patients with severe
renal disease. It manifests as hypocalcemia, elevated serum
phosphorus, and increased PTH. The cause is multifactorial due to
vitamin D deficiency, phosphorus retention, and skeletal resistance to
PTH. Despite an elevated serum PTH, the serum calcium remains
below normal levels. Most patients are successfully managed
medically. However, in symptomatic patients unresponsive to
medical therapy with bone or joint pain, bone loss, muscle weakness,
itching, irritability, anemia, or osteitis fibrosis, parathyroid surgery
may be indicated.
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism presents as hypercalcemia in some
patients with renal failure. One or more parathyroid glands becomes
autonomous, and PTH is no longer responsive to the feedback of an
elevated serum calcium. Surgical resection is indicated.
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
Clinical Presentation
In the past, patients presented with symptoms of nephrolithiasis,
osteitis
fibrosa
cystica,
osteoporosis,
pathological
fractures,
gastrointestinal and neuropsychiatric symptoms, and brown tumors.
Today, the majority of patients are asymptomatic at diagnosis, with
hypercalcemia detected during routine blood screening.
Diagnosis
An elevated PTH level in a patient with hypercalcemia is diagnostic of
hyperparathyroidism. Other causes for hypercalcemia without PTH
elevation include malignancy, vitamin D intoxication, sarcoidosis, and
thiazide diuretics. These patients have reduced serum PTH levels
because of a normal physiological feedback mechanism.
FIG. 8.29  Ectopic gland locations. Because of abnormal
embryological descent, ectopic glands can be found as cephalad as the
carotid bifurcation, as inferior as the pericardium, anterior to the thyroid,
posterior in the tracheoesophageal groove, and in the superior
mediastinum. In the anterior-posterior plane, inferior glands descend
anteriorly and superior glands descend more posteriorly.
Table 8.7
Hyperparathyroidism—Causes
Cause
Percentage
Adenoma
Hyperplasia
Ectopic
<5
Carcinoma
<1
Treatment
Surgical resection is curative. In the past, the standard surgical
operation was bilateral neck exploration with localization of each
parathyroid gland by the surgeon and removal of the offending
adenoma. Hyperplasia required removal of 3.5 glands, sometimes
with placement of one gland elsewhere (e.g., in the arm) to ensure a
functioning
parathyroid
gland.
Preoperative
imaging
for
hyperparathyroidism was controversial because all glands were
localized at surgery, and some surgeons reported a > 90%
detection/cure rate.
Today, the operation of choice is minimally invasive unilateral
surgery using a small incision. This results in reduced operation time
and fewer complications. However, this approach requires imaging
for preoperative localization. The radionuclide method has proven to
have superior detection accuracy compared with ultrasonography,
CT, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for the preoperative
localization of a hyperfunctioning parathyroid adenoma. However,
CT or sonography is often ordered for anatomical correlation and
confirmation. The anatomical imaging methods are particularly
insensitive for detecting ectopic and mediastinal glands.
During surgery, some surgeons use a specialized small gamma
probe to help localize the hyperfunctioning gland or glands. Others
do not feel it is necessary. An intraoperative reduction in the serum
PTH level by 50% after surgical removal of the hyperfunctioning
gland confirms successful surgery. Postoperative recurrence rates are
approximately 5%. Common reasons for surgical failure include (1) an
ectopic location of the tumor in the neck or in the mediastinum, (2)
failure to recognize hyperplasia, or (3) the presence of an
undiscovered fifth gland. Reexploration has increased morbidity and
a poorer success rate than the primary procedure.
Radiopharmaceuticals
In the 1980s, Tl-201 was routinely used for parathyroid scintigraphy in
conjunction with Tc-99m pertechnetate for imaging the thyroid.
Detection and localization were subsequently shown to be superior
for Tc-99m sestamibi compared with Tl-201, and Tc-99m sestamibi
became the standard radiopharmaceutical used for hyperfunctioning
parathyroid localization.
Tc-99m sestamibi (Cardiolite) is most commonly used as a
myocardial perfusion imaging agent. Chemically, it is a lipophilic
cation member of the isonitrile family (Hexakis 2-methoxyisobutyl
isonitrile). Uptake is related to the parathyroid adenoma’s high
vascularity and cellularity. The radiotracer localizes and is retained in
the region of mitochondria. The large number of mitochondria in
oxyphil cells in parathyroid adenomas is thought responsible for its
avid uptake and slow release. Normal functioning parathyroid glands
are not visualized. Tc-99m tetrofosmin (Myoview) has a similar
mechanism of uptake and localization and is reported useful for
parathyroid imaging; however, published data are limited.
FIG. 8.30  Parathyroid subtraction scintigraphy. (A) Tc-99m sestamibi
scan. (B) I-123 scan. (C) Computer subtraction of the I-123 scan from
the Tc-99m sestamibi scan reveals uptake only in the parathyroid,
consistent with an adenoma. In this case visual comparison would also
suggest a left inferior parathyroid adenoma.
FIG. 8.31  Tc-99m sestamibi parathyroid scan, delayed planar imaging
method. Patient has hypercalcemia and increased serum parathyroid
hormone (PTH). (A) Early planar imaging at 15 minutes with Tc-99m
sestamibi reveals somewhat asymmetrical activity with slightly more
uptake in the region of the right thyroid gland, which appears larger. (B)
Delayed imaging at 2 hours demonstrates washout of thyroid activity in
both lobes; focal retained uptake on the right is retained, consistent
with a parathyroid adenoma.
After intravenous injection, peak accumulation of Tc-99m sestamibi
occurs in a hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland at 3 to 5 minutes, with
a variable clearance half-time of approximately 60 minutes. Similar
rapid uptake occurs in the thyroid; however, it usually washes out
more rapidly than the parathyroid, thus the rationale for two-phase
parathyroid scintigraphy.
Methodology
Tc-99m sestamibi, 20 to 25 mCi (740–925 MBq), is injected
intravenously. Imaging begins 10 to 15 minutes later. Generally, two
different acquisition methodologies have been used:
• Combined thyroid and parathyroid imaging—The rationale
for a combined imaging protocol is to help differentiate a
parathyroid adenoma from normal thyroid and thyroid
nodules. The protocol is similar to that used in the past for Tl-
201/Tc-99m pertechnetate, with the use of subtraction
imaging. Tc-99m sestamibi is injected, and images are
acquired 10 minutes later. I-123 is then injected, and images
are acquired 20 minutes later. Images are compared for
different distribution. Digital subtraction of the I-123 thyroid
image from the Tc-99m sestamibi image is performed, often
resulting in an image only of the hyperfunctioning
parathyroid gland (Fig. 8.30). This methodology works well,
although technical errors may occur as a result of patient
movement and image misalignment.
• Two-phase parathyroid imaging—This is the more commonly
used methodology. Initial images are obtained 10 to 15
minutes after Tc-99m sestamibi injection. A second set of
images is obtained at 2 hours. Because of more rapid washout
of the thyroid, the delayed images often primarily show the
hyperfunctioning parathyroid (Fig. 8.31). In up to a third of
patients, this characteristic differential washout pattern is not
seen. Either both the thyroid and the parathyroid wash out at
the same rate or both wash out so rapidly that little tracer
remains on delayed images.
FIG. 8.32  Tc-99m sestamibi single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) parathyroid scan. Increased serum calcium
and serum parathyroid hormone (PTH). Scan ordered for
localization of hyperfunctioning parathyroid adenoma. Sequential
coronal (top two) and transverse (bottom two), each with early
images (above) and delayed images (below). The coronal
images show that the adenoma is at the inferior and posterior
aspect of the left thyroid lobe. The transverse images confirm
that the parathyroid is quite posterior on the left side.
Many variations and combinations of these two methods are used at
different imaging centers, which may include planar imaging, SPECT,
or SPECT/CT:
• Planar imaging—Two-dimensional planar imaging has long
been the standard methodology. The two options are a
parallel-hole collimator that permits simultaneous imaging of
the neck and mediastinum often with the addition of
magnified pinhole imaging of the neck with oblique as
images. The disadvantages of planar imaging are overlapping
thyroid and parathyroid activity and limited two-dimensional
information.
• Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)—
SPECT provides improved target-to-background compared
with planar imaging, minimizes overlapping activity,
improves detectability, and localizes the hyperfunctioning
gland(s) in three dimensions (Fig. 8.32).
• SPECT with computed tomography (SPECT/CT)—Hybrid
SPECT/CT systems are increasingly used because they
combine the functional information from SPECT and the
anatomical information from CT (Figs. 8.33–8.35) and make
possible attenuation correction.
Various combinations of these techniques are used at different
imaging centers.
Image Interpretation
Initial images at 10 to 15 minutes after injection typically show
prominent thyroid uptake, unless the patient has had a thyroidectomy
or is on thyroid hormone, causing suppression. Focal parathyroid
uptake greater than thyroid may be seen on occasion. On delayed
imaging, much of the thyroid uptake has usually washed out, and the
hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland persists and is a focus of
increased activity. Occasionally there is rapid washout of the
parathyroid adenoma as well as the thyroid, and a false-negative
study may result. In both cases interpretation can sometimes be made
on the initial image where the focal parathyroid uptake is greater than
the thyroid uptake. Ectopic glands are more easily detected because
often there is no obscuring thyroid activity. Images must be routinely
reviewed from the neck through the mediastinum, where adenomas
may reside.
FIG. 8.33  Retrosternal localization with single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT). (A)
Early and delayed planar images. Anterior (left), right anterior oblique
(RAO; middle), left anterior oblique (LAO; right). In the anterior view, a
suspicious adenoma is noted midline just below the two thyroid lobes.
On the RAO and LAO views, the adenoma appears to be in the lower
right lobe and lower left lobe, respectively. (B) The fused SPECT/CT
images (left lower) show that the parathyroid adenoma is clearly
retrotracheal.
FIG. 8.34  Pericardial localization with single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT).
Patient has had prior parathyroid surgery and left thyroidectomy and
now has recurrent hypercalcemia. The maximal-intensity projection
(MIP; right lower) view shows focal uptake in the right mediastinum.
The fused SPECT/CT image shows localization in the region of the
right pericardium.
FIG. 8.35  Ectopic parathyroid in patient with hypercalcemia and
elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH). Computed tomography (CT;
upper left), fused single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography (SPECT/CT) transverse (lower left), and coronal
(right) images. The parathyroid adenoma is localized anterior to the
aorta, immediately behind the sternum.
Although a parathyroid adenoma located in the region of the
inferior thyroid lobe is often an inferior parathyroid adenoma,
superior glands may descend to that region. Inferior parathyroid
glands are usually located immediately adjacent to the posterior
aspect of the thyroid, while superior glands that have descended tend
to be more posterior and clearly separated from the thyroid. This is
sometimes distinguishable with oblique static images; however,
SPECT and SPECT/CT can more easily allow differentiation.
FIG. 8.36  Tertiary hyperparathyroidism. Patient with renal failure and
elevated serum calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH). Three
adenomas, two in the left neck and one in the anterior mediastinum.
Accuracy
The sensitivity for the detection of parathyroid adenomas larger than
300 mg approaches 90%. The most common cause of a false-negative
study is small size. The sensitivity for detection of second adenomas
or four-gland hyperplasia is lower than for single adenomas (50–60%).
Localization of autonomous tertiary hyperfunctioning adenomas is
also quite good (Fig. 8.36). The most common cause of a false-positive
parathyroid study is a thyroid follicular adenoma. Thyroid cancer,
benign neoplasms, and metastatic tumors may also show Tc-99m
sestamibi uptake. Some drugs may cause rapid washout (e.g., calcium
channel blockers, which activate p-glycoprotein). Although there few
published data directly comparing the dual-isotope method
combining thyroid and parathyroid imaging with the early and
delayed image method, the reported accuracy of each suggests similar
accuracy. There is some evidence suggesting that SPECT is superior to
planar imaging and good evidence that SPECT/CT is superior to
SPECT and planar imaging.
Other Radiopharmaceuticals
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose has shown poor sensitivity for detecting
parathyroid adenomas. It may have a role in the diagnosis of
parathyroid carcinomas. C-11 methionine PET has shown good results
in several publications, used most commonly for patients with
negative Tc-99m sestamibi scans. However, C-11 has a very short half-
life and requires on-site cyclotron production. Preliminary evidence
suggests that F-18 fluorocholine provides very good localization
accuracy.
Suggested Reading
Avram A.M, Fig L.M, Frey K.A, Gross M.D, Wong K.K. Preablation 131-I scans with
SPECT/CT in post-operative thyroid cancer patients: what is the impact on staging?  J Clin
Endocrinol Metab . 2013;98:1163–1171.
Bahn R.S, Burch H.B, Cooper D.S, et al. Hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis:
management guidelines of the American Thyroid Association and the American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists.  Thyroid . 2011;21:593–641.
Chapman E.M. History of the discovery and early use of radioactive iodine.  JAMA
. 1983;250:2042–2044.
Haugen B.R, Alexander E.K, Bible K.C, et al. American Thyroid Association management
guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer.
Thyroid . 2015;2016(26):1–133.
Lavely W.C, Goetz S, Friedman K.P, et al. Comparison of SPECT/CT, SPECT, and planar
imaging with single-and dual-phase (99m)Tc-sestamibi parathyroid scintigraphy.  J Nucl
Med . 2007;48:1084–1089.
Nichols K.J, Tomas M.B, Tronco G.G, et al. Preoperative parathyroid scintigraphic lesion
localization: accuracy of various types of readings.  Radiology . 2008;248:221–232.
Shankar L.K, Yamamoto A.J, Alavi A, Mandel S.J. Comparison of I-123 scintigraphy at 5 and
24 hours in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.  J Nucl Med . 2002;43:72–76.
Taillefer R, Boucher Y, Potvin C, Lambert R. Detection and localization of parathyroid
adenomas in patients with hyperparathyroidism using a single radionuclide imaging
procedure with technetium-99m sestamibi (double-phase study).  J Nucl Med
. 1992;33:1801–1807.
Van Nostrand D, Moreau S, Varalakshmi V, et al. 124I Positron emission tomography versus
131I planar imaging in the identification of residual thyroid tissue and/or metastasis in
patients who have well-differentiated thyroid cancer.  Thyroid . 2010;20:879–883.
Wong K.K, Fig L.M, Gross M.D, Dwamena B.A. Parathyroid adenoma localization with Tc-
99m sestamibi SPECT/CT: a meta-analysis.  Nucl Med Commun . 2015;36:363–375.
