Endocrine System
Thyroid Disease—Radionuclide Diagnosis and
Therapy
In 1941, the first patient was treated for thyroid cancer with
radioiodine. Since then, radioiodine has proven invaluable in the
assessment of thyroid disorders and treatment of thyroid cancer,
Graves disease, and toxic thyroid nodules. Today, radioiodine I-123
and I-131 remain important diagnostic and therapeutic modalities,
and the use of positron emission tomography (PET) iodine-124 is
growing.
Thyroid Anatomy and Physiology
The thyroid gland lies in the anterior neck just inferior to the thyroid
cartilage. It normally weighs 15 to 20 grams (Fig. 8.1) and has two
lobes connected by an isthmus that shows considerable anatomical
variability. The pyramidal lobe, a remnant of the thyroglossal duct, is
present in approximately two-thirds of patients, extending superiorly
from the isthmus. Because of the thyroid’s embryological descent
from pharyngeal pouches, ectopic tissue may be found anywhere
from the foramen cecum at tongue base to the myocardium.
The gland is made up of follicles of varying size. The epithelial
follicular cells at the periphery of the follicle synthesize and secrete
thyroid hormone into the lumen, which contains colloid, where the
hormone is stored (Fig. 8.2). After oral ingestion, iodine is reduced to
iodide (I-) in the proximal small intestine, where more than 90% is
absorbed within 60 minutes. After distributing in the blood as an
extracellular ion, it exits by thyroid and gastric extraction, then
urinary and intestinal excretion.
A high-energy sodium-symporter membrane traps iodide and
concentrates it intracellularly 25 to 500 times greater than plasma.
Thyroid peroxidase at the follicular cell–colloid interface promptly
organifies it. The iodide then binds to tyrosine residues on
thyroglobulin. These monoiodinated and diiodinated tyrosines couple
to form triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), which are stored in
the colloid-filled follicular lumen (see Fig. 8.2). Trapping and uptake
can be blocked competitively by monovalent anions (e.g., potassium
perchlorate), and organification can be inhibited by drugs used for
Graves therapy, such as propylthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole.
Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) initiates iodide uptake,
organification, and thyroglobulin hydrolysis, releasing thyroid
hormone into the bloodstream. Thyroglobulin itself is not released,
except during disease states (e.g., thyroiditis or thyroid cancer). The
major hormone released by the thyroid is T4, which is transported to
peripheral tissues by thyroid-binding proteins and converted to the
more metabolically active T3. Because the normal gland contains a 1-
month supply of hormone, drugs that block hormone synthesis do not
become fully effective in controlling thyrotoxicosis until intrathyroidal
stores are depleted.
TSH secretion is primarily adjusted through the thyroid–pituitary
feedback mechanism (Fig. 8.3). When serum thyroid hormone levels
are above normal, as in hyperthyroidism, serum TSH is suppressed,
but when they are low, as in hypothyroidism, serum TSH serum
levels increase.
Radiopharmaceuticals
Radioiodine-131 (I-131) and -123 (I-123)
Like the stable iodine (I-127) normally encountered in the diet,
radioactive iodine isotopes, such as I-131 or I-123, are selectively
trapped by the thyroid and incorporated into thyroid hormone. Given
this ability to localize, they are excellent tools for evaluating thyroid
physiology, emitting gamma rays that provide clinically relevant
qualitative and quantitative information.
Radioiodine doses are usually supplied as a capsule for oral
administration. Although liquid I-131 may be available, it is volatile
and increases the risk of exposing those around the patient. In the
proximal small bowel, more than 90% of ingested iodine is absorbed
rapidly. It is detectable in the thyroid within minutes of oral ingestion,
reaching the thyroid follicular lumen by 20 to 30 minutes. Thyroid
uptake normally continues to increase occurs over 24 hours (Fig. 8.4),
although imaging can be done as soon as 4 hours. The delay between
radioiodine administration and imaging is not due to slow
accumulation but rather the time needed to clear relatively high
background activity. Radioiodine uptake can also be seen in the
salivary glands, stomach, and choroid plexus; however, it is not
concentrated or retained there. Excretion is via the kidneys and
gastrointestinal tract.
FIG. 8.1  Thyroid anatomy. The anatomical relationship of the thyroid
to the trachea, thyroid and cricoid cartilages, and vascular structures.
FIG. 8.2  Iodine metabolism. The thyroid follicular cell epithelium
extracts (traps) iodide from the plasma via the sodium iodide symporter
(thyroid pump) and organifies it. Iodide (I−) is converted to neutral
iodine (I0), which is then incorporated into thyroglobulin-bound tyrosine
molecules as monoiodotyrosine (MIT) or diiodotyrosine (DIT). Coupling
of the iodotyrosines results in T4 and T3 hormone bound to the
thyroglobulin, which is transported to and stored in the colloid, until T4
and T3 are released into the plasma by proteolytic enzymes. T4 is
converted to the more active T3 peripherally.
I-131 undergoes beta-minus decay (β–), emitting a principal
primary gamma photon of 364 keV with an 8.1-day physical half-life
(Table 8.1). These photons are not ideal for gamma camera imaging.
Count detection sensitivity is poor; half of the photons penetrate the
collimator septa (even with a high-energy collimator) and the 3/8-in.
sodium iodine camera crystal without detection, thus resulting in
image degradation. High-energy β-particles (0.606 megaelectron volt
[MeV]) are also emitted, which cannot be imaged but are valuable for
therapy. The high-energy gamma, β-emissions, and long physical
half-life result in a relatively high radiation dose to the thyroid (see
the Appendix). Therefore, the dose for uptake is limited to 10 to 20
μCi. Even after thyroidectomy, doses are typically limited to 2 to 3
mCi (74 MBq) for thyroid cancer imaging because the β-emission
could cause stunning in the residual cells, preventing uptake for
effective therapy or future imaging. In the past, 30 to 50 μCi (1110–
1850 MBq) of I-131 was sometimes used to determine whether an
anterior mediastinal mass was due to a goiter. I-123 has replaced I-131
for this purpose.
I-123 decays by electron capture (13.2-hour half-life), and the
principal emission is a 159-keV gamma photon (83.4% abundance),
well suited for gamma camera imaging (see Table 8.1). There are some
higher-energy emissions in low abundance, 440 to 625 keV (2.4%) and
625 to 784 (0.15%), making a medium-energy collimator preferable,
although low-energy collimators are acceptable. Cyclotron production
today results in I-123 that is 99.9% pure and no longer contaminated
by long-lived isotopes (e.g., I-124, I-125). Given this and the lack of β-
emissions, the radiation dose to the patient is roughly 100 times less
than I-131 (10 rads/mCi) compared with 1000 rad/mCi. The standard
uptake dose is 100 μCi (3.7 MBq) and 200 to 400 μCi (7.4 MBq) for
routine thyroid scans. Higher doses can also be used in cancer
imaging because I-123 does not cause stunning.
I-124 is a positron emitter that has been used as an alternative to I-
123 or I-131 for thyroid cancer imaging, largely in an experimental
capacity. It is cyclotron produced, decays by electron capture (75%)
and positron decay (26%), and has a half-life of 4.18 days (see Table
8.1). Studies suggest it is superior to I-123 or I-131 for the detection of
thyroid cancer metastases, and it has a potential role for thyroid
cancer dosimetry before therapy. However, radiation dosimetry is
relatively high (see Table 8.1).
FIG. 8.3  Thyroid—pituitary feedback. The normal thyroid is under the
control of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). The hypothalamic
production of thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) and thus the pituitary
release of TSH are increased with low circulating levels of T4 and T3
and decreased with high circulating levels of thyroid hormone.
FIG. 8.4  Percent radioiodine uptake (%RAIU) after oral administration
of I-123. In normal subjects the %RAIU increases progressively over 24
hours to values of 10% to 30% (gray area). With Graves disease, the
%RAIU rises at a more rapid rate to higher levels, often 50% to 80%
and greater (lower broken line). However, some patients with Graves
have rapid iodine turnover within the thyroid manifested as early, rapid,
high uptake at 4 to 12 hours but only mildly elevated or even normal
uptake by 24 hours (top broken line).
Table 8.1
Physical Characteristics of Thyroid Radiopharmaceuticals
Characteristics
Tc-99m
I-123
I-131
I-124
Mode of decay
Isometric transition
Electron capture
Beta minus
Positron
Physical half-life (T1⁄2)
6 hours
13.2 hours
8.1 days
110 min
Photon energy
140 keV
159 keV
364 keV
511 keV
Abundance a
89%
83%
81%
100%
Beta emissions
None
None
606 keV
None
a  Abundance is the percent likelihood that a photon emission will occur with each radioactive
decay.
Tc-99m pertechnetate is produced from a Mo-99/Tc99m generator,
making it inexpensive and readily available, unlike the costlier I-123,
which must often be ordered a day in advance. Because it is taken up
by the same mechanism as iodine, Tc-99m pertechnetate can be used
for thyroid assessment. The 140-keV photopeak (89% abundance) and
lack of high-energy emissions are optimal for gamma camera imaging
(see Table 8.1). In contrast to oral administration of radioiodine, Tc-
99m pertechnetate is administered intravenously and rapidly taken up
by the thyroid. However, it is not organified or retained in the
thyroid, and imaging must be performed early at peak uptake time, 15
to 30 minutes after injection. The lack of particulate emissions and
short 6-hour half-life result in a low radiation dose to the thyroid, far
less than I-131 or I-123 (see the Appendix). Thus, the administered
activity of Tc-99m pertechnetate can be much higher than that for I-
123, usually 3 to 5 mCi (111–185 MBq), and the large photon flux
results in high-quality images.
Special Considerations and Precautions
I-123 is the agent of choice for most adult thyroid imaging. Tc-99m
pertechnetate may be preferred in children because of its lower
radiation dosimetry and high count rate. However, because it is not
organified, it is not recommended for nodule evaluation, and the
rarely attempted Tc-99m pertechnetate uptake calculation is more
difficult and less reliable.
For thyroid cancer imaging, the long half-life of I-131 is an
important advantage over Tc-99m pertechnetate. Diagnostic I-131
scans are routinely acquired 48 hours after administration and 7 days
posttherapy. The result is a high target-to-background ratio due to the
time allowed for background clearance, resulting in good detectability
of thyroid cancer metastases. Even for this diagnostic indication, I-123
is replacing I-131 because it permits earlier patient imaging at 24
hours, better image quality, and similar accuracy, and I-123 does not
cause thyroid cell “stunning,” a situation where the cells are damaged
by the emitted β, preventing future radioiodine uptake for imaging or
therapy. These same high-energy I-131 β-emissions result in effective
therapy not only for thyroid cancer but also for Graves disease and
toxic nodules.
Uptake Inhibitors
A patient history, including food, drug, and prior imaging, should be
obtained before thyroid uptake and imaging studies or radioiodine
therapy.
Thyroid
replacement
medications
prevent
imaging
radiotracer uptake, as will thyroid-blocking medications. Exogenous
iodine suppresses uptake and may preclude successful imaging or
accurate uptake measurements. As little as 1 mg of stable iodine can
cause a marked reduction in uptake; 10 mg can effectively block the
gland.
Iodinated oral and intravenous radiographic contrast is a common
source of iodine that interferes with thyroid studies. Given the high
amount of iodine present in intravenous contrast, even water soluble,
radionuclide diagnostic and therapeutic studies should be delayed for
approximately 4 weeks following contrast administration.
The iodine normally found in foods and medications can also
interfere with radionuclide thyroid studies (Table 8.2). Greater
amounts of iodine in the normal diet over the years in the form of
iodized salt has resulted in lower normal values for the percent
radioiodine uptake (%RAIU). Chronic renal failure impairs iodide
clearance, expands the iodide pool, and lowers the %RAIU.
Hypothyroidism reduces the glomerular filtration rate and slows
urinary clearance of radioiodine from the body; hyperthyroidism
increases the clearance rate.
Iodine Allergy
The amount of iodine in a radioactive uptake or even a therapy dose is
subpharmacologic and has not been associated with allergic reactions,
even in patients with a documented iodine allergy.
Pregnancy and Lactation
The fetal thyroid begins to concentrate radioiodine by 10 to 12 weeks
of gestation. Thus, significant exposure of the fetal thyroid can occur
after therapeutic doses given to the mother, resulting in fetal
hypothyroidism. A serum pregnancy test is mandatory before treating
a female patient with I-131. Radioiodine is excreted in human breast
milk. Because of the long half-life of I-131, nursing should be
discontinued after diagnostic or therapeutic studies and not resumed.
Breastfeeding may resume 48 hours after administration of I-123 and
24 hours after Tc-99m pertechnetate. According to the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission (NRC), patients receiving I-131 for therapy or
imaging should receive written as well as verbal radiation safety
instructions if they are breastfeeding in addition to the routine
instructions and normally required written directives.
Thyroid Uptake (%RAIU)
Thyroid uptake measurements for benign disease are acquired using a
nonimaging gamma scintillation probe detector (Figs. 8.5 and 8.6). The
%RAIU can be determined with either I-131 or I-123 (Box 8.1). Clinical
indications are limited (Table 8.3). It is most commonly used in the
calculation of an I-131 therapy dose or to diagnose the cause of
thyrotoxicosis, most commonly to differentiate Graves disease from
subacute thyroiditis. Thyroid uptake values in other diseases are listed
in Box 8.2. The %RAIU is increased in Graves but suppressed in
subacute thyroiditis.
Medications that interfere with the radioiodine uptake should be
discontinued before the study, with the length of time based on their
half-lives (see Table 8.2). Patients should have nothing by mouth for 4
hours before radioiodine ingestion to ensure good absorption. I-123
and I-131 are usually administered in capsule form.
Table 8.2
Drugs, Foods, and Radiographic Contrast Agents That Decrease or Increase the Percent
Radioactive Iodine Thyroid Uptake
Decrease Uptake
Duration of Effect
Thyroid hormones
Thyroxine (T4)
4–6 weeks
Triiodothyronine (T3)
2 weeks
Excess iodine (expanded iodine pool)
Potassium iodide
2–4 weeks
Mineral supplements, cough medicines, vitamins
2–4 weeks
Iodine food supplements
2–4 weeks
Iodinated drugs (e.g., amiodarone)
Months
Iodinated skin ointments
2–4 weeks
Congestive heart failure
Renal failure
Radiographic contrast media
Water-soluble intravascular media
3–4 weeks
Fat-soluble media (lymphography)
Months to years
Non–iodine-containing drugs
Adrenocorticotropic hormone, adrenal steroids
Variable
Monovalent anions (perchlorate)
Variable
Penicillin
Variable
Antithyroid drugs
Propylthiouracil (PTU)
3–5 days
Methimazole (Tapazole)
5–7 days
Goitrogenic foods
Cabbage, turnips
Prior radiation to neck
Increase uptake
Iodine deficiency
Pregnancy
Rebound after therapy withdrawal
Antithyroid drugs
Lithium
If a scan is not needed, 5 to 10 μCi I-131 or 50 μCi I-123 is adequate
for a %RAIU because of the gamma probe’s high detection sensitivity.
If a scan is ordered, Tc-99m pertechnetate can be utilized following
the I-131 uptake. Both the scan and uptake can be performed with the
I-123 scan dose (200–400 μCi). The %RAIU is best acquired at 4 and 24
hours after ingestion, although some acquire it at only one time
period. The 24-hour uptake is the standard for I-131 therapy dose
calculation.
Methodology for %RAIU
The nonimaging gamma scintillation probe detector used for thyroid
uptake studies has a 2-cm-thick by 2-cm-diameter sodium iodine
crystal with an open, single-hole lead collimator coupled to a
photomultiplier tube and electronics. Room background activity is
determined. The radioiodine capsule with known calibrated activity is
placed in a Lucite neck phantom (see Fig. 8.5). Counts are obtained
with the detector placed at a standardized distance of 30 cm. The
radioiodine dose is then administered to the patient. At 4 and/or 24
hours, the probe is placed 30 cm from the anterior surface of the
patient’s neck (see Fig. 8.6). Counts are obtained for 1 minute. The
patient’s thigh is counted for a similar time to correct for background.
The %RAIU is calculated according to the following formula:
FIG. 8.5  Thyroid uptake probe counting I-123 capsule in neck
phantom. The neck phantom is solid Lucite plastic, except for the
cylinder-like defect in which the capsule is placed for counting. The
nonimaging gamma detector is placed at a standard distance of 30 cm
from the neck phantom and acquires emitted counts for 1 minute.
FIG. 8.6  Thyroid uptake probe is positioned 30 cm from the patient’s
neck, where it acquires counts from the patient’s neck/thyroid for 1
minute. Background counts are also acquired, usually in the thigh
region.
Table 8.3
Clinical Indications for Thyroid Scan and %Thyroid Uptake
Thyroid Scan
%Thyroid uptake
Functional status (cold, hot) of
thyroid nodule
Differential diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis
Detection of ectopic thyroid tissue
(e.g., lingual thyroid)
Calculate Graves I-131 therapy dose
Differential diagnosis of
mediastinal masses (substernal
goiter) with I-123
Whole-body thyroid cancer scans pretherapy,
posttherapy, and follow-up—to quantify residual or
recurrent disease
Thyroid cancer whole-body scan:
Before therapy—find distant
disease
Posttherapy—find additional
disease
Follow-up—determine therapeutic
effectiveness, evaluate for
recurrence
Box 8.1 Calculation of Radioactive Iodine and Tc-99m
Uptakes
Percent Radioiodine Uptake (%RAIU)
1. Preliminary measurements
Place dose capsule in neck phantom and count for 1
minute.
Count patient’s neck and thigh (background) for 1
minute.
2. Administer oral dose capsule.
3. Uptake measurement at 4 to 6 hours and 24 hours:
Count patient’s neck for 1 minute.
Count patient’s thigh for 1 minute.
4. Calculation
Tc-99m Pertechnetate %Uptake
Before and after injection, the syringe is imaged to obtain
counts (preinjection counts – postinjection counts =
administered counts).
Scan regions of interest (ROIs) are drawn for thyroid, thyroid
background.
Areas of interest are normalized for pixel size, and thyroid
and syringe counts are normalized for time of acquisition.
Normal values are 0.3% to 4.5%.
The normal range for the %RAIU is approximately 4% to 15% at 4 to
6 hours and 10% to 30% at 24 hours. The early uptake informs that the
%RAIU is elevated or suppressed. Some centers extrapolate from 4-
hour uptake to estimate the 24-hour uptake for I-131 therapy dose
planning. A problem with this approach is that some hyperthyroid
patients have rapid thyroid iodine turnover. These patients may show
an elevated 4- to 6-hour %RAIU but a lower value at 24 hours, thus
underestimating the therapy dose needed (see Fig. 8.4). Patients with
very high 4-hour uptakes can be brought back at 24 hours to ensure
correct dosing, but having both time points is always optimal. The
significance of uptake values must be determined by considering the
entire clinical picture. Causes for various uptake values are outlined in
Table 8.4.
A Tc-99m pertechnetate percentage uptake is not commonly
performed. Advantages are that peak uptake occurs at 20 to 30
minutes
compared
with
and
hours
for
radioiodine.
Disadvantages are a considerably lower accuracy than %RAIU, often a
lack of commercial software available for calculation, and a 24-hour
uptake is not possible because it is not organified. The methodology is
described in Box 8.1.
Box 8.2 Differential Diagnosis of Thyrotoxicosis:
Increased or Decreased %RAIU
Increased Uptake
Graves disease
Toxic nodular goiter
Hashitoxicosis
Hydatidiform mole, trophoblastic tumors, choriocarcinoma
Metastatic thyroid cancer
Decreased Uptake
Subacute thyroiditis
Granulomatous thyroiditis (de Quervain)
Silent thyroiditis
Postpartum thyroiditis
Iodine-induced thyrotoxicosis (Jod–Basedow)
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis
Thyrotoxicosis factitia
Struma ovarii (decreased in thyroid, increased in ovarian
tumor)
Thyroid Scan
Iodine-123 is administered orally, and the scan is acquired 4 hours
later. Imaging at 24 hours is possible; however, the low count rate at
that time requires longer acquisition, increasing the likelihood of
patient motion and image degradation. Four-hour images have
superior image quality. Tc-99m pertechnetate is administered
intravenously, and scan acquisition begins 20 minutes later. Detailed
protocols are described for both in Box 8.3.
A pinhole collimator magnifies and makes possible high-resolution
functional images of the thyroid (Fig. 8.7). Magnification increases as
the pinhole collimator approaches the neck. The thyroid gland image
should fill two-thirds of the field of view (Fig. 8.8). In some clinics, a
line source marker or two point sources 4 or 5 cm apart are placed
lateral to the thyroid lobes to help estimate the size of the thyroid
gland and nodules, although when the provider is experienced,
palpation may result in superior accuracy. Images are obtained in the
anterior and right and left anterior oblique projections with the
patient’s head slightly extended. The camera should be repositioned
while the patient remains still.
To confirm whether a particular palpable nodule takes up the
radiopharmaceutical (i.e., a hot or cold nodule), additional images can
be obtained using a radioactive or lead marker over the nodule. Care
should be taken to avoid the pinhole collimator parallax effect, that is,
a change in the relationship between a near and distant object when
viewed
from
different
angles,
potentially
resulting
in
misinterpretation of the location of a nodule or suspected substernal
goiter. To minimize this effect, the nodule should be positioned to the
center of the field of view.
Interpretation of Thyroid Scintigraphy
Thyroid scans should always be interpreted in light of patient history,
thyroid palpation examination, thyroid function studies, and
sonography. The normal scintigraphic appearance of the thyroid
varies somewhat, but the gland should have a smooth contour and
homogenous uptake (see Figs. 8.1 and 8.8). The right lobe is often
larger than the left, and relatively increased activity may seem to be
present in the middle or medial lobes given the gland’s central
thickness. Visualization of the isthmus varies between patients. The
thin pyramidal lobe is not normally seen in the euthyroid patient,
although it is commonly seen with Graves and Hashimoto thyroiditis.
It ascends anteriorly and superiorly from the isthmus of either lobe
but more often from the left lobe.
Table 8.4
Relationship of %Radioiodine Thyroid Uptake to Thyroid Function
%Radioiodine Thyroid Uptake
Thyroid
Function
Increased
Normal
Decreased
Thyrotoxicosis
Graves disease
Hashitoxicosis
Antithyroid drugs
Propylthiouracil
Methimazole
Contrast, high
iodine exposure
Subacute
thyroiditis,
thyrotoxic
phase
Thyrotoxicosis
factitia
Antithyroid drugs
Struma ovarii
Euthyroid
Rebound after
antithyroid drug
withdrawal
Recovery from
subacute thyroiditis
Compensated
dyshormonogenesis
Decompensated
dyshormonogenesis
Hypothyroid
Decompensated
dyshormonogenesis
Hashimoto disease
Hashimoto disease
After I-131 therapy
Subacute thyroiditis,
recovery phase
Hypothyroidism:
primary or
secondary
decompensated
dyshormonogenesis
FIG. 8.7  Pinhole collimator. The pinhole collimator is attached to the
front of the gamma camera and positioned close to the thyroid to permit
optimal magnification. If positioned farther away, the resulting image
becomes smaller. The lead pinhole insert is typically 4 mm in size,
although smaller and larger inserts are possible with some cameras.
Box 8.3 Thyroid Imaging With Iodine-123 and Tc-99m
Pertechnetate: Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
Discontinue medications that interfere with thyroid uptake
(see Table 8.2).
Nothing by mouth for 4 hours before study.
Radiopharmaceutical
Iodine I-123, 200 to 400 μCi (3.7–14.8 MBq), orally in capsule
form (or)
Tc-99m pertechnetate, 3 to 5 mCi (111–185 MBq),
intravenously
Time of Imaging
Iodine I-123, 4 hours after oral dose administration
Tc-99m pertechnetate, 20 minutes after injection
Imaging Procedure
Gamma camera with pinhole collimator
Energy window:
Tc-99m pertechnetate: 15% to 20% energy window
centered at 140 keV
I-123: 20% window centered at 159 keV
Position the supine patient with the chin up and neck
extended.
Acquire initial anterior view for 100,000 counts or 5 minutes
with collimator placed to include right side and suprasternal
notch markers.
Place the collimator closer so that the thyroid fills about
approximately two-thirds of the field of view.
Acquire anterior, left anterior oblique, and right anterior
oblique images for equal time compared with anterior view.
With Tc-99m pertechnetate scans imaged at 20 to 30 minutes, the
salivary glands are routinely seen; however, often they are not seen
with I-123 imaged at 4 hours due to washout. With thyroid
enlargement, the lobes appear plump, with convex borders. Relatively
hot and cold regions should be noted. Nodules should be confirmed
by palpation, scan marking, and sonography whenever possible.
Esophageal activity is sometimes seen. It may be displaced by the
trachea and cervical spine when the neck is hyperextended in the
imaging position. It is often seen just left of midline and posterior, and
often can be confirmed by having the patient swallow water. Anterior
oblique views can help determine whether the activity is anterior
(pyramidal lobe) or posterior (esophagus; Fig. 8.9).
Thyrotoxicosis—Hyperthyroidism.
The term hyperthyroidism describes thyrotoxicosis, excessive release of
thyroid hormone resulting from a hyperfunctioning thyroid gland
(e.g., Graves disease or toxic nodular goiter). Examples of
thyrotoxicosis not caused by a hyperfunctioning thyroid gland are
subacute thyroiditis, where inflammation releases stored hormone,
and thyroiditis factitia (Box 8.4). The frequency of different causes for
thyrotoxicosis is listed in Table 8.5. The symptoms of thyrotoxicosis
are
those
of
increased
metabolism
(e.g.,
heat
intolerance,
hyperhidrosis, anxiety, tachycardia, palpitations, and weight loss).
The symptoms are nonspecific, and diagnosis requires confirmation
by thyroid function studies. A suppressed serum TSH of less than 0.1
mU/L is diagnostic of thyrotoxicosis, the result of negative feedback
from the pituitary secondary to elevated serum thyroid hormone.
Clinical history and physical examination can sometimes suggest
the cause of thyrotoxicosis (e.g., a recent upper respiratory infection
and
tender
thyroid
gland
suggests
subacute
thyroiditis).
Exophthalmos and pretibial edema are classic for Graves. A
protracted course suggests Graves over thyroiditis. However, signs
and symptoms can frequently overlap, and a scan and uptake are
often important to confirm these diagnoses.
Graves disease
Graves disease is the cause of hyperthyroidism in approximately 75%
of patients. Graves is an autoimmune disease in which a thyrotropin
(TSH) receptor antibody binds to and stimulates thyroid follicular
cells, resulting in excessive production of thyroid hormone. Thus,
thyroid gland function is autonomous and independent of TSH
feedback. Graves is most commonly seen in middle-aged women but
may occur in anyone, including children. Patients have a diffusely
enlarged thyroid gland (goiter), which is firm and usually nontender.
The thyroid scan shows a high thyroid-to-background ratio (Fig. 8.10).
An elevated %RAIU, usually in the range of 45% to 80% at 24 hours,
confirms the diagnosis and excludes most other causes of
thyrotoxicosis. The scan can be helpful in differentiating a diffuse
toxic goiter (Graves) from a toxic multinodular goiter (Fig. 8.11). At
times, Graves may be superimposed on a nontoxic multinodular
goiter. The scan and uptake are usually diagnostic.
FIG. 8.8  Normal I-123 thyroid scan. All images are acquired with a
pinhole collimator. The upper left anterior image is acquired with the
pinhole collimator distanced further from the neck than the other three
images, thus minifying the image and permitting a larger field of view
so that the suprasternal notch (SSN) and the right side (RT) hot
markers can be easily seen. The anterior (ANT), left anterior oblique
(LAO), and right anterior oblique (RAO) views are acquired with the
pinhole close to the patient’s neck so that the image fills two-thirds of
the field of view. Both lobes appear relatively thin and normal. The LAO
view suggests a nodule in the lower aspect; however, it is not seen in
other views. The appearance is due to overlap of the right lobe and the
isthmus.
FIG. 8.9  Esophageal activity on thyroid scan. Right anterior oblique
(RAO), anterior (ANT), and left anterior oblique (LAO) views. The
thyroid scan shows esophageal activity below the thyroid to the left of
midline (arrows). Intensity is set high to better visualize esophageal
activity. Esophageal activity is not seen in the LAO view, the last view
acquired, because the activity spontaneously transited distally. Having
a patient drink water can often confirm its esophageal origin by
washing the activity distally.
Subacute Thyroiditis
Subacute thyroiditis is another common cause for thyrotoxicosis.
There are various subtypes. Granulomatous thyroiditis (de Quervain)
is usually preceded by several days of upper respiratory illness and
tender thyroid. Silent thyroiditis often occurs in the elderly and
presents with cardiac symptoms, is not associated with thyroid
tenderness, and is not a granulomatous process, probably viral.
Postpartum thyroiditis occurs within weeks or months of delivery.
The patient has antithyroid antibodies.
Thyrotoxicosis occurs during the initial stage of subacute thyroiditis
and is caused by the release of preformed thyroid hormone secondary
to an inflamed gland with increased membrane permeability. Patients
are often referred for a scan and uptake during this thyrotoxic stage to
differentiate subacute thyroiditis from Graves. With subacute
thyroiditis, the %RAIU is suppressed (Fig. 8.12). As the inflammation
resolves and thyroid gland hormone is depleted, serum thyroid
hormone levels decrease and may fall into the hypothyroid range,
resulting in a rise in serum TSH. Over weeks to months,
hypothyroidism resolves, and TSH and %RAIU return to normal (Fig.
8.13). The low gland uptake with suppressed %RAIU seen during the
thyrotoxic stage is the result of an intact pituitary feedback
mechanism, not damage or dysfunction of the gland. Uptake is
suppressed in the entire gland even though the disease may be patchy
or regional.
Table 8.5
Frequency of Causes for Thyrotoxicosis
Cause
Percentage
Graves disease
Thyroiditis
Toxic multinodular goiter
Toxic adenoma
Others
<1
Box 8.4 Classification of Thyrotoxicosis Based on
Thyroid Gland Function
Thyroid Gland Hyperfunction
A. Abnormal thyroid stimulator
1. Graves disease
2. Trophoblastic tumor
a. Hydatiform mole and choriocarcinoma (uterus or testes)
B. Intrinsic thyroid autonomy
1. Toxic single adenoma
2. Toxic multinodular goiter
C. Excess production of thyroid-stimulating hormone (rare)
No Thyroid Gland Hyperfunction
A. Disorders of hormone storage
1. Subacute thyroiditis
B. Extrathyroidal source of hormone
1. Thyrotoxicosis factitia
2. “Hamburger toxicosis” (epidemic caused by thyroid
gland–contaminated hamburger meat)
3. Ectopic thyroid tissue
a. Struma ovarii
b. Functioning follicular carcinoma
Multinodular Toxic Goiter (Plummer Disease)
Multinodular toxic goiter (Plummer disease) is most commonly seen
in the elderly. Patients present with tachyarrhythmias, weight loss,
anxiety, and insomnia. Hypermetabolism can exacerbate other
medical problems (e.g., cardiac), and thus the disease requires prompt
therapy. The %RAIU may only be moderately elevated or even in the
high-normal range. The thyroid scan shows high uptake within
hyperfunctioning nodules but suppression of the extranodular
nonautonomous tissue (see Fig. 8.11). A nontoxic euthyroid
multinodular goiter may have hot or warm nodules, but the
extranodular tissue is not suppressed (Fig. 8.14).
Single Autonomous Toxic Thyroid Nodule
A single autonomous toxic thyroid nodule occurs in approximately
5% of patients with a palpable nodule. Once an autonomous nodule
grows to a size of 2.5 to 3.0 cm, it often produces the clinical
manifestations of thyrotoxicosis. Although the %RAIU may be
elevated, it is often in the normal range. The thyroid scan shows
uptake in the nodule but suppression of the remainder of the gland
with low background (Fig. 8.15).
FIG. 8.10  Graves disease. The patient is thyrotoxic. The anterior view
shows that both thyroid lobes appear plump with convex borders, and
there is a pyramidal lobe arising from the isthmus. The thyroid to
background ratio is high. The %RAIU was 63%.
Hashitoxicosis
Hashimoto disease typically presents in middle-aged women as goiter
and hypothyroidism. The gland is diffusely and symmetrically
enlarged,
nontender,
firm,
and
usually
without
nodules.
Histopathology shows lymphocytic infiltration of chronic thyroiditis.
Serum antithyroglobulin and antimicrosomal antibodies are elevated.
Up to 5% of these patients develop thyrotoxicosis at some point
during the course of the disease. During the thyrotoxic phase, the
%RAIU is increased, and the scan shows diffuse increased uptake,
similar to Graves disease. Hashitoxicosis is thought to be an overlap
syndrome of Graves and Hashimoto chronic thyroiditis. It is often
treated with radioactive iodine.
Iodine-Induced Thyrotoxicosis (Jod–Basedow Phenomenon)
In
the
past,
iodine-induced
thyrotoxicosis
(Jod–Basedow
phenomenon) occurred with the introduction of iodized salt into the
diet in iodine-deficient areas (“goiter belts”). Today, it is most
commonly seen in patients who receive iodinated contrast with
computed tomography (CT). The iodine induces thyroiditis and
thyrotoxicosis; the %RAIU is suppressed. Sometimes, the iodine load
causes activation of subclinical Graves or toxic multinodular goiter,
and the %RAIU is elevated.
Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis
Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis occurs in 10% of patients on an
antiarrhythmic drug. It contains 75 mg iodine per tablet. Two types of
thyrotoxicosis are seen. In type 1, which is iodine induced (Jod–
Basedow), seen in patients with preexisting nodular goiter or
subclinical Graves disease, in which the %RAIU is elevated. Type 2 is
more common and results in a destructive thyroiditis, and the %RAIU
is near zero.
FIG. 8.11  Toxic multinodular goiter. Thyrotoxic patient who had
multiple thyroid nodules seen on ultrasonography. The thyroid scan
shows multiple areas of increased uptake consistent with hot nodules
in both lobes and significant suppression of the remaining normal
functioning thyroid, and low background. ANT, Anterior; LAO, left
anterior oblique; RAO, right anterior oblique; RT, right; SSN,
suprasternal notch. Compare this study with Fig. 8.14, a nontoxic
multinodular gland.
FIG. 8.12  Subacute thyroiditis. The patient presented with recent
onset of thyrotoxicosis. The thyroid was tender and slightly enlarged.
The Tc-99m thyroid scan shows no thyroid uptake due to the
suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and normal feedback.
RT, Right side; S.N., suprasternal notch.
Thyrotoxicosis Factitia
Thyrotoxicosis factitia occurs in patients on thyroid hormone,
sometimes
prescribed
by
a
physician
but
in
many
cases
surreptitiously taken, such as by a health care worker for weight loss.
Other Causes
Hydatidiform mole, trophoblastic tumors, and choriocarcinoma may
rarely produce symptoms of hyperthyroidism due to the production
of human chorionic gonadotropin, a weak TSH-like agonist. Serum
TSH is suppressed, and the %RAIU is elevated. Metastatic thyroid
cancer as a cause of hyperthyroidism is quite rare and most commonly
occurs with follicular carcinoma. Rare benign ovarian teratomas have
functioning thyroid tissue as a major component (struma ovarii) and
can produce sufficient thyroid hormone to cause thyrotoxicosis. The
diagnosis is suspected in a patient with a concomitant pelvic mass.
The ectopic functioning pelvic thyroid tissue can be imaged with
scintigraphy. Neck thyroid uptake is suppressed. Reidel struma is an
uncommon form of thyroiditis in which all or part of the gland is
replaced by fibrous tissue. No uptake is seen in the region of fibrous
tissue.
Thyroid Nodules
The incidence of benign and malignant nodules increases with age
and occurs more often in women than men. Concern for malignancy is
increased in a young person, a male, or cases with recent nodule
growth. Multiple thyroid nodules have the same risk of malignancy as
those of a solitary nodule, approximately 15% to 20%. Radiation to the
head and neck or mediastinum with exposure up to 1500 rem is
associated with an increased incidence of thyroid nodules and
papillary thyroid cancer, with a mean latency period of about 5 years.
For radiation greater than 1500 rem, the risk decreases, presumably
because of tissue destruction.
Ultrasonography can confirm and characterize the presence of a
nodule or nodules detected on physical examination. Purely cystic
lesions are benign; however, cancer cannot be excluded if the cyst has
a soft tissue component or cystic degeneration. Nodules > 1 cm
usually require fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy for diagnosis. The
accuracy of FNA is high, although it is subject to some sampling error
and indeterminate reports.
Radionuclide thyroid scans are not routinely ordered today for
thyroid nodules. Ultrasonography and biopsy usually make the
diagnosis, except in patients with a suppressed TSH. The latter
suggests a toxic autonomous nodule. A thyroid scan will show
increased uptake (hot nodule) due to a hyperfunctioning follicular
adenoma, and biopsy can/should be avoided. Histopathologically, a
follicular adenoma often cannot be distinguished from a follicular
cancer; thus, a thyroid scan can avoid this dilemma and is diagnostic.
However, most nodules are cold.
On thyroid scintigraphy, nodules are classified as cold, hot, warm,
or indeterminate (Table 8.6). Cold nodules are hypofunctioning
compared with adjacent normal tissue (Fig. 8.16). They have
approximately a 15% to 20% risk of malignancy. Cold nodules in
patients with Graves disease have the same likelihood of cancer and
should be worked up before therapy of Graves. Cold nodules may
also be due to simple cysts, colloid nodules, thyroiditis, hemorrhage,
necrosis, and so forth (Box 8.5). Hot nodules are hyperfunctioning,
with suppression of the extranodular gland (Fig. 8.17). They are
autonomous hyperfunctioning follicular adenomas. The likelihood of
thyroid cancer is < 1%.
Hot nodules larger than 2.5 to 3.0 cm usually produce overt
thyrotoxicosis. Patients with smaller nodules with less hormone
production may present with subclinical hyperthyroidism or T3
thyrotoxicosis (suppressed serum TSH, normal T4, elevated T3).
Radioiodine I-131 is the usual therapy for toxic nodules because the
radiation is delivered selectively to the hyperfunctioning tissue while
sparing suppressed extranodular tissues. This results in a lower
incidence of posttherapy hypothyroidism. After successful treatment,
the suppressed tissue regains function.
FIG. 8.13  Subacute thyroiditis, clinical course. Serum T4, thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH), and %RAIU from initial presentation to
resolution 9 months later. When the patient is thyrotoxic on the initial
examination, the T4 is elevated and TSH and %RAIU suppressed.
After the stored thyroid hormone has been released secondary to
inflammation and then metabolized, the patient becomes hypothyroid
as a result of the inflamed, poorly functioning thyroid. TSH and %RAIU
rise. With time, the thyroid regains function, and the patient usually
becomes euthyroid, with normalized T4, TSH, and %RAIU.
FIG. 8.14  Nontoxic multinodular goiter. Euthyroid patient with an
enlarged thyroid and multiple nodules on physical examination and
ultrasonography. The scan shows multiple areas of focally increased
and decreased uptake. The background is relatively high.
An indeterminate nodule is a palpable or sonographically detected
nodule > 1 cm that cannot be differentiated on scan as definitely hot or
cold compared with surrounding normal thyroid. This may be seen in
a posterior nodule that has normal thyroid tissue uptake
superimposed anterior to it; thus, it appears to have normal uptake.
Nodules < 1 cm may be too small to be detected by scintigraphy. An
indeterminate nodule has the same significance as a cold nodule.
Discordant nodules appear hot or warm on a Tc-99m scan but are cold
on a radioiodine scan. Some thyroid cancers maintain trapping but
not organification; thus, a single hot nodule identified on Tc-99m
pertechnetate imaging should not be considered a functioning nodule
until confirmed by an I-123 scan. Approximately 15% to 20% are
malignant.
FIG. 8.15  Toxic (hot) thyroid nodule. Patient presented with thyrotoxic
symptoms. Thyroid palpation detected a 3-cm right thyroid nodule.
Thyroid function studies revealed an elevated T4 and suppressed TSH
(<0.05 mIU/L). This I-123 scan shows intense uptake in the nodule;
however, the remainder of the gland is suppressed.
Table 8.6
Classification of Thyroid Nodule Function
Nodule
Scan Appearance
Cold
Hypofunctioning compared with adjacent normal tissue
Hot
Hyperfunctioning with suppression of the extranodular gland
Warm
Increased uptake but without suppression of the extranodular tissue
Indeterminate
Palpable or seen on anatomical imaging but not visualized on scan
Colloid nodular goiters are composed of benign colloid nodules.
Before the addition of iodine supplements to salt and food, goiter was
endemic in the United States around the Great Lakes and still occurs
in some parts of the world. The pathogenesis of iodine-deficient
nodule formation is hyperplasia followed by the formation of
functioning nodules that undergo hemorrhage and necrosis, replaced
by lakes of colloid. The scintigraphic appearance is inhomogeneous
uptake with cold areas of various sizes (Fig. 8.18).
Substernal goiters are extensions of the thyroid into the
mediastinum. Most show continuity with the cervical portion of the
gland, although some have a fibrous band connecting the substernal
and cervical thyroid tissues. Many are asymptomatic and incidentally
detected on CT as an anterior upper mediastinal mass. As they
enlarge, they may cause symptoms of dyspnea, stridor, or dysphagia.
Thyroid scans may be ordered to confirm a substernal goiter versus
another cause for the mass. Radiotracer uptake in substernal goiters is
sometimes poor, although uptake can usually be seen. I-131 was used
for detection in the past (Fig. 8.19). Today, I-123 is the preferred
radiopharmaceutical because of its good image quality and
substantially less radiation to the thyroid. Single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT)
should be obtained whenever possible (Fig. 8.20).
FIG. 8.16  Cold nodule. Focal decrease in iodine-123 uptake in the left
lobe of the thyroid corresponding to a palpable nodule. This patient
also has Graves disease. Note the high target-to-background ratio. The
cold nodule should be worked up before Graves therapy.
Box 8.5 Differential Diagnosis for Thyroid Nodules
Cold Nodules
Benign
Colloid nodule
Simple cyst
Hemorrhagic cyst
Adenoma
Thyroiditis
Abscess
Parathyroid cyst or adenoma
Malignant
Papillary
Follicular
Hurthle cell
Anaplastic
Medullary
Lymphoma
Metastatic carcinoma
Lung
Breast
Melanoma
Gastrointestinal
Renal
Hot Nodules
Toxic follicular adenomas
Warm Nodules
Nontoxic hyperfunctioning adenomas
Hyperplastic thyroid tissue
FIG. 8.17  Warm nodule in euthyroid patient. Patient presented with a
palpable 1.5-cm nodule. Normal thyroid function tests. Increased
uptake is seen in the inferior aspect of the right thyroid lobe. The may
be autonomous, it is not a toxic nodule. Compare with Fig. 8.15.
FIG. 8.18  Colloid goiter. Clinically palpable goiter in a patient who
grew up in a Michigan goiter belt. Inhomogeneous tracer distribution
with multiple focal cold areas. The patient was mildly hypothyroid.
Ectopic thyroid tissue occurs along the embryological path of the
thyroglossal duct descent, often in lingual, suprahyoid, and
infrahyoid locations (Fig. 8.21), occasionally in the lateral neck. It may
present clinically in the neonate or child as a midline mass with the
absence of normal thyroid tissue in the neck, accompanied by
hypothyroidism. The typical appearance of a lingual thyroid is a focal
or nodular accumulation at the base of the tongue and absence of
tracer uptake in the expected cervical location (Fig. 8.22). However,
ectopic thyroid tissue may occur in the mediastinum or even in the
pelvis (struma ovarii). Lateral rests usually function poorly, but they
can hyperfunction or be the focus of thyroid cancer. Ectopic thyroid
tissue should be considered metastatic until proven otherwise.
Radioiodine I-131 Therapy of Thyrotoxicosis
Graves Disease
Patients with Graves disease are often initially treated with beta-
blockers
and
antithyroid
drugs
(propylthiouracil
[PTU]
or
methimazole [Tapazole]). These drugs block organification and
reduce hormone production. They can “cool” the patient down and
render the patient euthyroid, providing time to consider further
therapeutic options. Often the drugs
A common individualized approach is to use a formula that takes
into consideration gland size, the %RAIU, and the I-131 dose per gram
of thyroid tissue (an example is shown Box 8.6):
Estimation of the gram weight of the gland is required. A normal
gland weighs 15 to 20 g. Patients with Graves disease often have
glands in the range of 40 to 80 g or larger. Although experienced
physicians may produce reproducible estimates, actual gland size is
very difficult to estimate. This is especially true in large glands, which
are often underestimated. Attempts to calculate volumes from
ultrasound images are also generally inadequate.
Another important variable in this calculation is the microcurie per
gram dose. In the past, referring physicians often preferred relatively
low I-131 doses to minimize radiation to the patient, for example, 60 to
80 μCi (2.2–3.0 MBq)/g tissue. Today, referring physicians are more
comfortable with the safety of higher doses, 120 to 180 μCi (4.4–6.6
MBq)/g tissue, and prefer the improved likelihood of success with a
single therapeutic dose. With the higher dose, earlier-onset
hypothyroidism is likely to occur, but this allows for prompt
appropriate replacement therapy, which many endocrinologists
prefer. Patients with rapid radioiodine turnover (high 4-hour but
normal or significantly lower 24-hour %RAIU) have a shorter I-131
thyroid residence time. Thus, a higher I-131 dose than normally
would be administered is indicated.
FIG. 8.20  Substernal goiter with I-123 hybrid single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT). I-123
thyroid scan is fused with the CT scan in selected transverse, sagittal,
and coronal views. This patient had a clinically multinodular toxic goiter
with substernal extension.
Toxic Nodular Disease
Toxic nodules are more resistant to therapy with radioiodine than
Graves. The reason is uncertain, but it may be that I-131 thyroid
residence time in the nodule(s) is reduced, leading to a lower retained
dose. The administered I-131 therapeutic dose is often increased by
50% over what would be prescribed for Graves. An empirical dose of
20 to 30 mCi (740–1110 MBq) is often used. Because extranodular
tissue is suppressed and relatively spared from radiation, normal
function usually resumes after successful therapy.
Thyroid Cancer
Well-differentiated thyroid cancer originates from thyroid follicular
epithelium. It retains biological characteristics of healthy thyroid
tissue, including expression of the sodium iodide symporter, which is
responsible for radioiodine uptake. Prognosis with appropriate
treatment is generally good, with an estimated 10-year survival rate of
greater than 85%. Even with distant metastases, the 10-year survival is
25% to 40%. The lifetime recurrence rate is 10% to 30%; therefore,
long-term follow-up is required, and repeat therapy is necessary for
some patients.
Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most common histopathological
type of well-differentiated thyroid malignancy (85%). Pure follicular
cell carcinoma occurs less frequently (12%) and poorly differentiated
tumors (3%). Papillary thyroid cancer spreads via regional lymphatic
vessels; however, follicular thyroid carcinoma, a more aggressive
tumor with worse prognosis, is likely to disseminate hematogenously
and result in distant metastases. Hürthle cell, tall cell, and columnar
variants of papillary cancer behave similar to follicular cell and have a
similarly poorer prognosis. Medullary, anaplastic, and poorly
differentiated carcinomas do not concentrate radioiodine, are not
detected with radioiodine scintigraphy, and are not treated with I-131.
The American Thyroid Association (ATA) Initial Risk Stratification
System is increasingly used to classify patients as having low,
intermediate, or high risk of recurrence, rather than the traditional
TNM system. This is important to estimate prognosis and provide
appropriate therapy.
Low-risk patients have intrathyroidal cancer, usually small with no
evidence of extrathyroidal extension, vascular invasion, or metastases.
Intermediate-risk patients have either microscopical extrathyroidal
extension, cervical lymph node metastases, vascular invasion,
aggressive tumor histology, or radioactive iodine avid disease in the
neck outside the thyroid bed.
High-risk patients have gross extrathyroidal extension, incomplete
tumor resection, distant metastases, or inappropriately high
postoperative serum thyroglobulin (Tg) values.
The primary treatment for newly diagnosed thyroid cancer is
surgery. The presence of metastatic disease does not obviate the
need for surgical excision of the primary tumor and accessible
local/regional disease. In most cases, near-total thyroidectomy is the
standard operation, with the removal of as much tumor, tumor-
involved tissue, and lymph nodes as possible. Lesser surgery is at
times performed for low-risk patients.
Postoperative radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy is administered
either as adjunctive tumor therapy after total thyroidectomy or as
ablative therapy for the remaining normal thyroid tissue. Effective
RAI I-131 therapy requires eradication of the remaining thyroid
cancer and ablation of the uninvolved normal thyroid. Ablation of
normal thyroid tissue allows for clinical follow-up of the patient
utilizing serum Tg and the whole-body RAI thyroid cancer scan.
After total thyroidectomy, the serum thyroglobulin level should not
be detectable. Thus, it becomes a specific thyroid cancer marker.
The sensitivity of Tg for the detection of residual or recurrent cancer
is enhanced when it is stimulated by serum TSH.
Lower RAI doses are being recommended today than in the past,
especially for the therapy of low-risk patients. There is also less
frequent use of the RAI scan for follow-up. Serum Tg and
ultrasound are increasingly the primary methods for patient follow-
up, although RAI is still recommended for some intermediate and
many high-risk patients.
Initial therapy recommendations according to 2015 American
Thyroid Association (ATA) management guidelines are as follows:
• Low-risk patients who have undergone total thyroidectomy:
Routine postoperative evaluation of disease status with serum
Tg. RAI scan and or ultrasound can be considered. RAI
remnant ablation not routinely recommended. If performed, 30
mCi (1110 MBq) is generally favored.
• Intermediate-risk patients who have had a total thyroidectomy
and therapeutic neck dissection: Routine postoperative
evaluation of serum Tg. Postoperative diagnostic RAI scan and
or ultrasound should be considered. For remnant ablation, 30
mCi is favored over a higher dose. Data suggest that the
effectiveness of I-131 thyroid bed ablation plateaus at 30 to 50
mCi (740–1110 MBq), so higher amounts are not likely to be
more effective. For adjuvant therapy, 30 mCi to 150 mCi (5550
MBq) is recommended in the absence of distant metastases.
• High-risk patients who have undergone total thyroidectomy,
therapeutic neck dissection, and possibly central neck
dissection: Postoperative RAI scan and or ultrasound should be
considered. For adjuvant therapy, administered activities up to
150 mCi (5550 MBq). For known structural disease, 100 to 200
mCi (370–740 MBq, 100–150 for patients > 70 years old).
Evaluate response to therapy with serum Tg and neck
ultrasound, and consider whole-body RAI scan, CT/magnetic
resonance (MR), and or fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET)/CT scan.
The ATA recommendations are guidelines. The nuclear medicine
community, both in the United States and Europe, has raised
concerns that the guidelines were written without sufficient nuclear
medicine input and marginalized the role of nuclear medicine in the
care of both nodular thyroid disease and thyroid cancer. One
concern is that these guidelines are not always supported by strong
data and are sometimes more conservative in the use of imaging
and therapy dose than is in common practice at many centers.
Postoperative diagnostic radioiodine whole-body scans (RAI
WBS) can help determine the extent of the thyroid remnant or
residual disease when it cannot be accurately ascertained from the
surgical report or neck ultrasonography alone and when the results
may alter the decision to treat or the amount of RAI activity that is
to
be
administered.
This
includes
patients
where
serum
thyroglobulin measurements are less accurate due to persistent
antithyroglobulin antibodies. Unsuspected regional and distant
metastases can also be identified. Localization of uptake may be
enhanced by SPECT/CT, which can alter clinical management in up
to 25% to 53% of patients.
All patients are prescribed thyroid hormone after surgery, not
only as replacement therapy but also to suppress TSH, which could
otherwise stimulate tumor growth. Serum Tg reaches its nadir 3 to 4
weeks postoperatively. Tg values of > 1 ng/mL or TSH-stimulated
Tg values of > 10 ng/mL are evidence of biochemical incomplete
response to therapy in patients treated with total thyroidectomy
and RAI ablation. Serum Tg is often obtained 6 to 18 months after
initial therapy. Risk assessment is then reclassified.
A biochemical incomplete response is seen in approximately 15%
to 20% of patients. Many of these patients are eventually reclassified
as having no evidence of disease at final follow-up, without any
additional RAI or surgical treatment. A structural incomplete
response to initial therapy is seen in 2% to 6% of ATA low-risk
patients, 19% to 28% of intermediate-risk patients, and 67% to 75%
of high-risk patients. Despite additional treatment, the majority of
these patients will have persistent structural and/or biochemical
evidence
of
persistent
disease
at
final
follow-up.
Persistent/recurrent loco-regional structural disease may have a
higher likelihood of responding to additional treatments and has
significantly
lower
disease-specific
mortality
rates
than
persistent/recurrent distant metastases.
Whole-Body Thyroid Cancer Scintigraphy
Well-differentiated thyroid cancer cells are hypofunctional compared
with normal thyroid tissue and so take up radioiodine to a lesser
degree than adjacent normal thyroid. This is the reason thyroid cancer
nodules appear cold on routine thyroid scans. However, after
thyroidectomy with endogenous TSH stimulation by hormone
withdrawal or by exogenous stimulation with recombinant TSH
(Thyrogen), thyroid cancer imaging with radioiodine becomes
feasible.
Postthyroidectomy Scan Preparation
Two methods are used for patient preparation. In one, the patient is
not
prescribed
thyroid
hormone
replacement/suppression
postoperatively; the serum TSH progressively rises as the patient
becomes increasingly hypothyroid. The patient’s serum TSH level
should be greater than 30 U/mL before radioiodine is administered, to
ensure good uptake. This takes 4 to 6 weeks. Alternatively, the patient
is placed on replacement/suppression thyroid hormone after surgery.
Then Thyrogen, a recombinant form of TSH (rTSH), is administered
on 2 consecutive days as an intramuscular injection of 0.9 mg. A
serum TSH level is usually obtained. On the third day, radioiodine is
administered. Imaging is performed on day 4 for I-123 and day 5 for I-
131.
Subsequent Follow-Up Whole-Body Thyroid CANCER Scans
If the hormone withdrawal method is chosen, the patient discontinues
the long-acting thyroid hormone T4 analog levothyroxine (Synthroid)
for 4 to 6 weeks, until the TSH level is greater than 30 U/mL. To
minimize hypothyroid symptoms, some patients are prescribed a
shorter-half-life
T3
thyroid
hormone
analog,
triiodothyronine
(Cytomel). However, this must be discontinued 2 weeks before
radioiodine administration to ensure an adequate rise in the serum
TSH.
Because symptoms of hypothyroidism can be quite debilitating for
some patients, particularly those with concomitant medical problems
who cannot be taken off their thyroid hormone. Thyrogen is
increasingly used as an alternative, as described previously.
Hypothyroidism causes a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) and radioiodine clearance. Recombinant TSH does not affect
GFR. Thus, to expose these thyroid cancer cells to similar extracellular
RAI as the thyroid withdrawal method, a larger RAI dose is
administered.
FIG. 8.21  Ectopic thyroid. The 40-year-old patient presented with an
anterior midline neck mass. Ultrasonography described it as a solid,
oval homogenous hypoechoic soft tissue mass measuring 11 cm,
suggestive of thyroid tissue. The thyroid scan confirms that it is ectopic
tissue thyroid superior to the normal right thyroid lobe.
Methodology for Whole-Body RAU Thyroid Cancer Scintigraphy.
Iodine-131 Whole-Body Scan
In the recent past, 5 mCi (185 MBq) or more of I-131 was a commonly
administered dose for diagnostic thyroid cancer scans. However,
because of reports of thyroid “stunning” after this dose (i.e., reduced
uptake of the subsequent therapeutic dose), the recommended I-131
diagnostic dose was reduced to 2 to 3 mCi (74–111 MBq). Whole-body
imaging is then acquired 48 hours after oral administration, which
allows detection of thyroid metastases at distant sites, including the
bones, liver, and brain. After I-131 therapy, a second whole-body scan
is routinely acquired approximately 7 days posttherapy when the I-
131 total-body RAI dose is low enough not to overwhelm the crystal
of the gamma camera. This yields a high target-to-background ratio. A
protocol summary is detailed (Box 8.7).
Iodine-123 Whole-Body Scan
I-123 is increasingly used as an alternative to I-131 for diagnostic
thyroid cancer scans. Stunning is not an issue with I-123, image
quality is superior, and the study is completed 24 hours after dose
administration rather than 48 hours for I-131. I-123 might be expected
to detect fewer tumors than I-131 because of the earlier imaging
period, which allows less time for background clearance; however,
investigations have shown similar sensitivity for detection of
metastases, possibly because of the higher photon flux of I-123. The
administered oral dose of I-123 is 1.5 to 3 mCi (55–111 MBq). Whole-
body imaging and high-count spot images of the head, neck, and chest
are obtained. SPECT/CT improves anatomical localization.
Interpretation of the Diagnostic Whole-Body Thyroid Cancer Scan
Diagnostic scans performed after near-total thyroidectomy but before
therapy often show some residual focal thyroid uptake in the neck,
often with a %RAIU uptake of less than 1% to 2%. Surgeons may not
be able to remove all of the normal thyroid tissue, either because of
the volume of tissue, tumor involvement of normal tissues, or care not
to damage the parathyroid glands. If limited to the region of the
thyroid bed with no known residual tumor, the neck uptake is often
merely normal thyroid remnant. It is not uncommon to also see
uptake in the thyroglossal duct region superior to the thyroid bed.
However, uptake lateral or inferior to the thyroid bed is suspicious for
nodal tumor. Normal activity is seen in the nasal area, oropharynx
and salivary glands, and genitourinary tract. Gastric and intestinal
activity is also seen (Fig. 8.23). Normal uptake in the breasts should
not be confused with lung uptake. It is only seen anteriorly. Thyroid
cancer metastases have a predilection for the mediastinum and lung.
Bone, brain, and liver metastases are less common and have a worse
prognosis.
FIG. 8.22  Lingual thyroid. Hypothyroid infant with upper midline neck
mass. Thyroid scan pinhole images (anterior view and left lateral views)
show prominent uptake within the midline mass. There is no thyroid
uptake lower in the region of the thyroid bed.
Box 8.6 Calculation of Iodine-131 Therapeutic Dose
for Graves Hyperthyroidism
Input Data
Gland weight: 60 g
24-hour uptake: 80%
Desired dose to be retained in thyroid (selected to deliver
8000–10,000 rads to thyroid): 100 μCi/g
Calculations
Box 8.7 Iodine-131 (or ) Iodine-123 Whole-Body
Imaging for Thyroid Cancer: Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
Low-iodine diet for 10 days
Discontinue thyroid hormone for a sufficient period (T4 for 6
wk, T3 for 2 wk) to ensure maximum endogenous thyroid-
stimulating hormone response (>30μU/mL) (or)
Administer Thyrogen (rTSH) 0.9 mg intramuscular × 2 days;
on third day, administer radioiodine.
Radiopharmaceutical Dose: I-123
Withdrawal: 1.5 mCi (56 MBq), orally
Thyrogen: 2 to 4 mCi (74–148 MBq), orally
Radiopharmaceutical Dose: I-131
Withdrawal: 2 mCi (74 MBq), orally
Thyrogen: 4 mCi (148 MBq), orally
Imaging Time
24 hours after I-123 administration
48 hours after I-131 administration
Procedure—I-123
Wide field-of-view gamma camera with computer acquisition
Medium-energy parallel-hole collimator and a 20% window
centered at 123 keV
Whole-body scan and a 10-minute spot views of the head,
neck, and mediastinum
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or
SPECT with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) as indicated.
Calculate the percent radioactive iodine uptake.
SPECT/CT optional
Procedure—I-131
Wide field-of-view gamma camera with computer acquisition
High-energy parallel-hole collimator and a 20% window
centered at 364 keV
Perform whole-body scan and 10-minute spot views to
include head, neck, and mediastinum
Calculate the percent radioactive iodine uptake.
SPECT/CT optional
FIG. 8.23  Whole-body thyroid cancer scans before and after I-131
ablation. (A) Pretherapy (post-thyroidectomy) I-123 scan shows
abnormal uptake limited to three focal areas in the region of the thyroid
bed. No local or distant metastases are seen. Gastric and urinary
clearance are normal. (B) Posttherapy I-131 scan. Six days after 30
mCi of I-131 therapy, the scan shows no significant change, with the
exception of normal posttherapy liver uptake due to metabolism of I-
131-labeled thyroid hormone, and some gastric and intestinal
clearance.
Approximately 7 days after RAI therapy, whole-body radioiodine I-
131 scans are often obtained. Up to 10% of patients will have
abnormal uptake on this posttherapy scan that was not seen on the
pretherapy scan, potentially changing staging, risk assessment, and
subsequent therapy (Fig. 8.24). SPECT/CT is increasingly used to
improve localization of uptake (Fig. 8.25). There are some differences
seen between the diagnostic pretherapy radioiodine scan and the 7-
day posttherapy scan. Liver activity is almost always seen on the
posttherapy scan because of the high administered dose, which allows
for visualization of radiolabeled hormone metabolism in the liver, but
almost never on the pretherapy scans. Considerably less intestinal or
urinary activity is typically seen because most background
radioiodine has cleared by 7 days, although this is variable. The high
administered therapeutic dose may result in intense uptake in the
thyroid bed (“star” artifact). The star has six points, caused by septal
penetration of the hexagonal shaped collimator holes (Fig. 8.26).
Whole-Body Percent Radioactive Iodine Thyroid Uptake (%RAIU)
Quantification of %RAIU after thyroidectomy is an indicator of the
adequacy of surgery and residual thyroid tissue. Subsequent follow-
up scan uptake allows for evaluation of therapeutic effectiveness or
recurrence. The %RAIU is determined from the scan itself, rather than
using a probe detector generally used for routine thyroid scans. A
radioiodine standard with calibrator-measured activity is also imaged.
Regions of interest (ROIs) are drawn for the thyroid, background, and
standard.
FIG. 8.24  Lung uptake due to military metastases seen only on the
posttherapy scan. (A) Pretherapy I-123 scan in a patient with follicular
cell thyroid cancer is negative, showing only normal gastric, intestinal,
and bladder radiotracer. (B) Posttherapy I-131 scan shows diffuse lung
uptake consistent with bilateral miliary pulmonary metastases.
FIG. 8.25  Added value of single-photon emission computed
tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) for metastatic
thyroid cancer. (A) A 48-year-old female whole-body posttherapy I-131
scan. Lymph node dissection of the neck had revealed tumor-positive
nodes. The whole-body scan shows uptake in the lower neck versus
upper mediastinum. (B) SPECT/CT three-view fused images precisely
localize the uptake to pretracheal nodes.
FIG. 8.26  Star artifact. Whole-body thyroid cancer scan (anterior and
posterior views) obtained 7 days after high-dose I-131 therapy. The
intense uptake in the thyroid bed results in a star artifact caused by
septal penetration of the hexagonal-shaped collimator holes by the
high-energy photons.
Dosimetry Calculation for Planning High-Dose I-131 Therapy
Patients at high risk requiring high-dose radioiodine therapy are often
prescribed a standard dose of 150 to 200 mCi MBq. However,
radioiodine uptake and clearance rate vary between patients; thus,
patients ultimately receive different therapeutic doses to their thyroid
cancer. One would like to administer as large a dose as possible while
minimizing toxicity to the bone marrow and lungs. The accepted
maximal allowable absorbed dose to the bone marrow is 200 rads at 48
hours, and the maximal accumulated activity to the lungs is 80 mCi
(2960 MBq). Dosimetry calculations before therapy can produce an
individualized dose based on the patient’s radioiodine clearance.
Thus, some patients may be able to receive considerably > 200 mCi
(7400 MBq), whereas others should receive less.
For dosimetry calculation, a patient is administered a diagnostic
dose of I-131 (1 mCi [37 MBq]). Blood clearance sampling is acquired
at 2, 4, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours after tracer administration, and whole-
body images are obtained daily for a week, usually with a probe
detector. Blood serves as a surrogate for the red bone marrow. Total-
body residence time and blood curve analysis are performed to
evaluate the lung dose. The maximal I-131 dose to be administered is
determined.
Box 8.8 Patient Instructions After I-131 Therapy for
Hyperthyroidism
For 3 to 7 days after treatment:
Men and women: Sit while urinating; flush the toilet twice
with the lid down after each use. Use separate bathrooms.
Wash hands frequently. Shower daily, cleaning shower or tub
afterward.
Sleep alone.
Limit prolonged close contact; maintain 1 to 2 arm’s lengths
when possible.
Do not engage in kissing or sexual relations.
Do not share food or drink with others.
Place eating utensils in the dishwasher or wash them
separately from others.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) patient release
regulations (10 CFR 20 and 35) are based on likely radiation exposure
to others. The regulations state that no one should receive more than 5
millisieverts (0.5 rem) from exposure to a released I-131 therapy
patient. Agreement States generally follow NRC guidelines. Hospitals
vary as to their own release requirements, which are never less
stringent than the NRC regulations. At many centers, patients are
treated primarily on an outpatient basis for doses < 200 mCi (7400
MBq). For > 200 mCi or for radiation safety for family members,
patients are treated as inpatients. Posttherapy NRC patient release
requirements are < 33 mCi (1121 MBq), or < 7 mrem/hour measured at
1 m. Radiation safety instructions should be discussed with the
patient and family. Patient-specific information regarding limiting
close contact and other measures to prevent exposure to others should
be provided to the patient and family (Boxes 8.8 and 8.9).
Iodine-131 Therapy for Thyroid Cancer
Patient Preparation
A low-iodine diet is recommended for 7 to 14 days before the
administration of therapy to increase radioiodine uptake and improve
the likelihood of effectiveness.
Written Directive
Before administering greater than 30 microcuries (1.11 MBq) I-131 to a
patient, a written directive must be dated and signed by an authorized
user.
A
directive
is
also
required
for
other
therapeutic
radiopharmaceuticals.
Adverse Effects of Therapy
Side effects soon after radioiodine I-131 therapy are usually mild but
may include nausea and vomiting and sialoadenitis. The latter can be
minimized with oral hydration and sour candy or lemon juice,
although there is some disagreement about its utility. Late
complications are usually related to the total I-131 dose received.
Chronic sialadenitis and xerostomia may result. Infertility is quite
uncommon, although sperm or egg harvesting is recommended by
some physicians. Pulmonary fibrosis and bone marrow aplasia may
be seen in patients with high tumor burden and repeated high-dose I-
131 therapy. Concern for bone marrow suppression and leukemia
increase as the total therapy dose increases above 500 mCi (18,500
MBq). There is some evidence, although inconclusive, for increased
risk of secondary malignancies with RAI doses > 150 mCi (550 MBq).
Physicians and technologists who administer the therapy dose are
required by NRC regulations to have a thyroid “bioassay” (neck
uptake counts) within a week of dose administration to determine
whether they have received any internal dose during patient
administration.
F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose
18 FDG PET is not useful for the initial detection of metastatic disease
in well-differentiated thyroid cancer because F-18 FDG is generally
more intense in aggressive cancers and has much lower sensitivity for
disease detection compared with radioiodine. However, F-18 FDG
PET/CT is indicated for high-risk patients with elevated serum
thyroglobulin (Tg) and a negative radioiodine whole-body scan. The
lack
of
radioiodine
uptake
signifies
that
the
tumor
has
dedifferentiated into a higher-grade tumor, increasing the likelihood
of FDG uptake (Fig. 8.27). Localization of the tumor allows for
possible surgical resection or other nonradioiodine therapy. FDG
PET/CT in the setting of a rising serum Tg of > 10 ng/mL with a
negative radioiodine scan has a sensitivity of about 83% and
specificity of 84%, with particular increased sensitivity in the
retropharyngeal and rectroclavicular regions. Sensitivity is even
higher in aggressive subtypes (e.g., tall cell, Hurthle cell, and poorly
differentiated).
Box 8.9 Patient Instructions After I-131 Therapy for
Thyroid Cancer
Remain home from work for 2 to 3 days.
For 3 days after treatment:
Avoid prolonged sitting near others, including during travel.
Sleep in a separate bed.
Avoid close contact with children.
Drink at least 2 quarts of fluid daily.
Use sour candy to keep saliva flowing.
If you vomit, immediately contact Dr. __________ at (___) -
___- ____.
For 3 to 7 days after treatment:
Men and women: Sit while urinating, and flush the toilet
twice with the lid down after each use. If possible, use a
separate bathroom. If not possible, clean the toilet seat after
use.
Wash hands frequently. Shower or bathe daily, cleaning the
tub or sink afterward.
Cover mouth when coughing or sneezing.
Do not engage in kissing or sexual relations.
Use separate towels and bed linens. Launder these items
separately.
Do not share food or drink with others.
Place eating utensils in the dishwasher or wash them
separately from others.
Maintain 1 to 2 arm’s lengths from others when possible.
Dispose of toothbrush after using for 1 week.
For 6 months: Avoid pregnancy (use two forms of birth
control for 3 months).
On whole-body FDG PET/CT performed for oncological staging or
surveillance of nonthyroid tumors, uptake is sometimes seen in the
thyroid. Diffuse gland uptake is usually caused by chronic thyroiditis
(Hashimoto disease) and less frequently subacute thyroiditis, or
Graves. Focal increased FDG uptake in a thyroid nodule, seen on the
CT portion, has approximately a 30% likelihood of primary thyroid
malignancy. Ultrasonography and biopsy are indicated.
