Tc-99m Sulfur Colloid Liver and Spleen
Imaging
Tc-99m sulfur colloid (SC) liver and spleen imaging was first
introduced in 1963 and was the standard clinical method for liver and
spleen imaging until the advent of CT in the 1970s. Although not a
frequently requested study today, it still has a few important clinical
indications.
Mechanism of Localization and
Pharmacokinetics
After intravenous injection, the Tc-99m SC particles, 0.1 to 1.0 um in
size, are extracted from the blood by Kupffer cells of the liver (85%),
macrophages of the spleen (10%) and bone marrow (5%). Tc-99m SC
has a blood clearance half-life of 2 to 3 minutes and single-pass liver
extraction efficiency of 95%. Uptake is complete by 15 minutes. After
phagocytosis, the Tc-99m SC particles are fixed intracellularly.
Kupffer cells line the walls of the liver sinusoids (see Fig. 9.3), make
up less than 10% of liver cell mass, and are fixed phagocytic cells.
Most liver diseases affect hepatocytes and Kupffer cells similarly,
causing local, diffuse, or heterogeneously decreased uptake as a result
of the destruction or displacement of normal liver. With severe diffuse
liver disease, a generalized reduction in hepatic extraction and
increased uptake by the spleen and bone marrow occur (colloid shift).
Increased splenic uptake is also seen with immunologically active
states.
Clinical Applications
Currently, the clinical role for Tc-99m SC liver and spleen imaging is
limited to situations in which the study can provide functional
diagnostic information, such as suspected focal nodular hyperplasia,
splenosis, cirrhosis, and bone marrow imaging.
Methodology
No patient preparation is required. Four mCi (148 MBq) is the
standard adult dose of Tc-99m SC; the pediatric dose is 0.05 mCi/kg
(minimal dose 500 μCi). Imaging begins 20 minutes later. Planar static
images are obtained in multiple views. SPECT or SPECT/CT is
increasingly becoming standard.
FIG. 9.40  Monitoring response to therapy. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography
(CT) images of the liver in a patient with unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma (A) before and (B) 1 month after Y-90 Therasphere
administration. The patient shows marked improvement.
FIG. 9.41  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC) diagram illustrating radiotracer
pharmacokinetics seen with liver hemangioma. (Left) Immediately after
injection, the hemangioma is “cold.” Time is required for the
radiolabeled RBCs to equilibrate with the unlabeled RBCs in the blood
pool of the hemangioma. (Middle) As the Tc-99m-labeled RBCs
increasingly enter the hemangioma and mix with the unlabeled cells,
activity in the hemangioma equalizes with normal liver. (Right), When
fully equilibrated (60–120 minutes), activity within the hemangioma
exceeds that in the surrounding liver and is equal to activity in the heart
and spleen.
FIG. 9.42  Cavernous hemangioma. (Left) Static planar Tc-99m red
blood cell (RBC) postflow immediate image. The lesion in the right lobe
is partly cold but to a great extent showing early filling. (Right) Delayed
image at 2 hours shows increased activity in the lesion compared with
background liver, equal to heart blood pool.
Image Interpretation
Abnormal scintigraphic findings include hepatomegaly, heterogeneity
of distribution, splenomegaly, colloid shift, focal defects, and focal
increased uptake. Hepatomegaly suggests acute hepatic dysfunction
or an infiltrating process. Splenic uptake on the posterior view is
normally equal to or less than that of the liver. Colloid shift (increased
splenic uptake compared with the liver) occurs in some hepatic
diseases, particularly cirrhosis (Fig. 9.45). A posterior spleen-to-liver
count ratio > 1.5 is abnormal.
Box 9.17 Tc-99m RBC Liver Hemangioma Scintigraphy:
Protocol Summary
Patient preparation
None
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m RBCs, 25 mCi (925 MBq)
Inject Tc-99m-labeled RBCs intravenously; bolus injection for
flow images
Instrumentation
Camera: large field of view with SPECT capability
Energy window: 15% to 20% centered over 140-keV
photopeak
Collimator: Low energy, high resolution, parallel hole
Image Acquisition
Planar Imaging
1. Blood flow: 1- to 2-second frames for 60 seconds on computer.
2. Immediate images: 750k- to 1000k-count planar image in same
projection and other views as necessary to best visualize
lesion(s).
3. Delayed images: 750k- to 1000k-count planar static images 1 to
2 hours after injection in multiple projections (anterior,
posterior, lateral, and oblique views).
4. SPECT or SPECT/CT: Planar imaging no longer necessary if
SPECT or SPECT/CT can be obtained at 1 to 2 hours after
injection.
CT, Computed tomography; RBC, red blood cell; SPECT, single-
photon emission computed tomography.
Liver Diseases
Decreased Uptake
Most benign and malignant lesions of the liver produce cold or
“photopenic” defects on Tc-99m SC liver imaging (Fig. 9.46).
Radiation therapy produces a characteristic rectangular port-shaped
hepatic defect. Diffusely decreased uptake is usually caused by
hepatocellular disease or infiltrating tumor. With increasing severity
and chronicity of cirrhotic liver disease, the right lobe of the liver
shrinks; the left lobe and caudate compensates with hypertrophy, and
colloid shift becomes marked due to portal hypertension.
Table 9.12
Sensitivity for Hemangioma Detection by Lesion Size With Tc-99m RBC SPECT
Lesion (cm)
Sensitivity (%)
>1.4
>1.3
1.0–2.0
0.9–1.3
0.5–0.9
RBC, Red blood cell; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
Increased Uptake
Increased hepatic uptake on Tc-99m SC imaging is uncommon but
quite characteristic for specific pathological conditions (Box 9.18).
FIG. 9.43  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC) single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) of
cavernous hemangioma. Small focus of mildly increased Tc-99m RBCs
in the dome of the liver on the maximal-intensity projection (MIP) image
(bottom right). Small hypodense lesion seen on CT (left upper). SPECT
(upper right) shows increased focal uptake in anterior aspect of the
dome of the liver. The fused SPECT/CT transverse image helps
confirm the cavernous hemangioma.
FIG. 9.44  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC) single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) study
versus contrast CT. Both SPECT (left) and early and delayed contrast
CT (right) confirm the diagnosis of cavernous hemangioma.
FIG. 9.45  Hepatic parenchymal disease with Tc-99m sulfur colloid.
(A) A 52-year-old man with hyperpigmentation and biopsy-proved
hemochromatosis. Anterior (left) and posterior (right) views show small
right lobe, hypertrophied left lobe, large spleen, and colloid shift. (B)
Severe cirrhotic liver disease. Anterior view shows very small liver with
poor uptake, enlarged spleen, and prominent colloid shift to the marrow
and spleen.
Superior Vena Cava Obstruction
Collateral thoracic and abdominal wall vessels communicate with the
recanalized umbilical vein delivering Tc-99m SC via the left portal
vein to the region of the quadrate lobe. Thus, relatively more
concentrated Tc-99m SC is delivered to that region compared with the
remainder of the liver, producing a hot spot (Fig. 9.47). This same
phenomenon can be seen on FDG PET and Tc-99m MAA lung
perfusion studies. Injection in the lower extremity rather than the
upper extremity results in a normal scan (see Fig. 9.47).
Focal Nodular Hyperplasia
FNH results in increased Tc-99m SC uptake because of the vascular
nature of the tumor and increased density of functioning Kupffer
cells. This tumor has all three hepatic cell types. Tc-99m SC uptake
occurs in two-thirds of patients with FNH (one-third with increased
uptake and one-third with normal uptake; Fig. 9.48). Another third are
cold, for unclear reasons. Hepatic adenoma is usually cold,
comprising only hepatocytes.
Box 9.18 Causes of Increased Focal Liver Uptake on Tc-
99m SC Imaging
Superior vena cava syndrome (arm injection)
Inferior vena cava obstruction (leg injection)
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Budd–Chiari syndrome
Regenerating nodule in cirrhosis
SC, Sulfur colloid.
FIG. 9.46  Colon cancer metastases on Tc-99m sulfur colloid (SC)
scan. (A) Anterior and right lateral views show large metastases in the
right and left lobes. (B) In a different patient, extensive liver metastases
are seen on initial Tc-99m SC study (left), but good response to
therapy is seen on follow-up study 4 months later (right).
FIG. 9.47  Superior vena cava syndrome. (Left) Tc-99m sulfur colloid
(SC) liver and spleen scan in a patient with lung cancer. Focal
increased uptake in the region of the quadrate lobe. Radiotracer was
injected in the arm. (Right) A repeat study with radiotracer injected in
lower extremity shows no abnormal uptake.
FIG. 9.48  Focal nodular hyperplasia. Tc-99m sulfur colloid (SC) study
(anterior [left] and right lateral [right]) shows increased uptake in the
inferior aspect of the right lobe of liver. Angiography confirmed the
diagnosis of focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH).
Budd-Chiari Syndrome
Hepatic vein thrombosis is characterized by relatively more uptake in
the caudate lobe than the remainder of the liver. The impaired venous
drainage of most of the liver results in poor hepatic function. The
caudate lobe retains good function because of its direct venous
drainage into the inferior vena cava.
