Tc-99m Macroaggregated Albumin (MAA)
Hepatic Arterial Perfusion Scintigraphy
Regional intraarterial therapy has been used to treat primary and
metastatic cancer since the 1960s. The advantage of a selective
intraarterial approach is based on the dual blood supply to the liver.
As a liver tumor grows, it derives most of its blood from the hepatic
artery, whereas normal liver cells are supplied predominantly by the
portal circulation. Intraarterial chemotherapy, chemoembolization,
and therapeutic radiolabeled microspheres deliver therapy directly to
the tumor, thus minimizing exposure to normal liver and to drug-
sensitive dose-limiting tissues (e.g., gastrointestinal epithelium and
bone marrow), which are often the source of side effects from
conventional intravenous chemotherapy.
Contrast arteriography is used to position the therapeutic catheter.
Incorrect positioning of the intraarterial catheter can result in
inadequate delivery to the tumor and extrahepatic flow to the
stomach, pancreas, spleen, or bowel. Collateral and anomalous arterial
anatomy must be identified and the catheter repositioned or vessels
occluded. Tc-99m MAA infused into the hepatic artery catheter can
determine the adequacy of blood flow to the tumor; the presence or
absence of extrahepatic perfusion, which can result in gastrointestinal
toxicity; and right-to-left shunting within the tumor bed, which can
result in pulmonary damage. Tumor arterial-venous shunting to the
lung can be quantified before infusion of therapeutic Yttrium-90
radiolabeled microspheres (Therasphere, SIR-Sphere) to minimize
pulmonary irradiation and toxicity.
FIG. 9.30  Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. (Above), The 2-minute
sequential images demonstrate delayed clearance from the common
duct. (Below) Regions of interest (ROIs) are drawn for the common
duct and liver (right). Delayed clearance from the common hepatic and
common bile duct is prominent. Time–activity curves for the common
duct and liver are drawn (left). This patient had a scintigraphic score of
7 (see Box 9.15), positive for sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
Box 9.14 Causes of Postcholecystectomy Pain
Syndrome
Retained or recurrent choledocholithiasis
Inflammatory biliary duct stricture
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Cystic duct remnant (obstructed/inflamed)
Nonhepatobiliary origin
Tc-99m MAA particles are larger than capillary size (range, 10–90
μm; mean 30–50 μm). When infused into the hepatic artery, they
distribute according to blood flow and are trapped on first pass in the
arteriolar-capillary bed of the liver. The particles partially occlude a
small percentage of the liver capillary bed and cause no problem.
Methodology
After placement of the hepatic arterial catheter via contrast
angiography, Tc-99m MAA is slowly infused. The procedure is
summarized in Box 9.16. Liver and lung images are obtained to
determine the extent of tumor and liver perfusion, extrahepatic
perfusion in the abdomen, and the presence of left-to-right shunting.
Study Interpretation
The Tc-99m MAA ratio of tumor to nontumor uptake within the liver
varies from 3:1 to 20:1. Small tumor nodules show uniform uptake,
whereas larger tumors often have increased uptake at the periphery of
the tumor and decreased uptake centrally due to central necrosis (Fig.
9.36). The hypervascular peripheral rim of the tumor is where active
growth
occurs
(neovascularity).
Extrahepatic
intraabdominal
perfusion to the stomach, spleen, pancreas, and so forth can result in
adverse symptoms/complications (e.g., pain, hemorrhagic gastritis;
see Fig. 9.36).
Although a small amount of arteriovenous shunting to the lungs is
common (1% to <10%), abnormal shunting of 20% and higher can
occur and is of concern for potential pulmonary toxicity by the
therapeutic Y-90 microspheres (Fig. 9.37). Shunting to the lung of
>20% usually results in cancellation of the planned intraarterial
radioactive microsphere therapy, whereas a shunt of >10% but <20%
usually results in dose reduction.
