Hepatic, Biliary, and Splenic
Scintigraphy
Liver, biliary, and splenic scintigraphy have played an important
diagnostic imaging role in patient management since the 1960s.
Today’s radiopharmaceuticals have mechanisms of uptake and
localization that take advantage of the complex anatomy and
physiology of the liver (Table 9.1; Figs. 9.1 to 9.4). Although many of
the radiopharmaceuticals, methodologies, and indications have
changed, hepatobiliary and splenic scintigraphy continue to provide
unique functional diagnostic information not available from
anatomical imaging such as computed tomography (CT) or
ultrasonography.
Cholescintigraphy
Cholescintigraphy is ordered by physicians and surgeons for the
diagnosis of a variety of acute and chronic hepatobiliary diseases,
including acute cholecystitis, biliary obstruction, biliary leak, and
chronic acalculous gallbladder disease (Box 9.1).
Radiopharmaceuticals
Three Tc-99m-labeled hepatobiliary radiopharmaceuticals have been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for clinical use
(see Fig. 9.4). The first, Tc-99m dimethyl iminodiacetic acid (Lidofenin
or hepatic iminodiacetic acid [HIDA]), is no longer used because of its
poor uptake in patients with hepatic dysfunction. The term HIDA is
now
commonly
used
to
describe
all
Tc-99m
hepatobiliary
radiopharmaceuticals. The two presently in clinical use in the United
States are Tc-99m disofenin (Hepatolite) and Tc-99m mebrofenin
(Choletec; Table 9.2).
For these hepatobiliary radiopharmaceuticals, Tc-99m serves as a
bridging atom between two iminodiacetic acid (IDA) ligand
molecules, both of which bind to a lidocaine analog that determines
the radiopharmaceutical’s biologic and pharmacokinetic properties
(see Fig. 9.4). Minor structural changes in the phenyl ring (N
substitutions) result in significant alterations in the pharmacokinetics
of IDA radiopharmaceuticals (Table 9.3). Numerous Tc-99m HIDA
analogs have been investigated; however, all had less uptake and
slower
clearance
than
the
two
currently
approved
radiopharmaceuticals (Fig. 9.5).
After intravenous injection, Tc-99m HIDA radiopharmaceuticals are
tightly bound to protein in the blood, thus minimizing renal clearance.
They are organic anions extracted and excreted by the liver in a
manner similar to bilirubin and bile. Unlike bilirubin, Tc-99m HIDA
radiopharmaceuticals are excreted in their original radiochemical
form without conjugation or metabolism. Because Tc-99m HIDA
travels the same pathway as bilirubin, it is subject to competitive
inhibition by elevated serum bilirubin levels. The radiotracer enters
the gallbladder via the cystic duct and the second portion of the
duodenum via the common bile duct (Fig. 9.6; see also Fig. 9.2).
Distribution between the gallbladder and biliary ducts varies
depending on the patency of the ducts, sphincter of Oddi tone, and
intraluminal pressures. The gallbladder normally begins to fill before
biliary-to-bowel transit.
Hepatic dysfunction results in altered HIDA pharmacokinetics—
delayed uptake, secretion, and clearance (Figs. 9.7 and 9.8). Therefore,
the normal time of gallbladder filling and biliary-to-bowel clearance
may be delayed. The kidneys serve as the alternative route of
excretion. Although only a small percentage of the dose is normally
cleared by this path, urinary excretion increases with hepatic
dysfunction.
Because
of
high
radiopharmaceutical
extraction
efficiency, diagnostic images can be obtained in patients with bilirubin
levels of 20 to 30 mg/dL, although image quality lessens. Mebrofenin
has greater hepatic extraction and resistance to displacement by
bilirubin than disofenin does; thus, it is preferred in patients with
poor liver function. Radiation dosimetry is detailed in the Appendix.
Patient Preparation
Patients must ingest nothing by mouth for 3 to 4 hours before the
study
because
food
stimulates
the
endogenous
release
of
cholecystokinin (CCK) from the proximal small bowel, resulting in
gallbladder contraction and thus potentially preventing radiotracer
entry. On the other hand, if the patient has been fasting for > 24 hours,
the gallbladder has no stimulus to contract and thus will likely contain
viscous bile, which can also prevent radiotracer entry. In this
situation, the patient should be administered sincalide (Kinevac, CCK)
before the clinical study to empty the gallbladder. Tc-99m HIDA
should be administered at least 30 minutes after the completion of
sincalide infusion to allow sufficient time for gallbladder relaxation.
All opiate drugs should be withheld for at least 6 hours or three half-
lives before radiopharmaceutical injection. Opiates contract the
sphincter of Oddi, potentially producing a picture of functional partial
biliary obstruction, indistinguishable from a true obstruction.
Table 9.1
Liver and Spleen Radiopharmaceuticals, Mechanisms, and Clinical Indications
Radiopharmaceutical
Mechanism of Uptake
Indication
Tc-99m mebrofenin,
disofenin
Hepatocyte
Cholescintigraphy
Tc-99m red blood cells
Blood-pool distribution
Hemangioma, splenosis
Tc-99m sulfur colloid
Kupffer cell
Focal nodular hyperplasia, splenosis, liver
function
Tc-99m MAA
Blood flow, capillary
occlusion
Hepatic arterial perfusion
Y-90 microspheres
Blood flow, capillary
occlusion
Hepatic arterial tumor therapy
F-18 FDG
Glucose metabolism
Tumor/infection imaging
Gallium-67 citrate
Iron binding
Tumor/infection imaging
FDG, Fluorodeoxyglucose; MAA, macroaggregated albumin.
FIG. 9.1  Anatomy of the liver. Diagram of the internal anatomy of the
liver, its biliary ducts, and arterial and venous vascularity.
FIG. 9.2  Hepatobiliary physiology. Bilirubin, a breakdown product of
hemoglobin, is extracted by hepatocytes in the liver, conjugated,
secreted into the bile canaliculi, and cleared through the biliary tract
into the bowel. Hepatic uptake and clearance of Tc-99m hepatic
iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) radiopharmaceuticals is similar to that of
bilirubin except that they are not conjugated or metabolized.
FIG. 9.3  Anatomy of a liver lobule. Plates of hepatocytes and Kupffer
cells are distributed radially around the central vein. Branches of the
portal vein and hepatic artery located at the periphery of the lobule
deliver blood to the sinusoids. Blood leaves through the central vein
(proximal branch of hepatic veins). Peripherally located bile ducts drain
bile canaliculi that course between hepatocytes.
FIG. 9.4  Chemical structure of Tc-99m hepatic iminodiacetic acid
(HIDA) radiopharmaceuticals. All are analogs of lidocaine (top). Tc-99m
is located centrally, bridging two ligand molecules of iminodiacetate
(NCH2COO; IDA), which bind to the lidocaine acetanilide analog.
Substitutions on aromatic rings differentiate the various Tc-99m HIDAs
and determine their pharmacokinetics. Tc-99m disofenin and
mebrofenin are in clinical use.
Table 9.2
Tc-99m Hepatobiliary Radiopharmaceuticals—Chemical, FDA, and Commercial Names
Chemical Name
FDA Name
Commercial Name
Tc-99m diisopropyl IDA (DISIDA)
Disofenin
Hepatolite
Tc-99m bromotriethyl IDA
Mebrofenin
Choletec
FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration. IDA, iminodiacetic acid.
Table 9.3
Uptake and Clearance of FDA-Approved Tc-99m Hepatic Iminodiacetic Acid (HIDA)
Radiopharmaceuticals
Radiopharmaceutical
Hepatic Uptake
(%)
Biliary Clearance Half-Time
(min)
2-hr Renal
Excretion
Tc-99m disofenin
(Hepatolite)
<9%
Tc-99m mebrofenin
(Choletec)
<1%
Box 9.1 Cholescintigraphy: Clinical Indications
Acute cholecystitis
Acute acalculous cholecystitis
Chronic cholecystitis
Chronic acalculous gallbladder disease
Biliary obstruction
Biliary atresia
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Biliary leak
Biliary diversion assessment
Biliary stent function
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Enterogastric bile reflux
Pertinent patient history before starting the study includes the
following: What is the clinical question being asked by the referring
physician? Are the symptoms acute or chronic? Has sonography or
other imaging been performed, and what were the results? Has the
patient had biliary surgery? If the patient had a biliary diversion
procedure, what is the anatomy? Are there intraabdominal tubes or
drains? If so, where are they placed, and which tubing drains each?
Should the drains be open or clamped to answer the clinical question?
Did the patient’s most recent meal contain sufficient fat (10 g) to
contract the gallbladder?
Methodology
A protocol for cholescintigraphy is detailed (Box 9.2). Acquisition of 1-
minute frames for 60 minutes is standard. An initial 60-second flow
study is optional (1–3 seconds/frame) but can occasionally add useful
information. At 60 minutes, right lateral and left anterior oblique
views should be performed to confirm or exclude gallbladder filling,
which at times may be uncertain due to bile in the biliary ducts and
duodenum overlapping the gallbladder fossa. Delayed imaging,
morphine sulfate, and CCK are options for specific clinical indications.
FIG. 9.5  Pharmacokinetics of many hepatobiliary
radiopharmaceuticals that were investigated in the 1970s and 1980s
(Tc-99m BIDA, PIPIDA, EIDA, etc.). Tc-99m Lidofenin (HIDA) was the
first agent approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) but
was later withdrawn. Tc-99m disofenin (DISIDA) and Tc-99m
mebrofenin (BTM) showed superior uptake and rapid clearance. They
were subsequently FDA approved.
Adapted from Krishnamurthy GT. Nuclear hepatology. New York:
Springer; 2000.
FIG. 9.6  Normal Tc-99m hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) study. (A)
Normal blood flow to the liver (2-second frames). First visualized are
the left ventricle and aorta. As the radiotracer transits, the kidneys are
seen. The spleen is not well seen in the left upper quadrant (LUQ),
being a posterior structure. The liver is perfused after the kidneys
because the majority of its blood flow is from the portal vein.(B) Normal
Tc-99m HIDA 60-minute study (1-minute frames). Good hepatic
uptake. Blood pool clears by 7 minutes, consistent with good hepatic
function. Gallbladder fills early, then bile duct visualization and biliary-
to-bowel transit.
Cholescintigraphic Diagnostic Patterns
Blood Flow
During the arterial flow phase, the spleen and kidneys are first seen
(see Fig. 9.6). The liver appears during the venous phase because of its
predominantly portal blood flow (75% portal vein, 25% hepatic
artery). Early hepatic flow may be seen with arterialization of the
liver’s blood supply (e.g., in cirrhosis or generalized tumor
involvement; see Fig. 9.7). With severe acute cholecystitis, there may
be increased flow to the gallbladder fossa (Fig. 9.9). Focal increased
flow may also be seen with intrahepatic abscess, malignant mass, and
focal nodular hyperplasia.
Hepatic Uptake and Function
Liver function is best judged by noting how rapidly the cardiac blood
pool clears. With good hepatic function, it clears within 5 to 10
minutes (see Fig. 9.6). With hepatic dysfunction, there is delayed
clearance (see Figs. 9.7 and 9.8). During the early hepatic uptake
phase, liver size can be approximated and intrahepatic lesions noted.
Most intrahepatic masses will have decreased uptake compared with
adjacent liver, except for focal nodular hyperplasia.
Gallbladder Filling
The normal gallbladder begins to fill by 10 minutes and is usually well
seen by 30 to 40 minutes (see Fig. 9.6). Visualization beyond 60
minutes is considered delayed (Fig. 9.10). Right lateral and left
anterior oblique views can help confirm or exclude gallbladder filling
(Fig. 9.11). In the right lateral projection, the gallbladder is anterior
and to the viewer’s right. In the left anterior oblique view, the
gallbladder, an anterior structure, moves toward the patient’s right;
the common duct and duodenum, more posterior structures, move to
the patient’s left. Upright imaging and ingestion of water can be used
to clear duodenal activity when needed.
Biliary Clearance
Duct size is not well assessed with cholescintigraphy. The smaller
peripheral biliary ducts are seen. The larger left and right hepatic bile
ducts, common hepatic duct, and common bile duct are typically seen.
Prominent ducts do not necessarily signify obstruction. The left
hepatic ducts sometimes appear more prominent than the right
because of the anterior position of the left lobe and close proximity to
the gamma camera. The strength of scintigraphy is to confirm or
exclude duct patency, not to diagnose dilatation. The common bile
duct is normally seen by 20 minutes. By 60 minutes, ductal activity
decreases by > 50% of peak activity, and clearance into the small
bowel is seen.
Pharmacological Interventions Before or
During Cholescintigraphy
Morphine Sulfate
Morphine sulfate (MS) can be used as an alternative to 3- to 4-hour
delayed imaging in patients with nonfilling of the gallbladder referred
for suspected acute cholecystitis. If the gallbladder has not visualized
by 60 minutes, low-dose morphine (0.04 mg/kg) is infused
intravenously, producing contraction of the sphincter of Oddi, thus
increasing intrabiliary pressure, resulting in preferential filling of the
gallbladder, if the cystic duct is patent (Fig. 9.12). The answer to filling
or nonfilling of the gallbladder is known by 30 minutes. Some clinics
give morphine at 30 minutes if bowel activity is seen. Be aware that
morphine may inhibit the effect of subsequently administered
cholecystokinin.
Cholecystokinin
CCK is a polypeptide hormone released by mucosal cells in the
proximal small bowel in response to ingested fat and protein. The
terminal octapeptide of CCK is the physiologically active portion of
the hormone (Fig. 9.13). Binding of CCK with receptors in the
gallbladder wall and sphincter of Oddi results in gallbladder
contraction and sphincter relaxation. Bile is then discharged into the
small intestines, where it facilitates intestinal fat absorption. Sincalide
(Kinevac), an analog of the terminal octapeptide of CCK, is the
commercial form of CCK. In patients who have not eaten within 24
hours, it should be administered before the study to empty the
gallbladder. Tc-99m HIDA should not be injected until at least 30
minutes after the conclusion of sincalide infusion, to allow time for
gallbladder relaxation so that the radiotracer can enter.
Imaging Gallbladder Contraction
Fatty meals and CCK have been used to evaluate gallbladder
contraction. An underlying assumption is that gastric emptying is
normal. Delayed gastric emptying results in delayed endogenous
stimulation of CCK from the proximal small bowel and thus
potentially delayed and reduced gallbladder contraction during the
standard imaging time. Alternative cholecystogogues have been used
and normal values established (e.g., whole milk, EnsurePlus, and corn
oil emulsion). However, sincalide is preferable because it has been
best standardized and gastric emptying is not an issue. Other uses for
sincalide include the calculation of a gallbladder ejection fraction
(GBEF) in patients to diagnose chronic acalculous gallbladder disease,
diagnose acute acalculous cholecystitis, and differentiate biliary
obstruction from functional delayed biliary clearance into the small
bowel (Box 9.3).
FIG. 9.7  (A to C) Hepatic dysfunction. Patient was referred with
elevated bilirubin and abdominal discomfort, to rule out biliary
obstruction. (A) Tc-99m hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) flow study
(2-second frames). Blood flow to the liver is arterialized and early. The
liver visualizes immediately after aorta flow.(B) Very slow background
and blood-pool clearance seen as prominent retained activity within the
heart. This illustrates severe hepatic dysfunction. Obstruction has not
been ruled out because biliary clearance and transit to the bowel has
not occurred. (C) Delayed image at 4 hours. Background has further
cleared, and there is now evidence of transit into the bowel without
retention in biliary ducts. This rules out biliary obstruction. Acute
cholecystitis has not been excluded. Further imaging up to 24 hours
may be desirable (see Fig 9.8). The final diagnosis was cirrhosis.
FIG. 9.8  Severe hepatic dysfunction with delayed gallbladder
visualization. Slow blood-pool clearance and poor liver-to-background
ratio. Gallbladder is not visualized until 12 hours. Last two images are
right and left anterior oblique views, respectively.
Box 9.2 Cholescintigraphy: Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
Nothing by mouth for 4 hours before the study.
If the patient is fasting for >24 hours, infuse sincalide 0.02
μg/kg over 60 minutes. Wait at least 30 minutes after sincalide
infusion is complete before infusing the radiopharmaceutical.
Hold all opiate drugs for at least 6 hours.
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m Mebrofenin—Intravenous Injection
Bilirubin
Dose
Adults
<2 mg/dL
5.0 mCi (185 MBq)
2–10 mg/dL
7.5 mCi (278 MBq)
>10 mg/dL
10.0 mCi (370 MBq)
Children
0.05 mCi/kg (1.85 MBq/kg)
Minimum dose 0.5 mCi (18.5 MBq)
Instrumentation
Camera: Large-field-of-view gamma camera
Collimator: Low-energy parallel hole—high resolution
Window: 15% to 20% over 140-keV photopeak
Patient Positioning
Supine; field of view should include upper abdomen.
Computer Setup
1-second frames × 60 for flow study, then 1-minute frames ×
Imaging Protocol
1. Start computer, then inject Tc-99m mebrofenin intravenously.
2. At 60 minutes, acquire right lateral and left anterior oblique
images.
3. If acute cholecystitis is suspected and the gallbladder has not
filled, inject morphine sulfate (or) obtain delayed images up
to 3 to 4 hours.
A. If liver activity has washed out, reinject half-dose Tc-99m
mebrofenin before morphine infusion.
B. Morphine infusion: If good biliary duct clearance and
biliary-to-bowel transit, inject intravenously 0.04 mg/kg
over 1 minute. Acquire 1-minute frames for 30 minutes.
C. As alternative to morphine for poor biliary duct
clearance (<50%) and poor biliary-to-bowel transit, obtain
delayed images at 2 and 4 hours.
4. If suspected partial biliary obstruction (delayed biliary duct
clearance and biliary-to-bowel transit) at 60 minutes,
administer sincalide over 60 minutes or obtain delayed 2- and
4-hour images.
5. Delayed imaging is also indicated in the setting of hepatic
insufficiency or suspected slow leak.
FIG. 9.9  Increased flow to the gallbladder fossa in a patient with acute
cholecystitis. Increased focal flow to the region of the gallbladder fossa
is seen beginning with the first several images. This is seen with severe
inflammation of the gallbladder and adjacent liver with acute
cholecystitis.
FIG. 9.10  Delayed gallbladder visualization in a 50-year-old female
with episodic abdominal pain. Immediate, 30-, and 60-minute images
show good hepatic uptake and biliary-to-bowel clearance but no
gallbladder visualization. Delayed image at 3 hours shows gallbladder
filling. Delayed filling of the gallbladder rules out acute cholecystitis and
is often seen with chronic cholecystitis.
FIG. 9.11  Overlapping duodenal and biliary activity in gallbladder
fossa. On the anterior (ANT) 60-minute image, gallbladder filling is
uncertain due to overlap. Right lateral (RL) and left anterior oblique
(LAO) views confirm that the gallbladder has filled. In the RL, the
gallbladder is anterior, and in the LAO view, it has moved to the left.
FIG. 9.12  Morphine-augmented cholescintigraphy. (Above) The
gallbladder was not seen during the initial 60 minutes of the study (not
shown). Bowel clearance was seen, and then morphine was
administered intravenously. Over 30 minutes, the gallbladder
visualizes, confirmed by right lateral (RL) and left anterior oblique
(LAO) views, ruling out acute cholecystitis. ANT, Anterior.
FIG. 9.13  Cholecystokinin (CCK) is a 33- to 39-polypeptide hormone
endogenously released from the proximal small bowel in response to
ingested fat. The terminal octapeptide is the physiologically active
portion of the hormone (CCK-8), which binds to receptors in the
gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi to produce gallbladder contraction
and sphincter relaxation.
Box 9.3 Clinical Indications for Sincalide Infusion
Before Tc-99m Hepatic Iminodiacetic Acid
(HIDA) Examination
To empty gallbladder in patient fasting longer than 24 hours
To diagnose sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (see Box 9.15)
After Initial 60-Minute Tc-99m HIDA
Examination
Differentiate common duct obstruction from functional
causes.
Exclude acute acalculous cholecystitis if gallbladder fills (rule
out a false-negative study).
Diagnose chronic acalculous gallbladder disease.
The use of sincalide to empty the gallbladder in a fasting patient can
result in delayed biliary-to-bowel transit. Because of its short half-life
in serum, CCK can be infused a second time during a patient study
(e.g., before the study in a patient who has been fasting > 24 hours and
after the initial 60-minute study to calculate a GBEF). The sincalide
infusion methodology should be identical for all indications, 0.02
μg/kg infused over 60 minutes.
Common Clinical Applications
Acute Cholecystitis
The most frequent indication for cholescintigraphy is to confirm or
exclude the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. Patients present with
colicky right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.
Physical examination often detects right upper quadrant tenderness.
Laboratory studies show leukocytosis. Liver function tests are usually
normal. A confirmatory imaging study is required for the diagnosis
before surgery. The cause is usually due to obstruction of the cystic
duct secondary to cholelithiasis. Soon after obstruction, a series of
sequential histopathological inflammatory changes occurs—first,
venous and lymphatic obstruction, followed by edema of the
gallbladder mucosa, then white blood cell infiltration, and, ultimately,
hemorrhage, ulceration, necrosis, and if left untreated, gangrene,
abscess, and perforation (Box 9.4).
Imaging for Acute Cholecystitis
Ultrasonography
Most patients with acute cholecystitis have gallstones noted on
sonography; however, the presence of stones is not specific for acute
cholecystitis. Asymptomatic gallstones are common and may be
unrelated to the cause of the abdominal pain. Other sonographic
findings seen with acute cholecystitis are also nonspecific. Thickening
of the gallbladder wall and peri-cholecystic fluid occur with various
acute and chronic diseases. A more specific indicator of acute
inflammation is intramural lucency. The sonographic Murphy sign
(localized tenderness in the region of the gallbladder) is reported to
have high accuracy in experienced hands; however, this finding is
operator dependent and not always reliable. The combination of
gallstones, intramural lucency, and the sonographic Murphy sign
makes the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis likely. However, many
patients with acute cholecystitis do not have all of these findings, and
the diagnosis is less certain. Ultrasonography may reveal other factors
causing the patient’s symptoms (e.g., common duct dilation due to
biliary obstruction, pancreatic or liver tumors, renal stones,
pulmonary consolidation).
Box 9.4 Acute Cholecystitis: Sequential
Pathophysiology
1. Cystic duct obstruction
2. Venous and lymphatic outflow obstruction
3. Mucosal edema and congestion
4. Neutrophilic leukocyte infiltration
5. Hemorrhage and necrosis
6. Gangrene, abscess
7. Perforation
Cholescintigraphy
A major advantage of HIDA scintigraphy is that it demonstrates the
pathophysiology of acute cholecystitis (i.e., nonfilling of the
gallbladder secondary to cystic duct obstruction). No filling by 60
minutes after Tc-99m HIDA injection is abnormal; however, it is not,
by itself, diagnostic of acute cholecystitis. However, no filling on
further delayed imaging at 3 to 4 hours or 30 minutes after morphine
infusion is diagnostic of acute cholecystitis. Delayed filling of the
gallbladder (i.e., after 60 minutes) rules out acute cholecystitis.
Common reasons for delayed gallbladder filling are chronic
cholecystitis and hepatic dysfunction (see Figs. 9.7–9.9 ).
Cholescintigraphy has high accuracy for the diagnosis of acute
cholecystitis (Table 9.4). The sensitivity (nonfilling of the gallbladder
in those with the disease) is 95% to 98%, and the specificity (filling of
the gallbladder in patients who do not have the disease) is > 90%.
Studies
that
have
directly
compared
cholescintigraphy
with
ultrasonography have found cholescintigraphy superior for this
diagnosis (see Table 9.4). However, in spite of its high specificity,
false-positive studies may occur. These can be minimized by
anticipating the potential situations where it can happen (Box 9.5) and
using state-of-the-art methodology. Ensuring that patients have fasted
for 3 to 4 hours before the study is critical. Those fasting > 24 hours or
receiving hyperalimentation likely have a gallbladder full of viscous
bile and should be administered sincalide before the study to empty
the gallbladder. In these cases, false positives may still occur because
of a poorly contracting gallbladder in response to CCK due to chronic
cholecystitis. Patients with poor hepatic function have delayed uptake
and clearance of the radiotracer and often delayed gallbladder filling.
In these patients, delayed imaging for up to 24 hours may be
necessary to confirm or exclude gallbladder filling; false positives may
still occasionally occur.
Table 9.4
Accuracy for Diagnosis of Acute Cholecystitis: Cholescintigraphy and Ultrasonography
Sensitivity/Specificity (%)
Study First Author, Date
Patients
Cholescin-tigraphy
Ultrasonography
Stadalnik, 1978
100/100
70/93
Weissmann, 1979
98/100
Freitas, 1980
97/87
Suarez, 1980
98/100
Szalabick, 1980
100/98
Weissmann, 1981
95/99
Zeman, 1981
98/82
67/82
Worthen, 1981
95/100
67/100
Mauro, 1982
100/94
Rails, 1982
86/84
86/90
Freitas 1982
98/90
60/81
Samuels, 1983
Chatziioannov, 2000
97/93
92/89
97/64
40/89
Overall
97/94
77/84
Box 9.5 Causes of False-Positive Cholescintigraphy for
Acute Cholecystitis
Fasting <4 hours before hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA)
study
Fasting >24 hours before HIDA study
Parenteral alimentation
Concurrent severe illness
Chronic cholecystitis
Hepatic dysfunction
Patients with chronic cholecystitis may have false-positive findings
for acute cholecystitis (nonfilling of the gallbladder) caused by a
fibrotic obstruction of the cystic duct or a functional obstruction
caused by a gallbladder filled with viscous bile. Even if a patient has
received sincalide before the study, a diseased gallbladder, whether
acute or chronic, may not contract. Very ill hospitalized patients with
a concurrent serious illness may also have false-positive scintigraphic
results for acute cholecystitis. The reason for this is uncertain.
False-negative results (gallbladder filling in a patient with acute
cholecystitis) are rare. One important cause to be avoided is
misinterpretation of the cystic duct sign, specifically cystic duct dilation
proximal to its obstruction, which might be misinterpreted as a
gallbladder. The focal activity is typically smaller than a gallbladder
and in a more medial position (Fig. 9.14).
If the gallbladder does not fill by 1 hour, either delayed imaging for
up to 4 hours or morphine administration is indicated to confirm or
exclude gallbladder filling. The accuracy of morphine is similar to the
delayed imaging method (Table 9.5) and is preferred whenever
possible because it confirms or excludes the diagnosis by 30 minutes
after administration. Morphine produces a functional partial common
duct obstruction that cannot be differentiated by scintigraphy from a
pathological partial common duct obstruction caused by stone or
stricture. Thus, morphine should not be administered if scintigraphic
findings show delayed clearance from the common duct and delayed
transit into the small bowel. Delayed imaging is indicated for these
patients. With cystic duct patency, the gallbladder begins to fill within
5 to 10 minutes after morphine infusion and is complete by 20 to 30
minutes. If no gallbladder filling is seen by the end of the 30-minute
infusion, acute cholecystitis is confirmed.
Ancillary Scintigraphic Findings of Acute Cholecystitis
Increased blood flow to the gallbladder fossa secondary to severe
inflammation is seen in some patients (see Fig. 9.9). Increased hepatic
uptake of HIDA tracer adjacent to the gallbladder fossa in patients
with acute cholecystitis is called the rim sign (Fig. 9.15) and is seen in
approximately 25% of patients with acute cholecystitis. The rim sign is
more common than increased flow to the gallbladder fossa.
Sometimes they occur together. The rim sign can usually be seen
throughout the duration of the study but is best seen as the
radiotracer clears from the uninvolved liver. It is caused by
inflammation of the liver adjacent to the gallbladder fossa. With
severe acute cholecystitis, inflammation may spread to the adjacent
normal liver, which can result in increased blood flow to that region,
increased radiotracer delivery, and thus increased Tc-99m HIDA
hepatic extraction.
The importance of the rim sign is twofold. First, it is a very specific
scintigraphic finding of acute cholecystitis. It increases interpretive
confidence that nonfilling of the gallbladder is caused by acute
cholecystitis (true positive) in a patient at increased risk for a false-
positive study (see Box 9.5), for example, a sick hospitalized patient
with concurrent serious illness. Second, the rim sign identifies patients
with acute cholecystitis who have more severe disease and are at
increased risk for complications (e.g., gangrene and perforation). Even
without these complications, patients with the rim sign tend to be
sicker and at a later stage of the pathophysiological spectrum of
disease, with hemorrhage and necrosis rather than edema and
leukocyte infiltration (see Box 9.4).
Acute Acalculous Cholecystitis
The acalculous form of acute cholecystitis is not common; however, it
can be life-threatening. It occurs in seriously ill hospitalized patients,
often those in the intensive care unit (ICU; Box 9.6). Because of its high
mortality (30%) and morbidity (55%), early diagnosis is imperative;
however, because of concomitant serious illness, diagnosis is often
delayed. In the majority of patients, acute acalculous cholecystitis is
initiated by cystic duct obstruction but not by cholelithiasis, rather, by
inflammatory debris, inspissated bile, and local edema, aggravated by
dehydration. To complicate the diagnosis further, some of these
patients do not have cystic duct obstruction but, rather, direct
inflammation of the gallbladder wall caused by systemic infection,
ischemia, or toxemia. This results in a lower diagnostic sensitivity for
HIDA imaging.
The sensitivity of cholescintigraphy for diagnosis of acute
acalculous cholescintigraphy is approximately 80%, compared with
95% to 98% for acute calculous cholecystitis (Table 9.6). The lower
sensitivity is at least partially due to the fact that some of these
patients do not have cystic duct obstruction. If a false-negative study
result (filling of the gallbladder in acute acalculous cholecystitis) is
suspected in a patient with a high clinical suspicion, sincalide infusion
with a gallbladder ejection fraction can be helpful. An acutely
inflamed gallbladder does not contract normally. Good contraction
excludes the diagnosis of cholecystitis. Poor contraction is consistent
with cholecystitis but not necessarily acute cholecystitis. It could be
caused by chronic cholecystitis, medications that inhibit contraction,
or concomitant acute or chronic illness (Boxes 9.7 and 9.8). In
uncertain cases, a radiolabeled leukocyte study could confirm the
diagnosis. Although it is urgent for these sick patients to have
gallbladder surgery, the increased risk of surgery may call for more
certainty and a willingness to wait for the leukocyte study. Indium-
111 (In-111) leukocytes are preferable because they have no
intraabdominal clearance. Tc-99m-labeled leukocytes are cleared
through the biliary and urinary system. However, early-same-day Tc-
99m HMPAO leukocyte imaging at 1 to 2 hours, before biliary
clearance occurs, may avoid this problem. Although the standard
imaging time for In-111 leukocytes is at 24 hours, imaging at 4 hours
may be diagnostic if gallbladder uptake is seen.
FIG. 9.14  Cystic duct sign. (A) Tc-99m hepatic iminodiacetic acid
(HIDA) images at 1, 2, and 3 hours show focal accumulation of activity
medial to the usual position of the gallbladder, which remains mostly
unchanged over this time. (B) Single-photon emission computed
tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT; 10-minute
acquisition time) fused transverse images show that the focal activity is
in the cystic duct, obstructed by a hypodense stone immediately
proximal to it.
Table 9.5
Accuracy of Morphine-Augmented Cholescintigraphy
Study Author, Date
Patients
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Choy, 1984
Keslar, 1987
Vasquez, 1987
Fig, 1990
69 a
Flancbaum, 1994
Fink-Bennett, 1991
Kistler, 1991
78 a
Overall
a  High percentage of patients with concurrent illness and chronic cholecystitis.
Chronic Cholecystitis
Recurrent episodes of right upper quadrant pain, usually in a middle-
aged female, although occasionally in men and children, are
suggestive of chronic cholecystitis. The clinical diagnosis is often
confirmed by detection of gallstones on sonography. The standard
therapy is cholecystectomy; gallbladder histopathology shows
evidence of chronic inflammation. On occasion, a clinician suspecting
that a patient’s pain is not due to cholecystitis and that the gallstones
seen are incidental may refer the patient for cholescintigraphy and a
GBEF. Although chronic cholecystitis classically shows delayed filling
after 60 minutes, some cases will show normal gallbladder filling.
When CCK is administered after gallbladder filling, patients with
asymptomatic cholelithiasis will have normal gallbladder contraction,
whereas patients with chronic cholecystitis have a poor gallbladder
response.
FIG. 9.15  Hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) rim sign. (A) Sequential
anterior images over 60 minutes show no gallbladder filling but good
biliary-to-bowel transit. Increased activity is seen in a curvilinear pattern
along the inferior right hepatic lobe (rim sign), which persists from the
beginning of the study through 60 minutes. (B) Sequential images for
30 minutes after morphine injection show no gallbladder filling but
persistence of the rim sign. Surgery confirmed severe acute
cholecystitis.
Box 9.6 Clinical Settings Associated With Acute
Acalculous Cholecystitis
Postoperative
Multiple trauma
Extensive burns
Shock
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
Mechanical ventilation
Multiple transfusions
Vasculitis
Table 9.6
Acute Acalculous Cholecystitis: Accuracy of Cholescintigraphy
Study Author, Date
Patients
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Shuman, 1984
Weissmann, 1983
Mirvis, 1986
Swayne, 1986
Ramanna, 1984
Flancbaum, 1995
Prevot, 1999
Mariat, 2000
Overall
Box 9.7 Drugs Known to Inhibit Gallbladder
Contraction
Opiates
Atropine
Nifedipine (calcium channel blocking agents)
Indomethacin
Progesterone
Oral contraceptives
Octreotide
Theophylline
Isoproterenol
Benzodiazepine
Phentolamine (alpha-adrenergic blocking agent)
Nicotine
Alcohol
Box 9.8 Diseases or Conditions Associated With Poor
Gallbladder Contraction
Diabetes mellitus
Sickle cell disease
Irritable bowel syndrome
Truncal vagotomy
Pancreatic insufficiency
Crohn disease
Celiac disease
Achalasia
Dyspeptic syndrome
Obesity
Cirrhosis
Pregnancy
Chronic Acalculous Gallbladder Disease
The acalculous form of chronic cholecystitis occurs in approximately
10% of patients with symptomatic chronic gallbladder disease. It is
clinically and histopathologically indistinguishable from chronic
calculous cholecystitis, except that there are no gallstones. This entity
has been called by various names in the literature and by referring
physicians, including gallbladder dyskinesia, gallbladder spasm,
cystic duct syndrome, and functional gallbladder disease (Box 9.9).
Patients present with recurrent right upper quadrant biliary colic,
have poor gallbladder contraction, and are usually cured with
cholecystectomy.
Box 9.9 Synonyms for Recurrent Pain Syndromes of
Biliary Origin
Chronic Acalculous Gallbladder Disease
Chronic acalculous cholecystitis
Gallbladder dyskinesia
Gallbladder spasm
Cystic duct syndrome
Functional gallbladder disease
Sphincter of Oddi Dysfunction
Papillary stenosis
Biliary dyskinesia
Biliary spasm
Many investigations have found that sincalide cholescintigraphy
can confirm the suspected clinical diagnosis of chronic acalculous
gallbladder disease. A poor GBEF predicts postcholecystectomy
symptomatic relief and histopathological evidence of chronic
gallbladder inflammation; a normal GBEF excludes the disease (Fig.
9.16). Publications report that a low GBEF has a positive predictive
value of > 90%. However, most published studies were retrospective.
There is only one small (21 patients) randomized prospective study. In
that study, 92% were cured with surgery. Some gastroenterologists
have stated that a larger, multicenter, well-controlled randomized
prospective study is needed to confirm the utility of sincalide
cholescintigraphy. Meanwhile, the GBEF study is commonly ordered
by clinicians and surgeons in the United States, although less
commonly outside the United States.
Sincalide cholescintigraphy should be performed on an outpatient
basis after a clinical evaluation has excluded other diseases. It is best
performed as an outpatient because acute illnesses and numerous
therapeutic drugs can adversely affect gallbladder contraction and
result in a false-positive study (see Boxes 9.7 and 9.8). If a clinician
insists that a GBEF be performed on an inpatient, a normal study
excludes gallbladder disease. However, a positive study (low GBEF)
should be repeated as an outpatient when the patient is asymptomatic
to confirm the disease.
Sincalide Infusion Methodology
The methodology used for sincalide infusion has varied in regard to
the dose administered, infusion length, and normal values. A 3-
minute infusion of 0.02 μg/kg was commonly used in the past.
However, investigations have found that this results in a wide range
of response in normal subjects and many false-positive studies (i.e.,
normal GBEFs in the same subjects when sincalide was infused for 30
or 60 minutes; Table 9.7). This raised concern that unnecessary
surgeries might be performed as a result of this method. Furthermore,
50% of normal subjects have nausea and/or abdominal cramping with
the 3-minute infusion but not with slower infusions. The likely
explanation is that rapid infusion of sincalide causes intestinal
cramping, resulting cramping/pain, and nausea. A common
misconception is that “reproduction of a patient’s pain” with sincalide
infusion is diagnostic of chronic acalculous gallbladder disease. This is
not true. The pain is the result of rapid infusion. Pain almost never
occurs with slow, more physiological infusions, regardless of whether
the patient has chronic cholecystitis or not.
A prospective multicenter study of 60 normal subjects at four
institutions, each given 0.02 μg/kg over 15 minutes, 30 minutes, and
60 minutes on different days, found the least variability (lowest
coefficient of variation) and narrowest normal range using the 60-
minute infusion, with the lower range of normal for the GBEF being
38% (see Table 9.7). Subsequently, a consensus report published by
expert gastroenterologists, surgeons, and nuclear medicine physicians
recommended that the 60-minute infusion method should become the
standard methodology (Box 9.10). Society of Nuclear Medicine and
Molecular Imaging (SNMMI) procedure guidelines also recommend
this method of sincalide infusion.
Biliary Obstruction
Biliary obstruction is usually caused by cholelithiasis or malignancy
(e.g., pancreatic or biliary duct cancer). Malignancy typically presents
as painless obstructive jaundice, whereas choledocholithiasis causes
acute or recurrent abdominal pain.
High-Grade Biliary Obstruction
Pathophysiology
With high-grade obstruction, the sequence of pathophysiological
events progresses in a predictable manner (Box 9.11). Obstruction
results in increased intraductal pressure and thus biliary ductal
dilatation. The high back pressure from obstruction reduces bile flow.
Ultimately, hepatocellular damage and biliary cirrhosis result.
Clinical Presentation
Patients present with abdominal pain, jaundice, and elevated alkaline
phosphatase and direct serum bilirubin. With obstruction due to
stones, the symptom of pain is dominant. With obstruction caused by
tumor, jaundice is often the presenting finding.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis can often be made with anatomical imaging (e.g.,
ultrasonography or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
[MRCP]) demonstrating biliary duct dilation and either an obstructing
mass or cholelithiasis. However, small obstructing biliary stones may
be missed on anatomical imaging, and ductal dilation may not
become evident until 24 to 72 hours after acute obstruction. Thus, a
patient with an acute obstructing stone presenting in the emergency
room may not have dilatation. In this situation, cholescintigraphy can
diagnose the obstruction before dilation occurs because it depicts the
underlying pathophysiology (i.e., reduced bile flow). A high-grade
obstruction will show liver uptake but no biliary secretion (Fig. 9.17).
If a patient has had prior obstruction, the biliary ducts may remain
chronically dilated even after the obstruction has been relieved. In that
case, cholescintigraphy can determine whether the dilated biliary
ducts are patent or again obstructed.
Partial Biliary Obstruction
Patients with a partial biliary obstruction typically present with
intermittent recurrent abdominal pain. Liver function tests and serum
bilirubin are often normal. Biliary ducts are not usually dilated.
Cholelithiasis is the usual cause. Ultrasonography is often the first
imaging study ordered. If the ducts are dilated, this is diagnostic,
unless the patient had prior obstruction. MRCP is superior to
sonography for detecting stones that do not result in ductal dilation;
however, small obstructing stones may not be detected, and MRCP
does not evaluate bile flow.
FIG. 9.16  Normal and abnormal gallbladder ejection fraction (GBEF).
Both patients (A and B) were referred for suspected chronic acalculous
gallbladder disease (gallbladder dyskinesia). Sincalide was infused
over 60 minutes after gallbladder visualization. A region of interest
(ROI) was drawn for the gallbladder and background. (A) Good
gallbladder contraction, GBEF 59%. (B) Poor gallbladder contraction,
GBEF 21% (abnormal <38%). The patient in B had a cholecystectomy
with relief of his chronic recurrent biliary colic-like symptoms.
Table 9.7
Comparison of 3-, 15-, 30-, 60-Minute Sincalide Infusions (0.02 μg/kg) in Normal Subjects
Infusion
Length
Subjects CV a
(%)
Range of
GBEFs (%)
Calculated Abnormal
GBEF (%)
Subjects With Abdominal
Cramping (%)
3 minutes
0–100
<0
15 minutes
5–92
<17
30 minutes
20–95
<19
60 minutes
19 b
50–96
<38
a  Coefficient of variation (CV) as a measure of variability (standard deviation [SD]/mean).
b  CV was statistically different (<0.0001) for 60 minutes versus 30 minutes and 30 minutes
versus 15 minutes.
Box 9.10 Consensus Methodology for Sincalide
(Cholecystokinin [CCK]) Cholescintigraphy:
Gallbladder Ejection Fraction (GBEF) Calculation
1. Ensure that the gallbladder has filled.
2. Position camera in left anterior oblique projection (35–40
degrees).
3. Draw 0.02 μg/kg sincalide into a 30- to 50-mL syringe and
dilute with normal saline to the volume of the syringe.
4. Set up infusion pump so that the entire volume of the syringe
will be infused slowly and continuously over 60 minutes.
5. Begin imaging at the start of sincalide infusion and stop
imaging at the end of 60-minute infusion.
Computer-Processing GBEF
1. Select region of interest for the gallbladder and adjacent liver
background.
2. Generate time–activity curve.
3. Calculate GBEF at 60 minutes = maximum counts − minimum
counts divided by maximum counts, all corrected for
background. (Abnormal GBEF is <38%.)
Box 9.11 High-Grade Biliary Obstruction: Sequential
Pathophysiology
1. Obstruction of hepatic or common bile duct
2. Increased intrabiliary pressure
3. Decreased bile flow
4. Ductal dilation
5. Biliary cirrhosis
Cholescintigraphy can determine whether the patient’s symptoms
are biliary in origin when anatomical imaging is uncertain, before a
more invasive workup by percutaneous cholangiography or
endoscopic
retrograde
cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP).
Discordance between anatomical and functional imaging is not
uncommon.
Functional
abnormalities
precede
morphologically
evident disease. When there is no anatomical evidence of biliary
dilation, scintigraphy may show evidence of partial biliary obstruction
as manifested by delayed bile flow (Fig. 9.18). In patients without
obstruction
but
with
dilated
ducts
from
prior
obstruction,
cholescintigraphy can exclude recurrent obstruction by demonstrating
normal bile flow.
Image Analysis for Obstruction With Cholescintigraphy
High-Grade Obstruction
With obstruction of recent onset, the liver will show good hepatic
function, manifested by rapid blood-pool clearance and good Tc-99m
HIDA uptake, but no excretion into the biliary tree. Images show a
characteristic persistent hepatogram with no bile excretion, the result
of the high back-pressure (see Fig. 9.17). Delayed imaging for up to 24
hours is often unchanged. On occasion, with a less severe but still
high-grade obstruction, there may be some delayed excretion into the
biliary ducts. In patients with good hepatic function, delayed imaging
beyond 2 hours is not usually necessary for diagnosis. However, in
patients with poor hepatic function, delayed imaging is required to
differentiate obstruction from primary hepatic dysfunction (see Figs.
9.7 and 9.8). At times, differentiating chronic obstruction from severe
hepatic insufficiency can be difficult. Lack of biliary clearance by 24
hours is suggestive of obstruction.
Partial Biliary Obstruction
Although there is prompt hepatic uptake and secretion into biliary
ducts, clearance from the biliary ducts is delayed, with common duct
activity often decreasing by less than 50% from peak over 60 minutes
(see Fig. 9.18), accompanied by delayed transit into the small
intestines (delayed biliary-to-bowel transit; Box 9.12). Some transit
into the small bowel may be seen with a partial obstruction. The most
important criteria should be whether or not there is good common
duct clearance. Delayed images at 2 hours or sincalide infusion can
help to confirm or exclude partial obstruction (Figs. 9.19–9.21).
Patients may have delayed biliary-to-bowel transit for reasons other
than obstruction (Box 9.13; e.g., received sincalide to empty
gallbladder before the study [see Fig. 9.18]). As the gallbladder
relaxes, the resulting relatively negative intraluminal gallbladder
pressure causes bile to flow preferentially toward the gallbladder
rather than through the common duct and sphincter of Oddi. Delayed
transit can also be seen in patients with chronic cholecystitis and in
some normal patients (“hypertonic sphincter of Oddi”). Delayed
imaging or sincalide can usually differentiate a functional cause (good
clearance) from obstruction (poor biliary duct clearance). Sincalide
provides a more rapid and standardized response. Opiate drugs may
produce a functional partial biliary obstruction. Thus, they should be
withheld for 6 hours before cholescintigraphy.
FIG. 9.17  High-grade biliary obstruction. Patient was admitted to the
hospital with acute abdominal pain of 6 hours duration.
Ultrasonography in the emergency room (ER) did not show biliary
dilation. Cholescintigraphy sequential selected summed images over 2
hours show rapid clearance of cardiac blood pool consistent with good
hepatic function. However, there is a hepatogram with no biliary duct
activity or clearance. This is diagnostic of a high-grade biliary
obstruction. A stone was found to be obstructing the common duct.
With poor hepatic function, further delayed imaging is required.
FIG. 9.18  Partial biliary obstruction. Patient had recurrent upper
abdominal pain for 6 months. Normal ultrasonography.
Cholescintigraphy immediately after injection (left), at 60 minutes
(middle), and at 2 hours (right). Cardiac blood pool cleared by 5
minutes (not shown). The common hepatic and common bile duct have
retained activity at 1 hour, which increases at 2 hours, suggestive of
partial biliary obstruction. Delayed gallbladder visualization (faint at 1
hour, filled by 2 hours) is suggestive of possible concomitant chronic
cholecystitis. The gallbladder usually fills early with biliary partial
obstruction in those without gallbladder disease.
Accuracy of Cholescintigraphy for Biliary Obstruction
The sensitivity and specificity of cholescintigraphy for high-grade
obstruction approach 100%. For low-grade, partial, or intermittent
obstruction, the sensitivity and specificity of cholescintigraphy have
been reported to be 95% and 85%, respectively, compared with
ultrasonography with a sensitivity of 78% and specificity of 86%.
Choledochal Cyst
Choledochal cysts are not true cysts but, rather, congenital dilation of
bile ducts. They usually involve the common hepatic duct or common
bile duct but may occur anywhere in the biliary system, usually in an
extrahepatic location but occasionally intrahepatic (Caroli disease),
which may be multifocal (Fig. 9.22). The cysts may present in young
children
as
biliary
obstruction,
pancreatitis,
or
cholangitis.
Alternatively, they may be asymptomatic and detected incidentally
and, rarely, first detected in adulthood. Ultrasonography or CT may
detect a saccular or fusiform cystic structure; however, it may be
uncertain whether the cystic structure connects with the biliary tract.
Cholescintigraphy can help confirm or exclude this. Nonobstructed
choledochal cysts fill slowly, have prolonged retention, and show
slow clearance of the HIDA radiotracer. Delayed imaging is often
required (Fig. 9.23). However, with a high-grade obstruction, there
will be no filling of the choledochal cyst because of the high back-
pressure.
Box 9.12 Scintigraphic Diagnosis of Partial Biliary
Obstruction
Poor biliary duct clearance (<50% of peak common duct
activity at 60 minutes)
Delayed or reduced biliary-to-bowel transit
No further biliary duct clearance on delayed imaging at 120
versus 60 minutes
No significant biliary duct clearance with sincalide infusion
between 60 and 120 minutes
Biliary Atresia
Biliary atresia is characterized by progressive inflammatory sclerosis
and obliteration of extrahepatic and intrahepatic biliary ducts. In the
neonatal period, these infants present with cholestatic jaundice,
acholic stools, and hepatomegaly. Without treatment, the disease
leads to hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, liver failure, and death within 2 to 3
years. The cause is unknown. Early diagnosis is critical because
surgery must be performed within the first 60 days of life to prevent
irreversible liver failure. Surgery, hepatoportoenterostomy (Kasai
procedure), is palliative. Ultimately, liver transplantation is required.
Biliary atresia must be differentiated from neonatal hepatitis caused
by various genetic, infectious, and metabolic causes, such as Alagille
syndrome (arteriohepatic dysplasia), alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency,
and cystic fibrosis, to name a few. Importantly, a gallbladder seen on
sonography does not rule out biliary atresia. Cholescintigraphy has
been used successfully for decades to confirm or exclude biliary
atresia.
FIG. 9.19  Delayed biliary-to-bowel transit due to sincalide
administered before the study because the patient had not eaten for
more than 24 hours. The patient was referred with abdominal pain. The
gallbladder fills by 30 minutes and the common duct is seen at 60
minutes, but there is no biliary-to-bowel clearance. Further imaging
shows intestinal clearance first seen at 90 minutes and continued
clearing of the common duct by 2 hours. This is a functional delay in
biliary-to-bowel transit, in this case, due to the prestudy sincalide.
FIG. 9.20  Delayed biliary-to-bowel transit in normal subject. (Top
three rows), Sequential images acquired over 60 minutes. The
gallbladder fills and the biliary ducts are visualized, but there is no
biliary-to-bowel transit. (Bottom two rows) Sincalide infusion produces
gallbladder contraction (gallbladder ejection fraction [GBEF], 51%) and
biliary-to-bowel transit with relaxation of sphincter of Oddi. (Arrowhead)
Mild enterogastric reflux. Interpreted as normal variation, “hypertonic
sphincter of Oddi.” CCK, Cholecystokinin.
Cholescintigraphy
Preparation
Patients should be pretreated with phenobarbital 5 mg/kg per day for
5 days before the study to activate liver excretory enzymes that
increase bile flow. A serum phenobarbital level should be in the
therapeutic range (10–30 mcg/mL) to maximize the specificity of the
scintigraphy. Ideally, the patient should fast for 2 hours before the
study. The recommended pediatric dose of Tc-99m HIDA is 0.05
mCi/kg (minimum dose, 0.5 mCi).
The atretic bile ducts of biliary atresia produce a picture of high-
grade biliary obstruction, with good hepatic function as shown by
rapid blood-pool clearance, but no biliary clearance, and a persistent
hepatogram (Fig. 9.24). The obstructive pattern is caused by the high
back-pressure, preventing secretion into biliary ducts or gallbladder.
Neonatal hepatitis shows hepatic dysfunction, with delayed blood-
pool clearance and delayed biliary-to-bowel transit, but transit is
typically seen by 24 hours after Tc-99m HIDA injection (Fig. 9.25).
Gallbladder filling excludes biliary atresia because the high back-
pressure would prevent biliary secretion (Figs. 9.26 and 9.27).
The sensitivity for detection of biliary atresia with cholescintigraphy
is very high, approaching 100%; however, the specificity reported in
the older literature is considerably lower, averaging 75% to 80%, in
some reports even less. However, a recent publication of a 20-year
experience at a children’s hospital found that if phenobarbital is
administered before the scan (5 mg/kg/day for 5 days in 2 divided
doses) and the serum phenobarbital level is in the therapeutic range at
the time of the scan, the specificity is 95%, with 100% sensitivity.
When a false-positive study result is clinically suspected, a repeat
study in several days to a week may be helpful for confirming a
parenchymal cause. Single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) and SPECT with CT (SPECT/CT) may be occasionally helpful
in specific cases (see Fig. 9.27).
FIG. 9.21  Partial common bile duct obstruction with poor response to
sincalide. (A) Increasing bile secretion over time. The gallbladder fills.
The common duct is quite prominent. No biliary-to-bowel transit is seen
at 60 minutes (second line, last image). (B) Sincalide was infused over
60 minutes. No gallbladder contraction and no significant biliary-to-
bowel transit is seen by the end of the study. This is consistent with a
partial common bile duct obstruction. The high back-pressure likely
prevented gallbladder contraction.
Box 9.13 Causes of Delayed Biliary-to-Bowel Transit
Biliary obstruction
Sincalide administration before cholescintigraphy
Opiate drugs
Chronic cholecystitis
Normal variation (“hypertonic sphincter of Oddi”)
Postcholecystectomy Pain Syndrome—Sphincter of Oddi
Dysfunction
Approximately 10% to 20% of patients who have had a
cholecystectomy for chronic cholecystitis subsequently develop
recurrent abdominal pain. The most common biliary causes include
retained or recurrent biliary duct stones, inflammatory stricture (Fig.
9.28), and, less commonly, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (Figs. 9.29
and 9.30; Box 9.14). All can cause partial biliary obstruction.
Cholescintigraphy will show evidence of this partial obstruction as
delayed clearance from biliary ducts and delayed biliary-to-bowel-
transit. Delayed imaging at 2 hours usually reveals no reduction in
common duct activity, and it is often increased (see Fig. 9.29). ERCP is
ultimately used to make the final diagnosis of stone or stricture.
Rarely, a cystic duct remnant acts like a small gallbladder, producing
symptoms similar to those of acute or chronic cholecystitis.
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is the cause in approximately 10% of
patients with postcholecystectomy pain syndrome. Symptoms are
those of intermittent recurrent abdominal pain. Transient liver
function abnormalities may be seen. It is caused by a partial biliary
obstruction at the level of the sphincter of Oddi but not caused by
stones, stricture, or tumor. The hypothesis for why the pain presents
after cholecystectomy is that before surgery, the gallbladder acts as a
pressure release valve that decompresses the biliary ducts when there
are increases in intrabiliary pressure, thus preventing pain. There is no
test that can reliably diagnose sphincter of Oddi dysfunction before
cholecystectomy.
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction may be a fixed obstruction (papillary
stenosis) or a functional intermittent and reversible obstruction
(biliary dyskinesia). The former is relatively straightforward to
diagnose and treat with anatomical imaging and ERCP, whereas the
latter can be more challenging. Therapy for sphincter dysfunction is
usually sphincterotomy, particularly for a fixed obstruction, whereas a
functional and reversible obstruction may sometimes respond to
drugs (e.g., nifedipine, Botox), although ultimately, they usually
require sphincterotomy.
FIG. 9.22  Classification of choledochal cysts. Type I: Cystic dilation of
an extrahepatic duct (most common). Type II: Sac or diverticulum
opening from the common bile duct. Type III: choledochocele, located
within the duodenal wall. Type IVA: Involving intrahepatic and
extrahepatic biliary ducts. Type IVB: Dilation of multiple segments
confined to extrahepatic biliary ducts. Type V: Multiple intrahepatic
ducts (Caroli disease).
FIG. 9.23  Choledochal cyst in a 25-year-old patient being evaluated
for abdominal pain. Ultrasonography detected a cystic structure
adjacent to the common hepatic duct without definite connection to the
biliary system. (A) Tc-99 hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) images
acquired at 90 minutes after the liver had cleared show filling of
choledochal cyst in the region of the common hepatic duct
(arrowhead), confirming that the cystic structure was connected to the
biliary system. CD, Common duct; D, duodenum; GB, gallbladder. (B)
Cholangiogram confirmed the diagnosis.
FIG. 9.24  Biliary atresia in a 13-week-old child with jaundice,
pretreated with phenobarbital for 5 days. Serum phenobarbital was in
the therapeutic range. No biliary excretion occurred over 24 hours.
Bladder clearance is seen. Biliary atresia was confirmed at
cholangiography, and a Kasai procedure was performed.
FIG. 9.25  Neonatal hepatitis. Sequential Tc-99m hepatic iminodiacetic
acid (HIDA) images. At 2 hours, gallbladder visualization is suggested.
By 6 hours, good gallbladder filling is seen. At 9 hours, bowel clearance
is noted, and the gallbladder has emptied. By 24 hours, image quality is
reduced due to decay, with perhaps some mild bowel activity at the
hepatic flexure. The patient was clinically followed, with progressive
improvement in liver function tests. Imaging could have been
discontinued at 6 hours because biliary atresia had been excluded with
gallbladder filling. The high back-pressure of biliary obstruction in biliary
atresia prevents any bile secretion.
FIG. 9.26  Rule out biliary atresia. (Left) At 1 hour, there is no biliary
clearance from the liver. (Right), At 4 hours, the gallbladder fills. The
activity in the lower abdomen is bladder, and below that, diaper.
Gallbladder filling rules out biliary atresia.
Sonography, CT, and MRCP may not be diagnostic. Sphincter of
Oddi manometry was regarded as the diagnostic standard in the
recent past, with a positive study revealing an elevated sphincter
pressure (>40 mm Hg). However, this technique is invasive, not
widely available, technically difficult, prone to interpretative errors,
and associated with a significant incidence of adverse effects, the most
serious of which is pancreatitis. It is rarely used today. ERCP
ultimately excludes cholelithiasis or stricture; however, it is invasive
and also associated with a relatively high incidence of postprocedure
complications.
The potential utility of cholescintigraphy for the diagnosis of
sphincter of Oddi dysfunction may seem obvious; however, its value
is controversial among gastroenterologists and surgeons. Strong,
evidence-based data are lacking. However, single-center studies have
found cholescintigraphy to be diagnostically useful, and it is routinely
performed at some biliary referral centers, although the quantitative
methodology varies. Early studies suggested that image analysis
could be diagnostic with findings of a partial biliary obstruction—
delayed biliary duct clearance at 60 minutes and persistent or
increased bile duct retention at 2 hours (see Fig. 9.29).
Various quantitative and semiquantitative methods have been used
to improve on image analysis alone. One published method used
routinely at Johns Hopkins University reported high sensitivity and
specificity in 26 patients. The protocol requires the infusion of
sincalide before the study, with the expectation that it will increase
bile flow and stress the capacity of the biliary ducts, bringing out less
severe abnormalities that might otherwise not be detected, similar to
Lasix renography. This method incorporates image analysis and
semiquantitative analysis (see Fig. 9.30). The methodology is detailed
in Box 9.15. When the examination is negative, nonbiliary causes of
pain are sought. If positive, the patient often proceeds to ERCP. If no
stones or strictures are seen, a sphincterotomy is often performed for
assumed sphincter dysfunction.
Postoperative Biliary Tract Complications
Cholescintigraphy can provide valuable diagnostic information for
patients with suspected complications presenting after laparoscopic or
open cholecystectomy, biliary duct surgery, gallstone lithotripsy, and
biliary-enteric anastomoses.
Biliary Leaks
Bile leaks may occur after abdominal trauma, cholecystectomy, or
other biliary tract surgery. The laparoscopic method has become the
procedure of choice for elective cholecystectomy; however, it is
associated with a higher incidence of bile duct injury than open
cholecystectomy. Although ultrasonography and CT can detect fluid
collections, cholescintigraphy is able to determine whether the fluid is
of biliary origin and can estimate the rate of biliary leakage. Slow bile
leaks usually resolve spontaneously with conservative therapy,
whereas rapid leaks often require surgical correction. Only biliary
scintigraphy can demonstrate communication between the biliary tree
and space-occupying lesions that represent biloma formation after
trauma.
Biliary leakage on cholescintigraphy is seen as a progressively
increasing collection of radiotracer in the region of the gallbladder
fossa or hepatic hilum. The activity may spread into the
subdiaphragmatic space, over the dome of the liver, into the colonic
gutters, or manifest as free bile within the abdomen (Fig. 9.31). Rapid
leaks are detectable on early imaging, but slower leaks may require
delayed imaging beyond 60 minutes. Positioning the patient in the
right lateral decubitus position for several minutes may help
demonstrate a fluid collection. Peritoneal tubing, drains, and
collection bags may be the only evidence of a leak and should always
be imaged.
Biliary Diversion Surgery
Biliary-enteric bypass procedures are performed for patients with
biliary obstruction for both benign and malignant conditions and for
liver transplantation. Ultrasonography has imaging limitations in the
presence of gas in the anastomotic bowel segment or refluxed biliary
air after surgery and thus may be reported as indeterminate. MRCP
has become a standard diagnostic procedure because of its accuracy in
visualizing the postoperative stricture and detecting obstruction.
Biliary dilation is present in > 20% of patients who have had these
procedures, even though obstruction has been adequately relieved by
surgery. Cholescintigraphy is well suited to diagnose bile leakage,
patency of the anastomosis, or recurrent obstruction. It is important to
know the postoperative anatomy of the patient being imaged.
Cholescintigraphy also can be helpful if ERCP cannot reach the biliary
tract when a long Roux-en-Y loop has been created (Figs. 9.32 and
9.33).
FIG. 9.27  Utility of single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography (SPECT/CT). (A) At 2 hours, (left) no definite
biliary-to-bowel clearance. Mild increased uptake at the inferior border
of the liver. The intensity is set high. (B) SPECT/CT confirms
gallbladder filling. Biliary atresia is ruled out. With biliary atresia, bile
cannot be excreted from the liver due to the high back-pressure.
Cholescintigraphy is the only noninvasive method that can
distinguish obstructed dilated ducts from chronically dilated but
nonobstructed ducts. Biliary clearance into the bowel by 1 hour with
or without ductal dilation is suggestive of functional patency.
Intestinal activity seen after 1 hour suggests partial obstruction.
Retention of activity in the biliary ducts is an even more reliable
indicator. Persistent or worsening biliary duct retention between 1
and 2 hours is very suggestive of obstruction. Stasis with minimal
intestinal excretion and pooling in the region of the biliary-enteric
anastomosis may normally be seen at 1 hour. This may be positional
and can be confirmed by imaging the patient upright. With complete
biliary obstruction, there is persistent nonvisualization of the biliary
system and intestine.
Cholescintigraphy can provide functional information about other
surgical procedures involving the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., Billroth I
and II and Whipple resection). In Billroth II anastomoses, afferent loop
patency can be determined. The afferent loop should fill readily in an
antegrade direction from the common duct. Normally, there is a
progressive accumulation of activity within the loop. However, it
should clear distally by 2 hours.
Primary Benign and Malignant Tumors of the Liver
Tumors that contain hepatocytes would be expected to take up Tc-
99m HIDA. Thus, cholescintigraphy can be useful for the differential
diagnosis of benign and malignant hepatic tumors, specifically focal
nodular hyperplasia (FNH), hepatic adenoma, and hepatocellular
carcinoma (Table 9.8).
Focal Nodular Hyperplasia and Hepatic Adenoma
The presentation and therapy of FNH and hepatic adenoma, both
benign tumors, are quite different. FNH is usually asymptomatic,
often discovered incidentally, and requires no specific therapy.
Hepatic adenomas are often symptomatic and may cause serious
hemorrhage that can be life threatening. They have a strong
association with oral contraceptives; FNH has a weaker association.
FNH contains all hepatic cell types: hepatocytes, Kupffer cells, and
bile canaliculi. The usual findings seen on cholescintigraphy are
increased blood flow, prompt hepatic uptake, and delayed clearance
(Fig. 9.34). Poor clearance may be due to abnormal biliary canaliculi.
This characteristic pattern is reported to be seen in more than 90% of
patients. Limited evidence suggests that the overall accuracy is higher
than the traditional Tc-99m SC method to diagnose FNH. Tc-99m SC
is taken up in only two-thirds of patients with FNH, one-third with
increased uptake and one-third with uptake equal to other liver.
Although hepatic adenomas consist exclusively of hepatocytes, it is
surprising that they do not have uptake on cholescintigraphy and are
hypofunctional.
Hepatocellular
carcinoma
(hepatoma)
also
demonstrates
characteristic
findings
with
cholescintigraphy.
The
malignant
hepatocytes are hypofunctional compared with the normal liver.
Thus, during the first hour of imaging, no uptake is usually seen
within the lesion (cold defect). Delayed imaging at 2 to 4 hours often
shows fill-in or continuing uptake within the tumor and concomitant
clearing of the adjacent normal liver. This pattern is quite specific for
hepatoma. However, poorly differentiated hepatomas may not fill in
on delayed imaging. Tc-99m HIDA uptake may sometimes be seen at
sites of hepatocellular metastases (e.g., in the lung).
FIG. 9.28  Biliary stricture causing partial obstruction. Images at 5, 10,
20, 40, and 60 minutes. Common hepatic and common bile ducts are
dilated proximal to the distal narrowing common duct, causing a partial
obstruction. There is biliary-to-bowel transit.
FIG. 9.29  Partial biliary obstruction postcholecystectomy—sphincter
of Oddi dysfunction. Hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) images at 1
hour (left) and 2 hours (right). At 1 hour, there is considerable retained
activity in the common duct and more proximal ducts. At 2 hours, the
liver has cleared; however, the common duct continues to retain activity
and appears to be somewhat increased. The patient had a successful
sphincterotomy.
