Tc-99m Red Blood Cell Liver Scintigraphy
Cavernous hemangiomas are the most common benign tumor of the
liver and the second most common hepatic tumor, behind liver
metastases.
They
are
usually
asymptomatic
and
discovered
incidentally on CT or ultrasonography during the workup or staging
in a patient with a known primary malignancy or during evaluation of
unrelated abdominal symptoms or disease. They require no specific
therapy but must be differentiated from other, more serious liver
tumors. The hemangiomas consist of dilated, endothelium-lined
vascular channels of varying size separated by fibrous septa. Ten
percent are multiple. Lesions larger than 4 cm are called giant
cavernous hemangiomas. Noninvasive diagnosis of a cavernous
hemangioma of the liver can obviate the need for biopsy, which could
result in hemorrhage and morbidity.
Methodology
Radiolabeling RBCs with Tc-99m pertechnetate is performed using the
methodology described for gastrointestinal bleeding (Chapter 10, Box
X.11, Fig. X.24). After injection, Tc-99m-labeled red blood cells (RBCs)
equilibrate within the relatively stagnant, nonlabeled blood pool of
the hemangioma (Fig. 9.41). Equilibration time takes 30 to 120
minutes. With traditional planar imaging, a three-phase study is
performed with flow images, blood-pool, and delayed multiple-view
images (Box 9.17). SPECT and SPECT/CT are used for improved
sensitivity and localization. Planar flow and early blood-pool images
are no longer necessary for diagnosis, although they illustrate and
teach the characteristic pathophysiology.
Image Interpretation
Radionuclide blood-flow imaging typically shows normal arterial
flow to the cavernous hemangioma. Immediate blood-pool images
show decreased activity within the hemangioma compared with
adjacent liver. Early increased inhomogeneous uptake as a result of
rapid equilibrium is sometimes seen (Fig. 9.42). On diagnostic 1- to 2-
hour delayed imaging, hemangiomas show increased activity
compared with that of the adjacent liver. Activity is equal to the blood
pool of the heart and spleen. Giant cavernous hemangiomas show
heterogeneity of uptake on delayed images, with areas of decreased
and increased uptake. The cold regions are caused by thrombosis,
necrosis, and fibrosis. Other benign and malignant liver tumors,
abscesses, cirrhotic nodules, and cysts all have decreased activity
compared with that of normal liver.
Accuracy
Tc-99m RBC scintigraphy has a positive predictive value approaching
100%. False-positive studies are rare. Sensitivity and false negatives
depend primarily on lesion size and the methodology used. The
sensitivity for planar imaging is 55% and SPECT 88%. Lesion size is
the main determinant of detectability (Table 9.12). SPECT can
visualize most hemangiomas larger than 1.4 cm and may detect some
as small as 0.5 cm. SPECT/CT can be helpful for the detection of
smaller, centrally located, multiple hemangiomas and those adjacent
to the heart, kidney, and spleen (Fig. 9.43). SPECT, contrast CT, and
magnetic resonance (MR) have similar accuracy for the diagnosis of
cavernous hemangioma (Fig. 9.44).
FIG. 9.37  Hepatic shunting to the lung. Calculation of percent lung
shunt. Patient with colon cancer metastatic to the liver, unresponsive to
chemotherapy, underwent this study before Theraspheres therapy. Tc-
99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) was injected via a hepatic artery
catheter. Whole-body imaging was acquired. Regions of interest (ROIs)
were selected for the lungs, liver, and background (thigh). The
calculated shunting to the lung was 9%. Scatter from the liver can
artificially elevate the shunt percent; thus, the lung ROI should not be
immediately adjacent to the hot liver.
FIG. 9.38  Liver arteriovenous (AV) shunting to lung. Intraarterial
administration of Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) into the
liver for quantification of shunting to the lung. The lung shunt was
calculated to be 40%. Thus, therapy with the Ytrium-90-labeled
microspheres was cancelled.
Table 9.9
Physical Characteristics of Therapeutic Radiolabeled Microspheres
Physical Characteristics of Therapeutic Radiolabeled Microspheres
Agent
Radiolabel
Particle Size (microns)
Particle Material
Activity (Bq/particle)
SIR-Sphere
Y-90
Mean 35
Range 20–60
Resin
Therasphere
Y-90
Mean 25
Range 20–30
Glass
Table 9.10
Yttrium-90 Microsphere Therapy Calculations
Liver Involvement by Tumor (%)
Recommended Y-90 Dose (GBq)
>50
25–50
2.5
<25
FIG. 9.39  Bremsstrahlung planar imaging after Y-90 hepatic arterial
microsphere therapy. This confirmed that therapy was delivered to the
whole liver. In some cases, single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) or SPECT with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) can be helpful in defining localization of the radiotracer.
Table 9.11
Yttrium-90 SIR-Sphere Dose Correction Based on Lung Shunting a
Hepatopulmonary Shunting (%)
Dose Reduction (%)
<10
10–15
15–20
>20
a  Maximum allowable shunting for Y-90 Therasphere = 10%.
