Hepatic Arterial Radiolabeled Microspheres for
Tumor Therapy
Malignant tumors, primary and metastatic, commonly involve the
liver. With hepatocellular cancer, surgical resection and liver
transplantation are the only methods for cure, but the majority of
patients present with unresectable disease. With liver metastases,
palliative or adjuvant therapy is frequently needed in addition to
chemotherapy to reduce tumor burden or symptoms. Thermal
ablation
(microwave
and
radiofrequency),
cryoablation,
and
percutaneous injections can be effective but are not suitable for
patients
with
large
or
multiple
lesions.
Transarterial
chemoembolization (TACE) has been recommended as a front-line
therapy for patients with large or multifocal hepatocellular tumors.
TACE involves a combination of chemotherapy and an embolic agent
(steel coils, microspheres, particles, sponges) that induces ischemic
necrosis and locally delivers chemotherapy. Newer drug-eluting
microspheres provide sustained chemotherapy release.
FIG. 9.31  Biliary leaks. Three patients (A, B, and C), each recently
postcholecystectomy, with different patterns of biliary leakage. (A)
Radiotracer extravasates along the inferior edge of the right lobe of the
liver to the region of the gallbladder fossa. (B) Leak transits inferior to
the left lobe, extending to the left upper quadrant. (C) Intraperitoneal
extravasation.
FIG. 9.32  Biliary-enteric anastomosis (hepatico-jejuno-anastomosis)
—normal. Post–complicated laparoscopic cholecystectomy with injury
of common hepatic duct. (A) Hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) images
show biliary drainage initially toward the right flank through a retrocecal
proximal jejunal limb (Roux limb). There is intermittent visualization of
tracer at the blind end of the jejunum (arrows). (B) Noncontrast coronal
magnetic resonance (MR) T2 image shows the blind end of the
mobilized jejunal loop (long arrow) and prominent intrahepatic right and
left hepatic ducts. The jejunal loop descends toward the right flank
(short arrow). (C) Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP) shows endoscopic tube passed through the duodenum and
pushed retrograde into the Roux limb up to the site of hepatojejunal
anastomosis. Anastomotic stricture was seen at the hepatico-jejuno-
anastomosis, with no evidence of leak. (D) Illustration of Roux-en-Y
hepatico-jejunostomy with end-to-side biliary enteric anastomosis and
side-to side jejuno-jejunal anastomosis (proximal limb reanastomosed
to the Roux limb. Magnified view of the end-to-side hepatico-jejuno-
anastomosis and the blind end of the jejunal loop.
With permission from Matesan M, Bermo M, Cruite I, et al. Biliary leak
in the postsurgical abdomen: A primer to HIDA scan interpretation.
Sem Nucl Med. 2017;47:618–629, Elsevier Inc.
Box 9.15 Sphincter of Oddi Dysfunction: Summary
Protocol
Preparation
Nothing by mouth (NPO) for 4 hours before study.
Computer Setup
One-minute frames × 60 (64 × 64)
Imaging Protocol
1. Infuse sincalide 0.02 μg/kg × 10 minutes.
2. Fifteen minutes after sincalide infusion, inject 5 mCi Tc-99m
hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) intravenously.
3. Acquire 1-minute frames × 60 minutes (128 × 128).
Computer-Processing Analysis
1. Draw regions of interest around liver and common duct and
derive time–activity curves.
2. Use image analysis primarily for scoring. Time–activity curves
provide ancillary information.
Scintigraphic Scoring
Score
1. Peak liver uptake
a. Less than 10 minutes
b. 10 minutes or greater
2. Time of biliary visualization
a. Less than 15 minutes
b. Greater than 15 minutes
3. Prominence of biliary tract
a. Not prominent
b. Prominence of major extrahepatic ducts
c. Prominence of major intrahepatic ducts
4. Bowel visualization
a. Less than 15 minutes
b. 15–30 minutes
c. Greater than 30 minutes
5. CBD emptying
a. More than 50%
b. Less than 50%
c. No change
d. Increasing activity
6. CBD-to-liver intensity ratio
a. CBD 60 min ≤ liver 60 min
b. CBD 60 min > liver 60 min but < liver 15 min
c. CBD 60 min > liver 60 min and = liver 15 min
d. CBD 60 min > both liver 60 min and liver 15 min
TOTAL SCORE
___
Interpretation
Score of ≥5 is consistent with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
CBD, Common bile duct.
Radiolabeled therapeutic microspheres can also be delivered via the
hepatic artery, thereby offering the advantage of delivering a large
dose of radiation directly to the region of the tumor (i.e., selective
internal radiation therapy). These directed intraarterial therapy
techniques take advantage of the primary blood supply to hepatic
tumors that originates from the hepatic artery, whereas the majority of
blood perfusing normal liver parenchyma is from the portal venous
system. Therefore, tumors preferentially receive the therapy and do
not need to be ablated individually, and flow to the normal liver is
minimized. Two radioembolization microsphere agents are available
clinically: Y-90 SIR-Sphere and Y-90 Therasphere. Y-90 SIR-Sphere has
been FDA approved for use with adjuvant chemotherapy in hepatic
metastases from colon cancer, and Y-90 Therasphere was approved
for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma.
Radiopharmaceuticals
The physical characteristics of the two Y-90 microsphere agents are
outlined (Table 9.9). The β-emissions from the Y-90 label have a mean
penetration length of 2.5 mm and energy of 0.94 MeV, resulting in an
intratumoral dose of 100 to 150 Gy. Nearby tumor cells are relatively
spared. With a physical half-life of 2.7 days, approximately 94% of the
Y-90 dose is delivered by 11 days. Dose calculation is based on the
tumor burden within the liver and the amount of shunting from the
liver to the lungs. The typical doses administered are in the range of
40 to 70 mCi (1.5–2.5 GBq); Table 9.10.
Methodology
Patients must be carefully screened before receiving radiolabeled
microsphere therapy. The functional status of the patient, liver
function, and estimated tumor burden are reviewed. Patency of the
portal vein must be established because portal vein thrombosis has
been a contraindication, although some studies suggest it need not be
absolute. Arteriography of hepatic vasculature is performed, and
anomalous vessels that could result in accidental delivery into
stomach, bowel, or other structures are embolized. With the catheter
in position for therapy administration, tumor perfusion and
arteriovenous shunting are assessed with Tc-99m MAA (Fig. 9.38).
After administration, the catheter is removed and the groin stabilized.
The patient is then scanned anteriorly and posteriorly. The shunt
fraction is calculated. For Y-90 SIR-spheres, the dose is adjusted to
help prevent radiation pneumonitis (Table 9.11). With Y-90
Theraspheres, the activity is higher on the glass beads, so a lower level
of shunting (<10%) is acceptable.
FIG. 9.33  Whipple procedure—hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA)
shows the jejunal loop brought to the right upper quadrant for
gastrojejunal, cholecochojejunal, and pancreaticojejunal anastomosis.
(A) HIDA at 60 minutes with radiotracer accumulation in the blind end
of the mobilized jejunum in the right upper quadrant (RUQ; arrow) and
normal progression of tracer distal in the afferent loop. Normal variant
of more prominent visualization of the left hepatic duct (arrowhead) is
also seen. (B and C) Fused coronal single-photon emission computed
tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) shows bile reflux
into the stomach and esophagus. (D) Fused axial SPECT/CT image
shows “blind-end sign” (arrow) at the end of the jejunum. (E) Contrast-
enhanced CT shows pancreatic duct stent ending in the afferent jejunal
loop. (F) Illustration of a variant of standard Whipple procedure
(pancreatico-duodenectomy localized distal to the hepatico-jejuno-
anastomosis as performed in this patient).
With permission from Matesan M, Bermo M, Cruite I, et al. Biliary leak
in the postsurgical abdomen: A primer to HIDA scan interpretation.
Sem Nucl Med. 2017;47:618–629, Elsevier Inc.
Table 9.8
Differential Diagnosis of Primary Hepatic Tumors With Tc-99m Hepatic Iminodiacetic Acid
(HIDA)
Lesion
Flow
Uptake
Clearance
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Increased
Immediate
Delayed
Hepatic adenoma
Normal
None
—
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Increased
Decreased and delayed
Delayed
After these procedures, the patient returns another day for the
therapy itself. The catheter is placed in the same position under
fluoroscopic
guidance.
The
radioactive
microsphere
dose
is
administered with a slow push to prevent refluxing the dose into the
systemic circulation. The patient can then be taken to nuclear
medicine and imaged using the bremsstrahlung radiation emitted from
the Y-90 to confirm proper localization (Fig. 9.39). Alternatively,
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging can show posttherapy
distribution because of a small amount of positron decay formed by
pair production; however, imaging acquisition time is at least 30
minutes due to the low count rate. Patients can be discharged to home
after the procedure. Some radiation safety precautions are needed
because of some activity excreted via the kidneys and bladder.
Complications
The most frequent side effects are fatigue and loss of appetite, which
typically resolve over 1 to 2 months. Potential serious side effects
include gastric ulcers, radiation pneumonitis, and radiation hepatitis.
Cholecystitis is a serious complication seen in patients when an
accessory cystic artery has not been coil-embolized pretherapy.
Thrombocytopenia can occur within 3 months of therapy. Transient
intrahepatic bile duct obstruction due to edema occurs more
frequently than cholecystitis, but is usually self-limiting.
FIG. 9.34  Focal nodular hyperplasia. Sequential 5-minute images
show early uptake by the benign tumor in the dome of the liver
(arrowhead) that persists throughout the 60-minute study as the normal
liver clears the tracer.
FIG. 9.35  Enterogastric reflux. Patient complains of recurrent vague
upper abdominal pain. (A) At 60 minutes after Tc-99m hepatic
iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) injection, reflux of a large amount of bile into
the stomach can be seen. Bile gastritis was confirmed at endoscopy.
(B) Entero-gastroesophageal reflux. This patient had a history of
esophageal cancer and esophagectomy. Bile refluxes into the patient’s
gastric pull-up.
Box 9.16 Tc-99m MAA Hepatic Arterial Perfusion
Imaging With Lung Shunt Quantification: Protocol
Summary
Patient Preparation
Intraarterial catheter must be positioned appropriately in the
hepatic artery or its branches by interventional radiology.
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Collimator: Low-energy parallel hole, high resolution
Energy window: 20% centered over 140-keV photopeak
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m MAA, 4 mCi (148 MBq)
Infuse Tc-99m MAA in a small volume (0.5–1 mL) through the
intraarterial catheter.
Imaging Protocol
Acquire anterior and posterior whole-body images.
Option: SPECT or SPECT/CT of abdomen to evaluate for
adequacy of distribution and the presence and location of
extrahepatic perfusion (e.g., stomach).
Calculation of Percent Shunt to Lung
1. Draw region of interest for the lung, for the liver, and for the
thigh background (free Tc-99m pertechnetate is often
present).
2. Percent shunt to lung = Lung (geometrical mean)/lung + liver
(geometrical mean), all corrected for background.
CT, Computed tomography; MAA, macroaggregated albumin;
SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
FIG. 9.36  Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) hepatic arterial
perfusion scintigraphy. (A) Patient with colon cancer metastatic to liver.
Tc-99m MAA study shows multiple hyperperfused solid tumor nodules
involving both lobes of liver. (B) Hyperperfusion of the periphery of the
large tumor mass with a large cold necrotic center. (C) Perfusion of the
right lobe, poor perfusion to the left lobe, and prominent extrahepatic
perfusion to the stomach and spleen. The focal hot spot adjacent to the
stomach is due to a thrombus at the chemotherapy infusion catheter
tip.
Results
After Y-90 microsphere therapy, a significant response can be seen on
CT in tumor appearance, with a decrease in size and development of
necrosis within the lesion. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/CT can
be performed at 1 month and may help monitor response (Fig. 9.40).
The majority of patients demonstrate at least partial response. Studies
have shown responses in some patients with hepatocellular cancer
who were not responding to chemotherapy and thus becoming
resectable. Limited data suggest improvement in median survival,
particularly with higher doses.
