Use the half-time of emptying and/or exponential fit
depending on which best represents the apparent emptying.
DTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; NPO, nil per os; SC,
sulfur colloid.
Liquid Gastric Emptying Quantification
Attenuation correction is not necessary for liquid gastric emptying
because of its rapid transit. A gastric ROI is drawn, and a half-time of
emptying (time in minutes when counts become half of peak counts)
and/or an exponential mathematical fit T1⁄2 is calculated (Figs. 10.13
and 10.14). If small bowel activity moves into the ROI, it should be
excluded to correct for potential artificial delay. Normal values for a
clear-liquid (water) study alone have been well validated, with a half-
emptying time of <25 minutes. Adding salt, sugar, and so forth to the
clear liquid meal slows the rate of emptying.
Gastric Accommodation
Some patients with symptoms suggestive of gastroparesis are found
to have normal emptying. Some of these patients have a problem with
gastric accommodation, the ability of the gastric fundus to relax with
ingestion of a meal. Direct methods are insufficient and unpleasant for
clinical diagnosis. The radionuclide approach is straightforward and
simple for the patient. Tc-99m pertechnetate is injected intravenously.
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) of the
stomach is acquired. The patient ingests a meal, and then a second
SPECT is obtained. The stomach volume is calculated before and after
the meal. When ratios are compared with normal values, a diagnosis
can be made. This has been a diagnostic test at only a limited number
of centers around the world, but interest is increasing at other centers.
Esophageal Transit Scintigraphy
Abnormal esophageal transit usually presents with dysphagia or chest
pain and occurs in patients with achalasia, scleroderma, systemic
lupus, muscular dystrophy, polymyositis, diffuse esophageal spasm,
and so forth. Barium swallow esophagrams can detect mucosal
changes and anatomical lesions but provide only a rough qualitative
assessment of motility. Manometry measures esophageal pressure,
peristalsis, and sphincter contraction/relaxation but not transit (Fig.
10.15). Esophageal transit scintigraphy is a time-proven test with good
accuracy, particularly for achalasia and scleroderma. It is most
commonly ordered today to screen patients who have a low suspicion
of a motility disorder, to avoid invasive manometry, or to evaluate
patient response to therapy. Sensitivity is reported to be 92% and
specificity 88% for abnormal transit. However, it is not particularly
useful in differentiating the underlying cause.
Methodology for Esophageal Transit Scintigraphy
Tc-99m SC or Tc-99m DTPA, 100 to 250 μCi, in 5 mL water is
swallowed as a bolus. A clear-liquid protocol is described (Box 10.7).
Acquisition in the posterior view allows for easier administration of
the liquid bolus and closer observation of the patient. The supine
position eliminates the effect of gravity on esophageal clearance and
thus is thought to be more sensitive for detection. However, in
achalasia, gravity is the only emptying mechanism, and thus upright
positioning is required for serial studies. Multiple swallows are
suggested for complete esophageal emptying and to increase the
sensitivity for abnormal transit in mild disease. Limited data suggest
that semisolid meals may be more sensitive for detecting esophageal
dysmotility; however, data are limited.
FIG. 10.11  Left anterior oblique (LAO) acquisition—diagram of
transverse view. When the camera is placed in the LAO projection,
rather than the anterior view, the stomach contents move roughly
parallel to the head of the gamma camera, compensating for the effect
of varying attenuation. No mathematical correction for attenuation is
required. ANT, Anterior.
FIG. 10.12  Comparison of lag phase (LAG) and percent emptying
(%GE) in two patients (A [left] and B [right]) using anterior (ANT)-only
camera head, geometrical mean (GM), and left anterior oblique (LAO)
attenuation correction, from top to bottom. (A) ANT-acquisition time–
activity curve (TAC) shows a modest rise in counts over 15 minutes
before declining. GM correction of anterior and posterior views (middle)
results in a shortened lag phase of 8 minutes and greater %GE than
the ANT view. LAO uncorrected method (bottom) results are very
similar to GM method. (B) Different patient. ANT acquisition shows very
long lag phase of 60 minutes and slowly rising TAC. GM correction
shortens the lag phase considerably, although there is still some initial
rise, suggesting incomplete correction (middle). The %GE is improved
greatly. The LAO results are similar, although not identical, to the GM.
FIG. 10.13  Normal liquid-only (water) gastric emptying. Only the first 8
of 30 1-minute images are shown. A region of interest (ROI) was drawn
for the stomach, and a time–activity curve was generated. The half-
time of emptying was 12.84 min (normal <25 minutes). The exponential
T1⁄2 fit (yellow line) was 8.17 minutes. Expon, Exponential
FIG. 10.14  Delayed liquid-only (water) gastric emptying. Only the first
8 of 30 1-minute images are shown. T1⁄2 of >40 minutes is delayed
emptying (normal <25). Expon, Exponential.
FIG. 10.15  Esophageal motility. Swallowing initiates a coordinated
peristaltic contraction that propagates down the esophagus. The
esophagus has three regions: the upper esophageal sphincter (UES),
which allows food to pass from the mouth to the esophagus and
prevents tracheobronchial aspiration; the esophageal body, with
striated muscle proximally and smooth muscle distally; and the lower
esophageal sphincter (LES), a high-pressure smooth muscle region
that prevents gastric reflux but relaxes during swallowing to allow
passage of food into the stomach. Shown are manometric pressure
changes with a bolus water swallow (WS). After WS, UES pressure
falls transiently, then LES pressure falls and remains low until the
peristaltic contraction passes aborally through the UES and
esophageal body, closing the LES.
Analysis and Quantification
Viewing the individual sequential esophageal swallow images as well
as the cinematic display may be adequate for diagnosis of serious
transit abnormalities. Quantification, however, is helpful for diagnosis
of less severe abnormalities and for comparison of serial studies over
time to determine therapeutic effectiveness. Time–activity curves are
typically derived for the entire esophagus and for selected regions
(e.g., upper, middle, lower; Figs. 10.16–10.18). Esophageal transit has
been quantified by calculating either a transit time, percent emptying,
or residual in the esophagus at a defined time point. Transit time has
been defined as the time from the initial entry of the bolus into the
esophagus until all but 10% of peak activity clears (abnormal >15
seconds). Percent emptying has been quantified as maximal counts
minus counts 10 sec after maximal counts/maximal counts before
swallow (normal >83%).
Box 10.7 Esophageal Transit (Clear Liquid)
Scintigraphy: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Patient should fast overnight.
Place radioactive marker next to cricoid cartilage.
Position the camera posteriorly.
Patient should be standing or supine (must be upright for
achalasia).
Practice swallow(s) with nonradioactive bolus.
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m SC or DTPA, 100 to 250 μCi (11 MBq) in 10 mL of
water
Instrumentation
Camera setup: Tc-99m 140 keV photopeak with 20% window
