Computer setup: 0.5-second frame × 120; byte mode, 64 × 64
Swallowing Procedure
Practice swallow with nonlabeled bolus.
Swallow radiolabeled liquid as a bolus.
Processing and Quantification
Time–activity curves, condensed dynamic images
Calculate
Transit time:
Time of initial esophageal entry until all but 10% of peak
clears (abnormal >15 sec)
Percent emptying:
Maximal counts—counts 10 seconds after maximal counts
divided by maximal counts before swallow (normal >83%)
DTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; SC, sulfur colloid.
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a common and sometimes
serious medical disorder. In adults, heartburn is the major symptom.
Complications include esophagitis, bleeding, perforation, stricture,
Barrett esophagus, and cancer. In children, reflux often presents
differently, with respiratory symptoms, iron-deficiency anemia, and
failure to thrive. Reflux is normal in infants and usually resolves
spontaneously by 18 months of age. However, a minority will have
persistent symptoms with serious sequelae. Symptomatic disease is
more common in patients with an associated esophageal motility
disorder, which increases the duration of mucosal exposure to
refluxate. Delayed gastric emptying may exacerbate symptoms and
inhibit effective therapy.
Diagnosis of GERD
Various
tests
are
used
to
confirm
the
diagnosis.
Barium
esophagography can detect mucosal damage, stricture, and tumor but
has low sensitivity for reflux. Endoscopy allows direct visualization of
esophageal mucosa and permits biopsy of ulcerations and areas
suspicious for malignancy. With the Bernstein acid infusion test,
hydrochloric acid (0.1 N) is infused into the distal esophagus to
reproduce reflux symptoms and confirm its esophageal origin.
Monitoring of pH can be diagnostic. A pH electrode is placed in the
distal esophagus for 24-hour monitoring. An abrupt drop in pH to less
than 4.0 is diagnostic of reflux; however, the study is invasive and
technically demanding.
FIG. 10.16  Delayed esophageal swallow and quantification. (A)
Summed image demonstrates delayed transit through the lower third of
the esophagus. (B) Selected sequential dynamic 0.5 images show
normal transit through the upper two-thirds of the esophagus but slow
transit in the distal third. (C) Time–activity curves for upper, mid-, and
lower regions. The red curve (lower third of esophagus) confirms
delayed transit. The esophageal transit time was not reached by 30
seconds. Percent esophageal emptying at 10 seconds was 54%
(normal >83%).
FIG. 10.17  Esophageal time–activity profiles: normal, achalasia, and
esophageal spasm (left to right). Regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn
for the proximal, middle, and distal esophagus, and time–activity curves
were generated. (Left) Normal subject. Bolus proceeds promptly
sequentially from proximal to distal esophagus. (Middle) Achalasia.
Delayed transit most prominent in the lower esophagus. (Right) Spasm,
uncoordinated contraction. Bolus has poor esophageal progression.
FIG. 10.18  Achalasia: semisolid meal. This methodology is most
useful for follow-up of achalasia patients. (A) Ten-second frames.
Retention of activity in the esophagus, most prominently in the distal
esophagus. (B) Two-minute frames. Persistent distal esophageal
retention with minimal clearance into the stomach over 30 minutes. (C)
Quantification of esophageal emptying. Time–activity curve shows very
delayed transit until ingestion of carbonated beverage, when rapid
emptying occurs. Calculated retention at 20 minutes: 63% (<5% is
normal).
Scintigraphy
The radionuclide gastroesophageal reflux study is quantitative,
noninvasive, and technically easy to perform. Although most
commonly requested for neonates, with simple modifications it can
also be quite useful for adults. In the past, the study was performed in
a manner similar to the barium contrast study, using Valsalva
maneuvers and an abdominal binder to progressively increase
intraabdominal pressure during each sequential static 30-second
image. However, this is not physiological, had poor sensitivity, and is
no longer recommended. Known as the “milk study,” the infant or
child ingests this or her normal formula or milk feeding mixed with
Tc-99m SC. With older children and adults, the radiotracer is typically
mixed in orange juice.
After ingestion, the study is acquired on a computer at a framing
rate of 5- to 10-second frames for 60 minutes. This rapid temporal
acquisition rate provides high sensitivity for the detection of reflux
events. Gastric emptying can also be determined by acquiring static
images immediately after ingestion and at 1 and 2 hours. See the
protocol in Box 10.8.
Image Interpretation
All frames should be reviewed. The window should be adjusted to
maximize esophageal detection sensitivity. Cinematic display may
also be helpful. The reflux events are seen as distinct spikes of activity
into the esophagus (Fig. 10.19). Normal values for neonates or young
children have not been established. Neonates normally have some
reflux. The greater the number of high reflux events and the longer
they last, the more likely and severe is the problem. Reflux events that
occur with small gastric volumes have more clinical significance
because reflux is occurring without the effect of the increased pressure
of a full meal volume. Detection of reflux events is affected by the
volume of the ingested meal and the rate of gastric emptying.
Sensitivity for the detection of reflux events is highest with a full
stomach and decreases as the stomach empties.
Image Interpretation and Quantification
All images should be reviewed for evidence of reflux events. A
marker noting the mouth is useful for estimating the degree of reflux.
One approach to quantification is a simple semiquantitative method
that grades each reflux event as high- or low-level (≥ or <
midesophagus), by its duration (<10 secs or ≥10 secs), and by the
temporal relationship to meal ingestion (reflux events at low gastric
volume carry greater significance). The total number and level of
reflux events can be summed into four categories:
1. Low level, <10 seconds
2. Low level, ≥10 seconds
Box 10.8 Gastroesophageal Reflux (“Milk Study”)
Scintigraphy: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
NPO 3 hours
Computer Setup
Framing rate of 5 to 10 seconds per frame for 60 minutes
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m SC, 0.1 mCi mixed with formula or milk
Feeding Meal
Infants: Normal feeding meal (formula or milk). Mix
radionuclide with half of the meal and feed to the child.
The second “cold” half of the meal is then fed to the
child. Orange juice is used for older children and adults.
Imaging Procedure
After mother burps infant, place patient supine with
gamma camera positioned posteriorly and the chest and
upper abdomen in the field of view. Place radioactive
marker at the mouth for several frames.
Obtain 1-minute anterior/posterior image immediately
after ingestion of feeding and at 1 hour and 2 hours.
Acquire 5- to 10-second frames for 60 minutes starting
after first 1-minute static image.
Acquire image of the chest at 2 hours. Review for
aspiration with computer enhancement.
Quantify gastroesophageal reflux events and gastric
emptying:
Short reflux events ≤ 10 seconds
Long reflux events >10 seconds
Low reflux events < half distance up esophagus
High reflux events ≥ half distance up esophagus
Sum events for each category.
Normal gastric emptying >50% at 1 hour and 75% at
2 hours
NPO, nil per os; SC, sulfur colloid.
3. High level, <10 seconds
4. High level, ≥10 seconds
Other quantitative parameters have been used (e.g., ROIs can be
drawn for the esophagus and time–activity curves [TACs] generated.
Peaks >5% have been reported to be diagnostic of gastroesophageal
reflux.
Accuracy
With current protocols using rapid framing rates, the sensitivity for
the detection of reflux is reported to be 75% to 100%, superior to
barium studies. The standard technique of pH monitoring has
limitations (i.e., 24-hour monitoring and poor temporal resolution
[detecting recurrent events]) because since clears slowly from the pH
monitors. The highest sensitivity is achieved using both scintigraphy
and pH monitoring. Normal gastric-emptying values for formula or
milk are not well established, but the consensus is that 1-hour
emptying should be 40% to 50% and 2-hour emptying, 60% to 75%.
The 2-hour value is considered more reliable.
Salivagram
Although aspiration should always be looked for on gastroesophageal
reflux studies, the sensitivity for the detection of aspiration on
radionuclide milk studies is reported to be poor, 1% to 25%. However,
a “salivagram” can often demonstrate clinically suspected aspiration
when the gastroesophageal reflux study is negative. The salivagram is
a variation of an esophageal transit study. A drop of radiotracer is
placed in the back of the infant’s mouth or tongue. Acquisition uses a
framing rate similar to the reflux study, followed by static images (Fig.
10.20).
FIG. 10.19  Gastroesophageal reflux. Sequential 5-second frames
show multiple episodes of long-lasting (>15 seconds) high-grade
(above midesophagus) reflux events.
Intestinal Transit Scintigraphy
Intestinal transit scintigraphy is not yet a routine study in many
nuclear medicine imaging clinics. However, this seems to be
changing.
Gastroenterologists
are
finding
intestinal
transit
scintigraphy useful for evaluating patients with various symptoms
related to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Small intestinal dysmotility
may present with a wide range of clinical manifestations and
symptoms, including some that overlap with those of gastric
dysmotility, including postprandial epigastric or periumbilical
abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, dyspepsia, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Large intestinal dysmotility symptoms may include constipation,
diarrhea, fecal incontinence, lower abdominal pain, and upper
abdominal symptoms. Abnormal intestinal transit may involve the
entire colon or may be regional (e.g., limited to the right colon,
descending colon, or rectosigmoid), and differentiating these is
important for appropriate therapy.
Nonscintigraphic Methodologies
Oral contrast ingested with radiopaque markers and obtaining
abdominal radiographs to plot its movement has been used as an
index of intestinal transit; however, it is not physiological (i.e., it is not
food and is likely treated differently than food by the intestines). The
radiation dose from repeated abdominal films can be high. The
hydrogen or lactose breath test sometimes used to estimate small
bowel intestinal transit measures H2 produced when a carbohydrate is
fermented by colonic bacteria. However, fermentative bacteria are
absent in the colon in a quarter of the population. The test only
measures the transit time of the meal’s leading edge from the mouth
to the cecum, not bulk transit. The wireless motility capsule
(Smartpill) measures pH and pressure within the intestines, but it
must be swallowed and requires multiple-day monitoring; however, it
is costly, published data are limited, and it is not truly physiological.
FIG. 10.20  “Salivagram” (esophageal swallow): aspiration. Neonate
with swallowing and neurological problems. A prior gastroesophageal
reflux study showed numerous reflux events but no aspiration. Tc-99m
pertechnetate was placed on the posterior tongue so that the child
would swallow it. (A) Sequential 5-second frames show transit into the
tracheal bifurcation. (B) High-count anterior image at 1 hour shows
persistent retention at the tracheal bifurcation.
Scintigraphy for Small Intestinal Transit
Scintigraphic
quantification
of
intestinal
transit
is
not
as
straightforward as gastric emptying. With gastric emptying, all of the
meal resides within the stomach at the start of acquisition, and
quantification depends on how much of or how fast the meal empties.
With small intestinal transit, there is continual movement of food into
the small intestine from the stomach as well as from the small bowel
into the large bowel, making quantification challenging. Various
scintigraphic quantitative methods have been published.
A common approach has been the use of an orally ingested liquid
marker (e.g., In-111 DTPA), with or without a solid meal. In-111
DTPA is not reabsorbed and has a sufficiently long half-life. Images
are typically acquired for 5 to 6 hours. The radiolabel spreads out as it
moves through the small bowel. Identification of the first
accumulation of radiotracer or the percent reaching the ileocecal valve
or cecum at specific time intervals has been used to estimate the small
bowel transit (Figs. 10.21–10.23). Limited data using Tc-99m HIDA
radiotracers have been reported.
Large Bowel Transit Scintigraphy
Various radiopharmaceuticals that do not break down before reaching
the large bowel have been used, such as I-131-radiolabeled cellulose
fiber. There are some limited data on the use of Ga-67 citrate to
measure transit. The most commonly used method has been the oral
ingestion of In-111 DTPA, with or without a concomitant meal. One
approach to quantification has been to calculate a geometrical center
of activity, that is, the weighted average of the counts in five to seven
