Uncommon
Accessory spleen
Hepatic hemangioma
Varices, esophageal and gastric
Vascular
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Gastroduodenal artery aneurysm
Abdominal varices
Caput medusae and dilated mesenteric veins
Gallbladder varices
Pseudoaneurysm
Arterial grafts
Cutaneous hemangioma
Duodenal telangiectasia
Angiodysplasia
Gallbladder (heme products in uremia)
Overall, many investigators, clinicians, and angiographers have
found the gastrointestinal bleeding study to be clinically valuable and
accurate in bleeding-site localization. A telling point is that at many
institutions, angiographers are often the ones to request RBC
scintigraphy before an invasive procedure. Being readily available
when needed and having good communication with referring
physicians is critical for success.
Meckel Scan
Meckel diverticulum is the most common and clinically important
form of heterotopic gastric mucosa. Although ectopic gastric mucosa is
the terminology frequently used, this is not really correct. Ectopic
refers to an organ that has migrated—for example, an ectopic kidney.
Heterotopic refers to a tissue at its site of origin. Other causes of
heterotopic gastric mucosa besides Meckel diverticulum are
gastrointestinal duplications, postoperative retained gastric antrum,
and Barrett esophagus.
Table 10.3
Correct Localization of Tc-99m Red Blood Cell (RBC) Gastrointestinal Bleeding
First Author
Year
Number of Scans
% Positive
% Correct
Suzman
Orechhia
O’Neill
Emslie
Leitman
Bearn
Dusold
Rantis
Van Geelen
Nicholson
Hunter
Bentley
Garofalo
Voeller
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m pertechnetate has been used since the 1970s to image and
diagnose Meckel diverticulum as the cause of gastrointestinal
bleeding.
Mechanism of Uptake
The mucosa of the gastric fundus contains multiple cell types,
including parietal cells that secrete hydrochloric acid and chief cells
that secrete pepsinogen and intrinsic factor. The gastric antrum and
pylorus contain G cells that secrete the hormone gastrin. Columnar
mucin-secreting epithelial cells are found throughout the stomach and
excrete alkaline secretions that protect the mucosa from the highly
acidic gastric fluid. Parietal cells were originally thought to be solely
responsible for gastric uptake and secretion of Tc-99m pertechnetate.
However, evidence points to the mucin-secreting cells being as
important. Uptake has been found in gastric tissue with no parietal
cells, and autoradiographic studies have shown mucin cell uptake.
Meckel diverticulum is the most common congenital anomaly of the
gastrointestinal tract, occurring in 1% to 3% of the population. It is
due to failure of closure of the omphalomesenteric duct in the embryo.
The duct connects the yolk sac to the primitive foregut through the
umbilical cord. This is a true diverticulum that arises on the
antimesenteric side of the small bowel, approximately 80 to 90 cm
proximal to the ileocecal valve. It is usually 2 to 3 cm in size but may
be larger. Gastric mucosa is present in 10% to 30% of patients with
Meckel diverticulum, in 60% of symptomatic patients with the
diverticulum, and in 98% of those with bleeding (Box 10.14). More
than 60% percent of patients with complications of Meckel
diverticulum are under age 2. Bleeding after age 40 is uncommon.
Box 10.14 Meckel Diverticulum
1% to 3% incidence in the general population
50% occur by age 2 years
10% to 30% have ectopic gastric mucosa
25% to 40% are symptomatic; 50% to 67% of these have
ectopic gastric mucosa
95% to 98% of patients with bleeding have ectopic gastric
mucosa
Clinical Manifestations
Gastric mucosal secretions can cause peptic ulceration of the Meckel
diverticulum or adjacent ileum, producing pain, perforation, or
bleeding.
Diagnosis
Meckel diverticulum can be missed on small bowel radiography
because of its narrow or stenotic ostium, which fills poorly and
empties rapidly. Angiography is diagnostic only with brisk active
bleeding and rarely used. The Meckel scan with Tc-99m pertechnetate
is considered the standard method for preoperative diagnosis of a
Meckel diverticulum.
Methodology
A Meckel scan protocol is described (Box 10.15). For patient
preparation, barium studies should not be performed for several days
before scintigraphy because attenuation by the contrast material may
prevent lesion detection. Procedures such as colonoscopy or laxatives
that irritate the intestinal mucosa can result in Tc-99m pertechnetate
uptake and should be avoided. Ethosuximide (Zarontin), an
anticonvulsant, is reported to cause uptake.
A full stomach or urinary bladder may obscure a Meckel
diverticulum; thus, fasting for 2 to 4 hours before the study or
continuous nasogastric aspiration to decrease stomach size is
recommended. Patients should void before the study and at the end
before imaging. A urinary catheter should be considered. Potassium
perchlorate should not be used to block thyroid uptake because it will
also block gastric uptake. It may be administered after the study to
wash out the radiotracer from the thyroid and thus minimize
radiation exposure.
Pharmacological Augmentation
Patient preparation with drugs to improve the detection of Meckel
diverticulum has been used. Cimetidine, a histamine H2-receptor
antagonist, is reported to increase Tc-99m pertechnetate uptake by
inhibiting its release from gastric mucosa. The dose is 20 mg/kg orally
in divided doses for 2 days before the study. It can also be given
intravenously. Other related drugs, such as ranitidine and famotidine,
have been used both orally and intravenously (see Box 10.15). No
large or controlled studies have been reported to validate the
diagnostic utility of cimetidine; however, its use has been
recommended based on animal studies and case reports suggesting its
effectiveness and its low risk for side effects with short-term use.
Pentagastrin was used in the past to stimulate uptake; however, it was
removed from the U.S. market because of reported serious side effects.
Box 10.15 Meckel Scan: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Fasting 4 to 6 hours before study to reduce size of stomach
No pretreatment with sodium perchlorate; may be given after
completion of study
No barium studies should be performed within 3 to 4 days of
scintigraphy.
Void before, during if possible, and after study.
Premedication
Cimetidine: 20 mg/kg/day orally for 48 hours in divided doses
(or)
Intravenous: 300 mg in 100 mL 5% dextrose over 20 minutes;
imaging begins 1 hour later
(or) Ranitidine: 2 mg/kg twice daily (or)
Intravenous: 1 mg/kg (maximum 50 mg) intravenously over
20 minutes; imaging begins 1 hour later
(or) Famotidine: 0.5 mg/kg once daily × 48 hours
Intravenous: 0.25 mg/kg intravenously 1 hour before
procedure
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m pertechnetate
Children: 0.05 mCi/kg (1.85 MBq/kg)—minimum 1 mCi
(37 MBq)
Adults: 5 to 10 mCi (185–370 MBq) intravenously
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Collimator: Low energy, all purpose or high resolution
Patient Position
Position patient supine under camera with xiphoid to
symphysis pubis in field of view.
Imaging Procedure
Obtain flow images: 60 1-second frames.
Obtain static images: 500k-counts for first image, others for
same time every 5 to 10 minutes for 1 hour.
Erect, right lateral, posterior, or oblique views may be helpful
at 30 to 60 minutes.
Obtain postvoid image.
Image Interpretation
On the scan, a Meckel diverticulum appears as a focal area of
increased activity, usually in the right lower quadrant (see Fig. 10.37).
Tc-99m pertechnetate uptake is seen within 5 to 10 minutes after
injection and increases over time, typically at a rate similar to that of
gastric uptake. Lateral or oblique views can help confirm the anterior
position of the diverticulum versus the posterior location of renal or
ureteral activity. Upright views may distinguish fixed activity (e.g.,
duodenum) from ectopic gastric mucosa, which moves inferiorly, and
also renal pelvic activity. The intensity of activity may fluctuate
because of intestinal secretions, hemorrhage, or increased motility
washing out radiotracer. Postvoid images can empty the renal
collecting system and aid in better visualization of areas adjacent to
the bladder.
FIG. 10.37  Meckel diverticulum. Child referred with rectal bleeding.
Sequential dynamic images (top two rows) and then static image
(below right) show focal accumulation in the right lower quadrant. Note
the simultaneous progressive uptake in the stomach and the Meckel
diverticulum. Surgery confirmed the diagnosis.
Accuracy
The reported accuracy of Meckel scintigraphy is high. One large study
reported results in 954 patients who had undergone scintigraphy for
suspected Meckel diverticulum using modern imaging methods and
found an overall sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 95%. Detection in
adults is said to be lower, but data are quite limited.
False-negative studies may result from poor technique, rapid
washout of the secreted Tc-99m pertechnetate, lack of sufficient gastric
mucosa; a small diverticulum; and impaired diverticular blood supply
from intussusception, volvulus, or infarction. Reported causes for
false-positive study results are listed (Box 10.16). Activity in the
genitourinary tract is the most common cause (see Fig. 10.38).
Gastrointestinal duplications are potential false positives. These are
cystic or tubular congenital abnormalities that have a mucosa, smooth
muscle, and alimentary epithelial lining attached to any part of the
gastrointestinal tract, often the ileum. Gastric mucosa occurs in 30% to
50% of duplications. Duplications often appear on scintigraphy as
large, multilobulated areas of increased activity. Other false-positive
causes include inflammatory and/or obstructive lesions of the
intestines, as well as tumors. The final diagnosis of a duplication is
made at surgery.
Retained Gastric Antrum
Retained gastric antrum may be left behind in the afferent loop after a
Billroth II gastrojejunostomy. The antrum continues to produce
gastrin, no longer inhibited by acid in the stomach because it is
diverted through the gastrojejunostomy. The high acid production
leads to marginal ulcers. Endoscopy or barium radiography may
demonstrate the retained gastric antrum. A Tc-99m pertechnetate scan
can be confirmatory. Uptake in the gastric remnant is seen as a collar
of radioactivity in the duodenal stump of the afferent loop. The
retained antrum usually lies to the right of the gastric remnant. In one
series, uptake was detected in 16/22 patients.
Barrett Esophagus
Chronic gastroesophageal reflux can cause the distal esophagus to
become lined by gastric columnar epithelium rather than the usual
esophageal squamous epithelium. This condition is associated with
complications of ulcers, strictures, and an 8.5% incidence of
esophageal adenocarcinoma. Tc-99m pertechnetate scans show
intrathoracic uptake contiguous with that of the stomach but
conforming to the shape and posterior location of the esophagus.
Today, the diagnosis is usually made with endoscopy and mucosal
biopsy.
FIG. 10.38  Meckel scan: False positive. Sequential images show two
foci of activity to the right of midline that progressively increase with
time. A bone scan performed 6 months before this study showed a
similar pattern, consistent with renal collecting-system clearance. The
patient had crossed-fused ectopia.
Box 10.16 False-Positive Meckel Scan—Potential
Causes
Urinary Tract
Ectopic kidney
Extrarenal pelvis
Hydronephrosis
Vesicoureteral reflux
Horseshoe kidney
Bladder diverticulum
Vascular
Arteriovenous malformation
Hemangioma
Aneurysm of intraabdominal vessel
Angiodysplasia
Hyperemia and Inflammatory
Peptic ulcer
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Abscess
Appendicitis
Colitis
Neoplasm
Carcinoma of sigmoid colon
Carcinoid
Lymphoma
Leiomyosarcoma
Small Bowel Obstruction
Intussusception
Volvulus
Other Sites of Ectopic Gastric Mucosa
Gastrogenic cyst
Enteric duplication
Duplication cysts
Barrett esophagus
