Gastrointestinal System
Janis M. O’Malley, and Harvey Ziessman
The use of a radionuclide to measure gastric transit was first described
in 1966. Radionuclide gastric emptying scintigraphy has long been the
standard methodology for measuring gastric transit. In this section,
the recommended standardized gastric emptying protocol is
described in some detail, followed by a discussion of esophageal and
intestinal transit (Fig. 10.1). Other topics include gastrointestinal
bleeding, Meckel, peritoneal, and salivary gland scans.
Gastrointestinal Transit Scintigraphy
Gastric Emptying
The radionuclide gastric-emptying study is the accepted standard
methodology used to measure gastric transit. It is physiological,
quantitative, accurate, and reproducible. An upper gastrointestinal
contrast study can detect a gross delay in gastric emptying, but it is
not sensitive for the detection of less severe but symptomatic
gastroparesis. Other methodologies have been proposed and
investigated, most recently the wireless motility capsule; however, all
have issues, and none has found routine clinical use. However, the
radionuclide study cannot differentiate a severe functional delay from
anatomical obstruction, such as a tumor or pyloric channel ulcer.
Endoscopy or contrast barium radiography is required for that
purpose.
Patients with delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) present
clinically with symptoms of postprandial nausea, vomiting, and
abdominal pain. Some of the clinical indications for the radionuclide
gastric emptying study are listed (Box 10.1). Rapid gastric emptying is
less common than delayed. Patients may present with similar
symptoms, although more commonly postprandial abdominal
cramps, diarrhea, flushing, and tachycardia (dumping syndrome).
Anatomy and Physiology
The regions are designated from proximal to distal as cardia, fundus,
body, antrum, and pylorus (Fig. 10.2). Gastric mucosal glands secrete
hydrochloric acid and digestive enzymes. Gastric motility is
controlled by both neuromuscular gastric activity and small intestinal
neuroendocrine feedback.
The gastric fundus and antrum have distinct functions. The more
proximal fundus acts as a reservoir, accepting large meals with only a
minimal
increase
in
pressure
(receptive
relaxation
and
accommodation). Fundal tonic contractions produce a constant
pressure gradient between the stomach and pylorus, resulting in
liquid emptying. The more distal antrum has phasic contractions
initiated by a neural pacemaker. Muscular contractions sweep down
the antrum in a ring-like pattern, squeezing food toward the pylorus.
Larger food particles are not allowed to pass and are retropelled. The
solid material is converted into chyme through contact with acid and
peptic enzymes and mechanical grinding. Food particles must be
broken down until they are small enough to pass through the pyloric
sphincter (1–2 mm). The antrum is responsible for solid emptying. The
pylorus, at the junction of the antrum and duodenal bulb, acts as a
sieve, regulating gastric outflow (Fig. 10.3).
The pattern of emptying for solid and liquid meals is different.
Solids have a delay before emptying begins (lag phase) lasting 5 to 25
minutes. This is the time required to grind the food into small enough
particles so that they can pass through the pylorus. Following the lag
phase, solids empty in a relatively linear pattern (Fig. 10.4). The rate of
emptying depends on the size and contents of the meal. Meals with
greater volume, weight, carbohydrates, protein, or fat empty slower
(Box 10.2). Liquids have no delay before emptying begins. Clear
liquids empty in a monoexponential pattern (Fig. 10.5A and B). Full
liquids and clear liquids ingested simultaneously with a solid meal
empty in a slower multiexponential pattern.
FIG. 10.1  Diagram of gastrointestinal tract from esophagus through
rectum.
Box 10.1 Clinical Indications for Radionuclide Gastric-
Emptying Study
Insulin-dependent diabetics with persistent postprandial
symptoms
Diabetics with poor blood glucose control
Nonulcer dyspepsia
Unexplained postprandial nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain
Severe reflux esophagitis
To assess response to a motility drug
Gastric Stasis Syndromes
The majority of patients with chronic gastroparesis have a functional
cause; that is, there is no known pathological etiology. An exception is
diabetic gastroenteropathy, which occurs in patients with long-
standing insulin-dependent diabetes. Here gastroparesis is caused by
vagal nerve damage as part of a generalized autonomic neuropathy.
In addition to producing disagreeable postprandial symptoms, the
delay in emptying may exacerbate the problem of diabetic glucose
control because the timing of the insulin dose with food ingestion and
absorption may be unpredictable. A common gastric disorder is
nonulcer dyspepsia, characterized by ulcer-like or dyspeptic
symptoms. It is reported that gastroparesis occurs in 20% to 40% of
these patients.
FIG. 10.2  Gastric anatomy. The proximal stomach (fundus)
undergoes receptive relaxation and accommodation of ingested food.
Its tonic contraction is responsible for liquid emptying. The distal
stomach (antrum) is responsible for solid emptying. It has phasic
contractions that mix and grind food into small enough particles to pass
through the pylorus.
Most patients with gastroparesis have a chronic problem with
delayed emptying. However, some have acute and potentially
reversible causes (e.g., due to viral gastroenteritis, trauma, metabolic
derangements). Common causes of and associations with chronic and
acute gastric stasis syndromes are listed in Box 10.3. Rapid gastric
emptying is most commonly seen in patients who have had gastric
surgery (e.g., pyloroplasty or gastrectomy), in patients with
hyperthyroidism, or in those with a gastrinoma producing large
amounts of the hormone gastrin (Zollinger–Ellison syndrome). A
minority of patients with insulin-dependent diabetes have rapid
gastric emptying (Box 10.4), with symptoms of palpitations,
diaphoresis, weakness, and diarrhea.
Patient Preparation
Hyperglycemia per se, independent of diabetic gastroenteropathy,
may cause a delay in gastric emptying. Thus, gastric-emptying studies
should be performed when patients are under good diabetic control,
with a fasting blood preferably <250 mg/dL. Also, many commonly
used nongastric therapeutic drugs can delay gastric emptying (Table
10.1). In our clinic, we allow the referring physician to decide whether
the patient should continue to take his or her medications before the
study. This will depend on the study indication (e.g., whether to make
the diagnosis of gastroparesis or to determine whether a specific
therapeutic drug has been effective). When indicated, the drugs
should be stopped 48 to 72 hours before the study. Medications taken
should be considered when interpreting the study.
Therapy of Gastroparesis
Metoclopramide (Reglan) is the most common therapeutic drug
prescribed for delayed gastric emptying. It is not effective in all
patients, symptom relief is not always accompanied by an
improvement in gastric emptying, and serious side effects may occur
in some patients (e.g., tardive dyskinesia seen in 10% of patients
taking the drug for longer than 3 months). Domperidone (Motilium),
used in Europe, is not approved for clinical use in the United States.
Cisapride (Propulsid) was removed from the U.S. market due to
serious arrhythmias. Erythromycin, a motilin agonist, improves
gastric motility; however, it has a high incidence of nausea and
vomiting. Analogs of erythromycin as well as other potential
therapeutic drugs are in development. Surgical intervention is
sometimes used to treat refractory gastroparesis. One approach is
implantation of an electrical gastric stimulator. In patients who are not
responsive to standard therapies, gastric resection may be indicated.
FIG. 10.3  Solid gastric emptying. Four selected images, from left to
right, at time 0, 15 minutes, 30 minutes, and 60 minutes. Initially, the
solid meal resides in the fundus; then it moves into the antrum, where it
is ground up to a small enough size to pass through the pylorus into the
small intestines.
FIG. 10.4  Biphasic pattern of solid emptying. (A) Sequential solid
gastric-emptying images over initial 60 minutes. The ingested meal
moves normally from the gastric fundus to the antrum and then begins
to clear into the small intestines. (B) Time–activity curve for the patient
generated by a region of interest (ROI) around the stomach shows a
biphasic pattern of solid gastric emptying. An initial delay (lag phase) of
9 minutes is seen before emptying begins. Emptying clears the
stomach in a linear pattern for the remainder of the 60-minute study.
Radiopharmaceuticals
For accurate and reproducible quantification of solid gastric
emptying, the radionuclide must be tightly bound to the solid
component of the meal. Elution of the radiolabel results in a part-
solid, part-liquid labeled mixture and may be quantitatively
unreliable. Radiolabeled eggs are most commonly used for solid
gastric-emptying studies. Tc-99m sulfur colloid (Tc-99m SC) binds to
albumen in egg white during cooking. Although whole eggs work
well for gastric emptying, egg whites have higher percent binding. Tc-
99m SC remains stable in the acidic stomach and is not absorbed by
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
For liquid meals, the radiotracer must equilibrate rapidly within the
liquid and be nonabsorbable in the gastrointestinal tract. Tc-99m- or
In-111-labeled diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) and Tc-99m
SC meet these criteria. Dual-phase solid-liquid studies use one
radiotracer for the solid meal and another for the liquid phase, for
example, In-111 DTPA as the liquid marker (171, 247 keV) and Tc-99m
SC (140 keV) as the solid marker (Fig. 10.6). They are differentiated by
their separate photopeaks.
Standardization of Solid Gastric-Emptying
Scintigraphy
Various methodologies have been used over the years for solid
gastric-emptying
studies,
including
different
meals,
patient
positioning, instrumentation, framing rate, and study length as well as
quantitative methods. All of these factors may affect normal values.
Thus, normal values must be well validated for the specific meal and
methodology used. In the past, gastroenterologists have expressed
concern about the different methodologies and different normal
values. They advocated for a standardized gastric emptying protocol.
Box 10.2 Factors Other Than Medications That Affect
the Rate of Gastric Emptying
Meal content
Fat, protein, acid, osmolality
Volume
Weight
Caloric density
Particle size
Time of day
Patient position (standing, sitting, supine)
Gender
Metabolic state
Stress
Exercise
FIG. 10.5  (A) Normal liquid emptying. Sequential 1-minute images of
a 30-minute study after ingestion of 300 mL water with 100 μCi Tc-99m
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA). Distribution is uniform in
the stomach throughout the study. Hot spot in lower portion of the
stomach in second row of images is due to overlap with small bowel
activity. (B) Time–activity curve was generated by drawing a whole-
stomach region of interest (ROI). Emptying begins immediately. The
clearance pattern is monoexponential, with a half-emptying time of 15
minutes (normal <25).
Standardized Solid Gastric-Emptying Study
In 2008, an expert panel of gastroenterologists and nuclear medicine
physicians published Consensus Recommendations for Radionuclide
Gastric Emptying. The recommendations were based on a protocol
published by Tougas and colleagues in 2000 and are described in
detail in Box 10.5. The protocol was selected because it simplified the
procedure and because the normal values were considered valid
based on the large number of normal subjects studied (123). The meal
consists of an egg-substitute sandwich (4 oz egg white, equivalent to 2
whole eggs, 2 slices of bread), strawberry jam (30 g), and water (120
mL). The study requires 1-minute anterior and posterior images
acquired at four time points (immediately after meal ingestion and at
1, 2, and 4 hours) and calculation of the percent gastric retention at
each time point (Figs. 10.7–10.9).
The Tougas and colleagues publication found that infrequent
imaging (each hour) was as accurate as more frequent imaging (e.g.,
every 10 minutes). The rationale for a 4-hour study length was based
on several publications reporting a higher rate of detection of
gastroparesis at 4 hours compared with 2 hours. One investigation
reported that by extending the study from 2 to 4 hours, the number of
patients diagnosed with gastroparesis increased by 30%. Widespread
use of this protocol ensures that results are comparable between
institutions. Although a 4-hour study length might at first seem
demanding of clinic logistics, the standardized protocol can actually
improve patient flow. Multiple patients can be studied on one camera
in a single morning because total imaging time per patient is short.
Interpretation of Solid Gastric-Emptying Studies
A standardized gastric-emptying study is considered normal if the 2-
hour retention value is <60% retention (>40% emptying) and the 4-
hour value is <10% retention (>90% emptying; see Fig. 10.7). The
Tougas protocol used “percent retention” for the normal values. This
textbook prefers “gastric emptying.” Normal values are based on
ingestion of the entire meal. Ingestion of a smaller volume or less
eggs, bread, jam, or water will likely result in more rapid emptying
than if the entire meal was ingested. Normal values have not been
published for partial meal ingestion. Thus, if a patient cannot ingest
the whole meal, a statement should be added to the interpretation
(e.g., “Because the patient did not ingest the entire meal, the study
likely overestimates the rate of gastric emptying”).
Box 10.3 Gastric Stasis Syndromes—Causes and
Associations
Acute Gastroparesis—Potentially Reversible
Trauma
Postoperative ileus
Acute viral infections (e.g., gastroenteritis)
Hyperalimentation
Metabolic: Hyperglycemia, acidosis, uremia, hypokalemia,
hypercalcemia,
hepatic coma, myxedema
Physiological: Labyrinth stimulation, physical and mental
stress, gastric distention, increased intragastric pressure
Hormone increases: Gastrin, secretin, glucagon,
cholecystokinin, somatostatin, estrogen, progesterone
Chronic Gastroparesis
Anatomical
Gastric ulcer
Surgery, vagotomy
Pyloric hypertrophy
Postradiotherapy
Tumors
Diabetic gastroenteropathy
Functional
Nonulcer dyspepsia
Dermatomyositis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Amyloidosis
Hypothyroidism
Familial dysautonomia
Pernicious anemia
Tumor-associated gastroparesis
Progressive systemic sclerosis
Fabry disease
Box 10.4 Rapid Gastric Emptying—Causes
Prior surgery
Pyloroplasty
Hemigastrectomy (Billroth I, II)
Diseases
Duodenal ulcer
Gastrinoma (Zollinger–Ellison syndrome)
Hyperthyroidism
Diabetics (subgroup)
Hormones
Thyroxine
Motilin
Enterogastrone
Delayed emptying may occur at both 2 and 4 hours, only at 2 hours,
or only at 4 hours. All these patterns are abnormal and may be
causing the patient’s symptoms. The study can be discontinued early
(e.g., 2 hours) if the 4-hour normal values have been achieved. Some
clinics obtain a 3-hour image for this same reason, potentially
stopping the study early if there has been >90% emptying. Rapid
emptying has been defined as >70% emptying at 1 hour (see Fig. 10.9).
Table 10.1
Drugs That Delay Gastric Emptying
Drug Type
Specific Drugs
Cardiovascular
Calcium channel blockers (e.g., nifedipine) Beta-adrenergic antagonists
(e.g., propanolol)
Respiratory
Isoproterenol, theophylline
Gastrointestinal
Sucralfate, anticholinergics, tegaserod
Reproductive
Progesterone, oral contraceptives
Neuropsychiatric
Valium, Librium, Librax, Ativan, tricyclic antidepressants, levodopa
Phenothiazines (e.g., Thorazine)
Opiates
Alcohol and
nicotine
OxyContin, Percodan, Percocet
Two published large investigations have now reported that the
solid gastric-emptying study can be stopped at 2 hours in >50% of
patients because the 2-hour emptying value can predict 4-hour
emptying in those patients. If 2-hour gastric emptying is <35%, the
study can be interpreted as delayed emptying and stopped. If there is
>55% emptying, it can be interpreted as normal with high accuracy
and the study discontinued. If emptying is between those two values,
the study must be continued to 4 hours. The disadvantage of stopping
early is that it may be more difficult to compare subsequent follow-up
studies.
Alternative Solid Meals
Some patients cannot eat eggs for dietary or allergic reasons. Limited
data exist regarding normal values for alternative meals. One small
published study found that EnsurePlus (8 oz) had normal values that
did not differ significantly from the standardized meal, in spite of the
fact that it is a full liquid meal. A few other meals have been reported
with established normal values, but their contents and use are often
unique to their country of origin. One alternative meal with well-
established published normal values is a clear liquid-meal, described
in the following section. It can be used when the patient cannot ingest
the standard meal or EnsurePlus.
Liquid Gastric Emptying
Accepted teaching had long been that liquid gastric-emptying studies
were less sensitive for the detection of gastroparesis than solid studies,
that liquids become abnormal only in late stages of gastroparesis, and
that only a solid gastric-emptying study is necessary for clinical
purposes. However, no data had been published to support this, and
it has recently proven to be incorrect.
Two publications of 140 patients have compared clear-liquid
(water)-only emptying with the standardized solid gastric-emptying
meal in patients referred for suspected gastroparesis. More patients
had abnormal liquid than solid emptying. The most important finding
was that 25% of patients who had a normal solid study had delayed
liquid emptying. The pathophysiologic explanation for these findings
is unclear; however, it may help explain the patient’s symptoms.
Many of our patients are referred for both studies.
FIG. 10.6  Dual-isotope, dual-phase solid–liquid emptying.
Simultaneously ingested solid and liquid meals. The solid egg meal is
labeled with Tc-99m sulfur colloid (SC), and the liquid (water) meal is
mixed with In-111 diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA). One-
minute images were acquired. Time–activity curves were generated by
drawing regions of interest (ROIs) around the stomach. The solid and
liquid meals are distinguished by their different photopeaks. This study
shows very delayed solid emptying but normal liquid emptying.
Box 10.5 Standardized Gastric-Emptying Scintigraphy:
Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
The referring physician should decide which medications are
to be continued/discontinued before the study.
For diabetics, a fasting blood sugar (FBS) is recommended
before the study. The study should not be performed if the
FBS is >250 mg/dL.
Begin the study in the morning after an overnight fast. The
patient should be NPO for at least 6 hours before study.
Radiopharmaceutical and Meal
Tc-99m SC 1 mCi (37 MBq) bound to 4 oz egg substitute (Egg-
Beaters or generic egg-white equivalent) by microwaving or
scrambling after mixing egg with Tc-99m SC. Stir once or
twice while cooking until mixture reaches consistency of
omelet. Meal also consists of two slices of white bread,
strawberry jam (30 g), and water (120 mL).
Meal should be ingested within 10 to 15 minutes.
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large-field-of-view, dual-detector camera
Collimator: Low energy, parallel hole, high resolution or
general purpose
Tc-99m photopeak with a 20% window around 140 keV
photopeak
Computer setup: 1-minute frames (128 × 128 word mode
matrix)
Patient Position
Position patient either standing upright or lying supine, with
camera heads anterior and posterior. A single-head camera
can be used, acquiring an image first anteriorly, then
posteriorly.
Imaging Procedure
Acquire 1-minute frames at time 0 (immediately after
ingestion) and 1, 2, and 4 hours; 3-hour images are optional.
Processing
Draw region of interest for anterior and posterior stomach
views.
The geometrical mean of the anterior and posterior views is
determined at each time point. The percent retention or
gastric emptying is calculated at each imaging time point.
Decay correction is mandatory.
Interpretation
Delayed gastric emptying:
1 hour <10% emptying (>90% retention)
2 hours <40% emptying (>60% retention)
4 hours <90% emptying (>10% retention)
Rapid gastric emptying:
>70% emptying at 1 hour
>90% emptying at 2 hours
These values apply to the entire meal and are not valid
for different meals or incomplete ingestion of the
standard meal.
NPO, Nil per os; SC, sulfur colloid.
FIG. 10.7  Normal solid gastric emptying using the standardized
Tougas and colleagues protocol. (Left) Anterior (above) and posterior
(lower) images acquired simultaneously at time 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 hours.
Three-hour images are not required. Regions of interest are drawn
around the stomach. (Right) Time–activity curve and results (below).
The percent geometrical-mean-corrected gastric emptying result at 2
hours (112 minutes) is 44% (normal >40%), and at 4 hours (233
minutes), it is 90% (normal >90%).
The methodology for clear-liquid-only studies is detailed in Box
10.6. Because water empties rapidly, only a 30-minute study is
required (1-minute framing rate). Imaging begins immediately after
ingestion of the 300 mL water containing 1 mCi Tc-99m DTPA or Tc-
99m SC. Alternatively, the liquid and solid studies can be performed
sequentially on the same day, the clear liquid first with In-111 DTPA,
followed by the solid study labeled with Tc-99m SC. Simultaneous
evaluation of liquid and solid gastric emptying is possible and done at
some institutions using a dual-isotope acquisition technique (Fig.
10.10). Liquids radiolabeled with In-111 and ingested simultaneously
with the standardized Tc-99m-labeled solid meal empty slower than
liquid-only meals. The results of liquid-only and simultaneously
ingested liquids and solids correlate poorly and likely provide
different pathophysiologic information, although at present the reason
is uncertain. However, if abnormal, either may explain the patient’s
symptoms.
Quantification of Gastric Emptying
Various methods have been used over the years to quantify gastric-
emptying studies. However, investigations have found no clinical
advantage to more frequent imaging, other methods of quantification,
or calculation of the lag phase. Percent emptying is more accurate
than a rate of emptying (T1⁄2) with the standardized methodology
because there are only 4 to 5 data points. For the standardized solid
gastric-emptying study, a gastric region of interest (ROI) is drawn for
all anterior and posterior views at each time point (see Figs. 10.7–10.9).
Decay
and
attenuation
correction
is
required
for
accurate
quantification. The percent emptying is calculated at each time point.
FIG. 10.8  Delayed solid gastric emptying, using the standardized
protocol. At 2 hours (119 minutes), the percent gastric emptying is 22%
(normal >40%), and it is 60% at 4 hours (240 minutes; normal >90%).
Percent emptying = initial meal counts minus meal counts at 1, 2,
and 4 hours, each divided by initial meal counts, and all corrected for
attenuation and decay.
Attenuation Correction
Attenuation on gastric-emptying studies varies as the ingested meal
transits the stomach because stomach contents move from the
relatively posterior fundus to the more anterior antrum. With a single
gamma camera detector positioned anteriorly, the counts increase
during the early portion of the study in spite of the fact that all the
food is already in the stomach from time zero. This results in a
quantitative error. Attenuation correction is mandatory for correct
results (see Fig. 10.10). Otherwise, there may be an underestimation of
emptying, by as much as 10% to 30%. This is most pronounced in
obese patients; however, it also occurs in nonobese patients and is not
predictable between patients. The commonly used method for
attenuation correction is mathematical and involves calculating the
geometrical mean (square result of the product of the anterior and
posterior counts) at each time point.
FIG. 10.9  Rapid solid gastric emptying. At 1 hour (67 minutes), solid
gastric emptying is 88% (abnormal >70%). We also consider >90%
emptying at 2 hours to be rapid. The initial (time 0) region of interest
(ROI) includes abdominal activity. Because of the rapid emptying, there
was transit to the small bowel by the first image after ingestion. Thus,
for accurate calculation of the total ingested radiolabeled meal, the
large ROI is required for the initial image.
The left anterior oblique projection acquisition method is an
alternative approach that minimizes the effect of attenuation. The
study is acquired in this one projection. It compensates for attenuation
because the head of the gamma camera is roughly parallel to the
movement of the stomach contents, and thus the effect of attenuation
is minimized (Fig. 10.11). The advantages of this method are that it
requires only a single-headed camera, and no mathematical correction
is needed. Results correlate well with those of the geometrical mean
method, although the geometrical mean is more accurate and
preferable whenever possible (Fig. 10.12).
Correction for radioactive decay is mandatory for solid-meal studies
because of the short half-life of Tc-99m (6 hours) and the relatively
long duration of the study (4 hours). Down-scatter (In-111 into the Tc-
99m window) and up-scatter (Tc-99m into the In-111 171 keV
window) have been shown to be inconsequential if the administered
dose ratio of Tc-99m to In-111 is at least 4:1. Therefore, with standard
doses of 1 mCi Tc-99m and 100 to 200 μCi In-111, no correction is
necessary.
FIG. 10.10  Geometrical mean correction for attenuation. The anterior
detector time–activity curve (TAC) shows a rising curve before
emptying begins; however, all the food is in the stomach at time 0. The
posterior detector curve shows decreasing counts from time 0. The
geometrical-mean-corrected curve has a normal pattern with an initial
lag phase, then linear emptying.
Box 10.6 Liquid (Water ) Gastric Emptying: Summary
Protocol
Patient Preparation
Patient must fast for 4 to 6 hours before study.
Radiopharmaceutical and Meal
Tc-99m DTPA or Tc-99m SC, 1 mCi (37 MBq) in 300 mL water
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view, dual detector
Collimator: Low energy, parallel hole, high resolution or
general purpose
Tc-99m photopeak with a 20% window around 140 keV
Computer setup: 1-minute frames (128 × 128 word mode
matrix) × 30
Patient Position
Semiupright (30–45 degrees) on a hospital gurney with the
gamma camera placed in the left anterior oblique (LAO)
projection (makes it convenient for patient to ingest meal and
imaging be started promptly with the camera in the LAO
projection)
Imaging Procedure
Have patient swallow radiolabeled water. Immediately after
ingestion of the water, acquire 1-minute images for 30
minutes.
Processing
Draw region of interest (ROI) to outline stomach on all
images. Correct for decay.
Observe for ROI overlap of the stomach with small intestines.
If there is overlap, redraw ROI to exclude overlap.
Calculate a half-time of emptying and exponential T1⁄2.
Interpretation
Normal values: Less than 25 minutes
Use the half-time of emptying and/or exponential fit
depending on which best represents the apparent emptying.
DTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; NPO, nil per os; SC,
sulfur colloid.
Liquid Gastric Emptying Quantification
Attenuation correction is not necessary for liquid gastric emptying
because of its rapid transit. A gastric ROI is drawn, and a half-time of
emptying (time in minutes when counts become half of peak counts)
and/or an exponential mathematical fit T1⁄2 is calculated (Figs. 10.13
and 10.14). If small bowel activity moves into the ROI, it should be
excluded to correct for potential artificial delay. Normal values for a
clear-liquid (water) study alone have been well validated, with a half-
emptying time of <25 minutes. Adding salt, sugar, and so forth to the
clear liquid meal slows the rate of emptying.
Gastric Accommodation
Some patients with symptoms suggestive of gastroparesis are found
to have normal emptying. Some of these patients have a problem with
gastric accommodation, the ability of the gastric fundus to relax with
ingestion of a meal. Direct methods are insufficient and unpleasant for
clinical diagnosis. The radionuclide approach is straightforward and
simple for the patient. Tc-99m pertechnetate is injected intravenously.
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) of the
stomach is acquired. The patient ingests a meal, and then a second
SPECT is obtained. The stomach volume is calculated before and after
the meal. When ratios are compared with normal values, a diagnosis
can be made. This has been a diagnostic test at only a limited number
of centers around the world, but interest is increasing at other centers.
