Protein-Losing Enteropathy
Excessive protein loss through the gastrointestinal tract is associated
with a variety of diseases, including intestinal lymphangiectasia,
Crohn, Ménétrier, amyloidosis, and intestinal fistula. Tc-99m human
serum albumin, In-111 transferrin, and Tc-99m dextran have all been
reported useful for confirming protein-losing enteropathy. However,
these radiopharmaceuticals have not been approved for clinical use in
the United States. Case reports suggest that Tc-99m methylene
diphosphonate bone scans can also be confirmatory.
Peritoneal Scintigraphy
Peritoneal scintigraphy has been used for many years to evaluate
intraabdominal
distribution
for
planned
intraperitoneal
chemotherapy, to detect pleural-peritoneal communications (e.g., as
the cause for a pleural effusion), to assess peritoneal shunt patency,
and to evaluate complications of peritoneal dialysis. Scintigraphy can
diagnose pleural-peritoneal and scrotal-peritoneal communications,
hepatic hydrothorax, traumatic diaphragmatic rupture, loculation of
chemotherapy, peritoneal dialysis catheter flow, and obstructed
LeVeen or Denver peritoneal venous shunts. A protocol is described
in Box 10.17.
Box 10.17 Peritoneal Scintigraphy: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Place peritoneal catheter access.
Patients with minimal ascites may benefit from 500 mL of
saline or other fluid infused into the peritoneal cavity before
the study.
Patients on peritoneal dialysis should have 500 mL dialysate
infused before study. They should have 100 mL dialysate
with them for infusion after intraperitoneal injection of
radiotracer.
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m SC or Tc-99m MAA, 3 mCi (111 MBq)
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Energy window: 20% window centered at 140 keV
Collimator: Low energy, parallel hole, high resolution or
general purpose
Patient Position
Position patient supine under gamma camera.
Procedure
Check catheter patency before radiopharmaceutical injection.
Inject the radiopharmaceutical slowly 10 mL saline, followed
by fluid flush.
Imaging
Obtain anterior and lateral static images for 5 minutes (128 ×
128) or 500k counts.
Have patient ambulate if possible; alternatively, turn from
side to side.
Repeat imaging 1 hour after injection.
Interpretation
Radiopharmaceutical should normally distribute throughout
the peritoneal cavity, although often inhomogeneously.
MAA, Macroaggregated albumin; SC, sulfur colloid.
Methodology
Both Tc-99m SC and Tc-99m macroaggregated albumin (MAA) have
been used because they do not diffuse through peritoneal surfaces.
Both radiopharmaceuticals will stay below the diaphragm unless a
pleural-peritoneal connection or a patent shunt is present (see Fig.
10.39). For purposes of chemotherapy, it can confirm good
distribution throughout the peritoneum. SPECT may be helpful. To
judge peritoneal venous shunt patency, Tc-99m MAA has the
advantage of being taken up by the lungs, confirming patency.
Salivary Gland Scintigraphy
Xerostomia or dry mouth is due to salivary gland hypofunction
resulting in reduced saliva production. This causes problems in
tasting, chewing, and swallowing and can lead to tooth decay,
demineralization of teeth, tooth sensitivity, and oral infections.
Etiologies include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, medications,
radioactive iodine therapy, and Sjogren’ syndrome, an autoimmune
disorder in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and lupus.
Studies have shown that salivary gland dysfunction can be
confirmed by scintigraphy, using Tc-99m pertechnetate, which can
dynamically demonstrate abnormal or normal trapping and uptake
and discharge of saliva after stimulation with sour candy or lemon
juice.
Methodology
The fasting patient’s head is placed in the Waters projection (anterior
view with head tilted back 45 degrees), Tc-99m pertechnetate is
injected intravenously, and dynamic images are obtained (15-second
frames × 240; uptake phase). At frame 180 (end of uptake phase),
lemon juice is administered to stimulate saliva (discharge phase).
Normal quantitative values for uptake and discharge have been
published for the parotid and submandibular glands.
Dacryoscintigraphy
Dacryoscintigraphy is an old nuclear medicine procedure that is still
