sequential regions of the large bowel at specific time intervals over
several days (Fig. 10.24). This provides a semiquantitative assessment
of transit. However, it is demanding to draw all these regions and not
always reproducible. Alternatively, a method that calculates the
percent transit, similar to percent gastric emptying, at 24, 48, and 72
hours has been published and correlates well with the geometrical
center method (Figs. 10.25 and 10.26). The diffuse or regional nature of
delayed transit is then assessed by image analysis.
Whole-Gut Transit or Comprehensive
Gastrointestinal Transit Scintigraphy
Studies at several institutions now have protocols that assess the
upper and lower gastrointestinal tract transit as a single combined
sequential study. Solid and liquid gastric emptying and small and
large bowel transit are combined into a several-day study, using the
standardized solid egg meal for solid emptying with In-111 DTPA for
liquid emptying, and small and large intestinal transit. Esophageal
transit is also an easy add-on at the beginning of the study. Different
approaches have been used. A sample summarized protocol is
described in Box 10.9. Because the symptoms of upper and lower tract
disease may overlap, these studies allow for evaluation of the entire
gastrointestinal tract in one study over 72 hours (Fig. 10.27).
Furthermore, many of these patients have transit abnormalities in
more than one region of the gastrointestinal tract.
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Because acute gastrointestinal bleeding is potentially life threatening,
effective therapy requires prompt localization of the site of
hemorrhage. The history and physical examination can often
distinguish upper from lower tract bleeding (above or below the
ligament of Treitz). Upper-tract bleeding typically presents with
melena; bright red blood suggests a lower-tract origin. Hemorrhage
from the upper tract is often confirmed with gastric intu bation and
treated with flexible fiberoptic endoscopy. Lower-tract bleeding is
more challenging. Colonoscopy is difficult and of limited value during
active hemorrhage.
FIG. 10.21  Small and large bowel transit—normal small bowel transit;
delayed large bowel transit. Images start immediately after ingestion of
In-111-labeled water (left upper). Radiotracer can be seen in the
stomach. It promptly moves distally to the small bowel and then to the
region of the ileo-cecal valve, best demonstrated at 360 minutes, where
the region of interest (ROI) is drawn. At 24 hours, the radiotracer has
moved to the transverse colon and, to a lesser extent, the descending
colon. However, there is poor progression of transit at 48 and 72 hours,
which is delayed.
FIG. 10.22  Small bowel transit—normal. All anterior In-111 images
beginning with ingestion of radiolabeled water (immediate). The
stomach is seen as well as transit to the proximal small bowel. Then
images every 60 minutes until 6 hours (360 minutes). Finally, images
for colonic transit at 24, 48, and 72 hours. On sequential images, the
small bowel activity moves distally, localizing in the region of the
ileocecal valve and cecum. On the 360-minute image, a region of
interest (ROI) is drawn to include the distal ileum and cecum in both the
anterior and posterior views (posterior not shown). In this case it is
assumed that the inferior activity is the ileocecal valve and the superior
activity is the cecum. If activity had progressed further along the large
bowel, it would have been included. The amount of radiotracer that
reaches this region is an index of small intestinal transit. In this case it
was 69% or normal (>49% is normal). At 24 hours, the activity has
reached the transverse colon.
The radionuclide gastrointestinal bleeding study has been a
standard imaging test to detect gastrointestinal bleeding for decades,
first described in 1977. Only 2 to 3 mL of extravasated blood is
required for detection. Contrast computed tomography (CTA) is being
used at some centers as an alternative to the scintigraphic study
because of its ready availability and superior anatomical visualization
of the bleeding site. However, because gastrointestinal bleeding is
intermittent, the radionuclide study has the distinct advantage of
being able to image patients over time for up to 24 hours, not just
immediately after injection. Other disadvantages of CTA include the
need for intravenous contrast and a higher radiation dose to the
patient. The radionuclide study can detect bleeding rates of 0.1
mL/min, versus 0.3 mL/min for CTA or 1.0 mL/min for visceral
contrast angiography. An important reason for per forming
scintigraphy or CTA is to determine whether bleeding is active so that
invasive mesenteric angiography can be performed for therapeutic
intervention. Which approach is used depends on the local situation.
Lack of availability of nuclear studies in some hospitals on weekends
and or at night may give preference there to CTA.
FIG. 10.23  Small bowel transit—rapid. Anterior In-111 images after
ingestion of water with In-111 diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
(DTPA) and solid meal. In the top row, the stomach is almost
completely emptied by 180 minutes (first row, top right). There is rapid
transit through the small bowel so that by 240 minutes (second row, far
left), the activity is almost all in the ascending colon. The ileocecal
valve can be seen at its inferior aspect. By 24 hours (second row, far
right), the activity has almost all transited from ascending colon, with
some in the transverse colon, but most is in the descending colon and
rectosigmoid. The region of interest (ROI) was drawn at 360 minutes to
include all activity that has reached the ileocecal value or that which is
distal to it. In this case the entire image is included because it is
beyond the ileocecal valve. Small bowel transit was 100%. The 24-hour
image shows rapid large bowel transit, with most activity in the
descending colon and rectosigmoid.
FIG. 10.24  Geometrical center of colonic activity. The geometrical
center is a weighted average of the radioactivity counted over specific
segments of the colon, the ascending, transverse, descending, and
rectosigmoid colon. The geometrical center is calculated as the sum of
a weighted fraction represented by the counts in each region multiplied
by the region number divided by the total counts.
From Maurer AH, Camilleri M, Donohoe K, et al. The SNMMI and
EANM practice guideline for small-bowel and colon transit 1.0. J Nucl
Med. 2013;54:2004–2013.
Gastrointestinal Bleeding Scintigraphy
A method using Tc-99m SC was first described. After intravenous
injection, it is rapidly extracted by the liver, spleen, and marrow,
resulting in a high target-to-background ratio. The diagnosis was
made by observing intraabdominal extravasation at the site of
bleeding. The study was complete in 20 to 30 minutes. The
disadvantage of this method was that intermittent bleeding could be
missed during the short duration of the examination, similar to CTA.
Tc-99m serum albumen, a blood-pool agent, was subsequently used,
permitting a longer imaging time. In 1979, radiolabeling of the
patient’s red blood cells (RBCs) with Tc-99m pertechnetate was
introduced, and this continues to be the standard methodology used
today. Image quality is superior to Tc-99m serum albumen, and
imaging is possible for up to 24 hours. Advances and modifications in
instrumentation and methodology have enhanced detection.
Image quality is best when Tc-99m pertechnetate binds tightly to
the RBCs, with minimal residual free Tc-99m. Free Tc-99m is taken up
by the salivary glands and gastric mucosa and secreted into the
stomach, which then transits the gastrointestinal tract, potentially
complicating study interpretation (i.e., differentiating free Tc-99m
from active bleeding).
Before initiating a radionuclide GI bleeding study, it is helpful to
have a discussion with the referring clinician, angiographer, and/or
surgeon regarding the specific plan should the bleeding study be
positive. Contrast angiography should be performed promptly after a
positive radionuclide study to maximize the likelihood of detection
and treatment of the bleeding site.
RBC Radiolabeling
Tc-99m must be reduced before it can bind to the beta chain of
hemoglobin. Stannous ion (tin) in the form of stannous chloride or
stannous
pyrophosphate
is
used
for
this
purpose.
Several
methodologies have been utilized over the years for labeling of RBCs
with Tc-99m and are briefly described in Box 10.10.
FIG. 10.25  Large bowel transit—normal. Patient complains of
recurrent abdominal pain and constipation. Format and software are
similar to the gastric-emptying program. At 360 minutes (left upper
corner of anterior and posterior images), there is predominantly small
bowel activity. At 24 hours (right upper corner), activity has transited to
the ascending and, even more so, the transverse colon. By 48 hours,
activity is in the descending colon and rectosigmoid, but with much-
reduced overall activity from 24 hours. At 72 hours, most activity has
exited, with a small residual in the descending colon and rectosigmoid
(bottom right anterior and posterior images). Quantification is 47% at
24 hours, 81% at 48 hours, and 82% at 72 hours—all normal (see %
emptying column; normal is >14% at 24 hours, >41% at 48 hours,
>67% at 72 hours).
In Vivo Method
This was the original method described. Stannous pyrophosphate is
injected intravenously (IV), followed 15 minutes later by IV Tc-99m
pertechnetate. Both diffuse across the RBC membrane. The stannous
ion reduces the Tc-99m intracellularly, which then binds to
hemoglobin. Although a simple method, the labeling yield is at best
75%. Poor labeling can be exacerbated by various drugs and other
interactions (Table 10.2). This method is suboptimal by today’s
standards and used only for patients who cannot receive blood
products for religious reasons.
Modified In Vivo (In Vitro) Method
Stannous pyrophosphate is injected into the IV line. After 15 minutes,
3 to 5 mL of blood is withdrawn through the IV line into a lead-
shielded syringe that contains Tc-99m pertechnetate and a small
amount of anticoagulant. The syringe is left attached to the IV line
during the procedure so that it is a closed procedure. The syringe is
agitated gently for 10 minutes, and then its contents are reinjected into
the patient. Labeling efficiency is approximately 85%. Although it is
clearly superior to the in vivo method and acceptable for GI bleeding
studies, some drugs and other factors may still interfere with labeling
(see Table 10.2).
In Vitro Method
Originally, the in vitro method required drawing the patient’s blood,
centrifuging it to separate the RBCs from serum, radiolabeling the
RBCs, resuspending it in plasma, and then infusing it back into the
patient. Binding was excellent. However, today, a simple commercial
kit method (UltraTag) is available for this purpose. Labeling efficiency
is >97%. The method uses whole blood and does not require
centrifugation (Fig. 10.28). The patient’s blood is withdrawn and
added to a reaction vial contacting stannous chloride. The stannous
ion diffuses across the RBC membrane. After adding Tc-99m
pertechnetate, which also crosses the RBC membrane, it is reduced by
the stannous ion within the cell, allowing for binding to the RBC. The
mixture is allowed to incubate for 20 minutes before reinjection into
the patient. This approach is much less subject to drug-labeling
interference than the other methods. Although the in vivo and
modified in vivo methods both depend on biological clearance of
undesirable extracellular reduced stannous ion, the in vitro method
adds sodium hypochlorite to oxidize any extracellular stannous ion
and thus prevent extracellular reduction of Tc-99m pertechnetate,
ensuring only RBC cellular radiolabeling.
Image Acquisition
An imaging protocol is described (Box 10.11). Images are acquired in
the supine position, and the camera is placed anteriorly. Following IV
injection, a flow study may be acquired (1- to 3-second frames), then
1-minute dynamic images for up to 90 minutes. A static left lateral or
left anterior oblique view of the pelvis is obtained to help differentiate
activity in the bladder and genital area from blood in the rectum. If
the study is not diagnostic, delayed imaging can be acquired as
needed for up to 24 hours. Delayed images should always be acquired
at the same framing rate and for approximately 30 minutes in
duration.
FIG. 10.26  Large bowel transit—delayed. A 50-year-old female with
scleroderma, abdominal discomfort, and constipation. Esophageal
study showed delayed transit (not shown here). Gastric emptying was
normal. At 360 minutes (anterior image, upper left), activity is
predominantly in the small bowel, most prominently at the ileocecal
valve and cecum. By 24 hours (upper right), activity is in the ascending
and transverse colon. By 48 hours (lower left), activity is in the
transverse and descending colon. At 72 hours (lower right), the
distribution is mostly unchanged, although the activity has decreased
somewhat, and some has reached the rectosigmoid area (posterior
image, bottom right). However, quantification shows diffusely delayed
transit. This patient had minimal transit or percent emptying, even at 72
hours, 25% (frame/time 4). Normal transit (emptying) values are 14% at
24 hours, 41% by 48 hours, and 67% by 72 hours.
Box 10.9 Comprehensive Gastrointestinal Transit—
Protocol Summary
Esophageal transit:
Posterior view, standing
Computer setup: 0.5-second frames × 60
Practice 2 dry swallows initially; then swallow 15-cc
water bolus with 100 μCi.
Normal values: Percent transit (>83%), transit time (<15
seconds)
Liquid-only gastric emptying:
In-111 100 μCi in 300 cc water
Left anterior oblique (LAO) projection
1-minute frames × 30
Normal values: <25 minutes half-time (T1⁄2)
Liquid emptying simultaneous with solid gastric emptying:
In-111 100 μCi in 120 mL water
Tc-99m SC standardized egg-white sandwich, jam
Anterior/posterior imaging at 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 hours
Normal values: 39% at 1 hour
Small intestinal transit:
In-111 window: 1-minute anterior/posterior images at 5 and 6
hours
Calculation: Percent of activity that reaches ileal-cecal valve or
beyond at 360 minutes
Normal values: >50 at 6 hours
Large intestinal transit:
In-111 window: 5-minute anterior/posterior images at 24, 48,
72 hours
Calculation: % activity transited (gastric-emptying program)
from 360-minute baseline
Interpretation: Include image analysis to determine whether
regional or diffuse delay.
Normal values: 14% at 24 hours, 41% at 48 hours, 67% at
72 hours; rapid emptying >40% at 24 hours.
For further details of methodology, processing, and normal
values, refer to
Antoniou AJ, Ziessman HA, et al. Comprehensive radionuclide
esophago-gastrointestinal transit: methodology, normal values, and
initial clinical experience. J Nucl Med. 2015;56:721–727.
SC, Sulfur colloid.
FIG. 10.27  Comprehensive gastrointestinal (GI) transit. A 35-year-old
female with symptoms of postprandial nausea, abdominal discomfort,
and constipation. Anterior In-111 images after ingestion of combined
soli–liquid meal. The esophageal and liquid and solid gastric-emptying
portions of the study are not shown. (Upper row) In-111 activity in the
stomach (first image) transits normally to the small bowel over 180
minutes. (Second row) The majority of tracer is at the ileocecal valve by
240 minutes (second row, left), which is normal small bowel transit. By
24 hours, activity is in the ascending and transverse colon. No change
is seen at 48 hours, and there is very delayed transit at 72 hours, never
reaching the descending colon.
Box 10.10 Methods of Tc-99m Red Blood Cell (RBC)
Labeling
In Vivo Method (Labeling Efficiency, 75–80%)
1. Inject stannous pyrophosphate.
2. Wait 10 to 20 minutes.
3. Inject Tc-99m sodium pertechnetate.
Modified In Vivo (In Vitro) Method (Labeling
Efficiency, 85–90%)
1. Inject stannous pyrophosphate.
2. Wait 10 to 20 minutes.
3. Withdraw 5 to 8 mL of blood into shielded syringe with Tc-
99m.
4. Gently agitate syringe contents for 10 minutes at room
temperature.
In Vitro Commercial Kit (UltraTag; Labeling
Efficiency, >97%)
1. Add 1 to 3 mL of blood (heparin or acid citrate dextrose as
anticoagulant) to reagent vial (50–100 μg stannous chloride,
3.67 mg Na citrate) and mix. Allow 5 minutes to react.
2. Add syringe 1 contents (0.6 mg sodium hypochlorite) and mix
by inverting 4 to 5 times.
3. Add contents of syringe 2 (8.7 mg citric acid, 32.5 mg Na
citrate, dextrose) and mix.
4. Add Tc-99m 10 to 100 mCi (370–3700 MBq) to reaction vial.
5. Mix and allow to react for 20 minutes, with occasional mixing.
Table 10.2
Causes of Poor Tc-99m Red Blood Cell Labeling
Drug–drug interactions
Heparin, doxorubicin, methyldopa, hydralazine, contrast media,
quinidine
Circulating antibodies
Prior transfusion, transplantation, some antibiotics
Too little stannous ion
Insufficient to reduce Tc (VII)
Too much stannous ion
Reduction of Tc (VII) outside of red blood cell before cell labeling
Carrier Tc-99
Buildup of Tc-99m in the Mo-99/Tc-99m generator due to long
interval between elutions
Too short an interval for
“tinning”
Not enough time for stannous ion to penetrate the red blood cells
before addition of Tc-99m
Too short an incubation
time
Not enough time for reduction of Tc (VII)
Image Interpretation
The purpose of the radionuclide bleeding study is (1) to determine
whether hemorrhage is active, (2) to estimate the approximate rate of
bleeding, and (3) to determinate the site of bleeding. If the study is
negative, angiography is also likely to be negative because of the
greater sensitivity of the radionuclide study. If scintigraphy is
positive, it should be promptly followed by angiography. Because
intestinal anatomy is complex due to its embryological development
(Fig. 10.29) and because scintigraphic image resolution is limited, all
sequential 1-minute frames should be carefully reviewed to observe
the path of intestinal blood flow to determine with certainty the site of
bleeding. Prematurely stopping the study before that is a mistake,
unless the patient is unstable and needs to be sent immediately to
angiography. Displaying the frames dynamically can help pinpoint
the vascular origin of the bleed.
Excessive gastric, thyroid, and soft tissue background activity
suggests poor labeling. A routine anterior image of the neck and
abdomen can confirm free Tc-99m pertechnetate by noting uptake in
the thyroid, salivary glands, and stomach. The iodine from a recent
contrast study can block thyroid uptake, but salivary uptake is usually
seen. Bladder filling with Tc-99m pertechnetate or other reduced Tc-
99m compound may make it difficult to see a rectal bleed in the
anterior view. The left lateral or left anterior oblique (LAO) view can
help to confirm or exclude blood in the rectum.
FIG. 10.28  In vitro red blood cell (RBC) labeling with Tc-99m
(UltraTag). The kit consists of three nonradioactive components: a 10-
mL vial of stannous chloride; syringe 1 containing sodium hypochlorite
(to oxidize the extracellular stannous ion to prevent extracellular
reduction of Tc-99m pertechnetate); and syringe 2 containing citric
acid, sodium citrate, and dextrose (ACD). Labeling efficiency is >97%.
Flow Phase
Rapid hemorrhage may rarely be seen during this phase. However, it
is probably most helpful when bleeding is not active, such as for
detection of a vascular blush, which at times can be seen with
angiodysplasia, arteriovenous (AV) malformations, or tumor, at a time
when there is no active bleeding (Fig. 10.30). The flow study on
occasion may also help with image interpretation (e.g., defining a
vascular lesion, aneurysmal vessels, kidneys, or uterus).
Dynamic Phase
Approximately 80% of bleeding sites are detected during the initial
90-minute study (0.5- to 1.0-minute frames; Figs. 10.31–10.36). Because
bleeding is intermittent, further delayed imaging may be necessary to
confirm the site and/or detect the other 20% of bleeding sites. On
occasion, SPECT with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) can
sometimes be helpful in confirming the site of bleeding.
Delayed Imaging
Further imaging can be obtained as needed for up to 24 hours. Images
should always be dynamic over 20 to 30 minutes.
Interpretative Criteria
Specific diagnostic criteria should be used to diagnose active bleeding
and its site of origin (Box 10.12). The radiotracer activity must (1) first
appear where there was none before, (2) then increase over time, and
(3) move in a pattern consistent with intestinal anatomy, antegrade
and/or retrograde. Fixed nonmoving activity should not be diagnosed
as an active bleeding site and is likely due to a vascular structure (e.g.,
hemangioma, accessory spleen, ectopic kidney; Box 10.13). Large
intestinal bleeds typically appear as curvilinear activity moving along
the periphery of the abdomen in the expected anatomical pattern. The
small bowel is more centrally located, and blood moves rapidly
through its looping (serpiginous) segments.
Box 10.11 Gastrointestinal Bleeding—Tc-99m Red
Blood Cell (RBC) Scintigraphy: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
None
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m-labeled RBCs; in vitro kit labeling method (UltraTag)
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Collimator: High resolution, parallel hole
Computer setup: 1-second frames for 60 seconds; 1-minute
frames for 90 minutes
As needed up to 24 hours: Delayed image sequence should be
acquired as 1-minute frames for 30 minutes.
Patient Position
Supine; anterior imaging, with abdomen and pelvis in field of
view
Imaging Procedure
Inject patient’s Tc-99m-labeled erythrocytes intravenously.
Acquire 1-second flow images × 60, followed by 1-minute
images for 90 minutes.
Acquire image of neck for thyroid and salivary uptake and
left lateral/left anterior oblique (LAO) view of pelvis.
If study is negative or bleeding is recurrent, may repeat with
30-minute acquisitions (1-minute frame × 30).
FIG. 10.29  The embryological development of the gastrointestinal
tract explains its ultimate anatomical configuration. The diagram relates
this anatomy to its arterial supply (celiac, superior mesenteric, and
inferior mesenteric arteries).
FIG. 10.30  Utility of blood flow on a gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding
study. Increased blood flow (3-second frames) to the region of the right
upper quadrant (arrowhead). The subsequent 90-minute Tc-99m red
blood cell (RBC) study (1-minute frames) was negative, as was a
second acquisition for 30 minutes at 3 hours. Colonoscopy diagnosed
angiodysplasia in the ascending colon.
FIG. 10.31  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC): Small bowel bleed.
Sequential 1-minute images. (Second row, left image) New focal
activity just below the liver, likely proximal small bowel. With time, the
activity transverses the proximal and ultimately more distal small
intestines. This was determined to be a duodenal ulcer bleed on
endoscopy.
Scintigraphy has limitations in precise anatomical localization;
however, a bleeding site can usually be localized to the proximal or
distal small bowel, cecum, ascending colon, hepatic flexure, transverse
colon, splenic flexure, descending colon, sigmoid colon, or rectum.
This information can assist the angiographer in deciding which vessel
(celiac, superior mesenteric, or inferior mesenteric artery) to inject first
with contrast.
Although the radionuclide bleeding study is rarely requested for
upper gastrointestinal bleeding because endoscopy is usually
diagnostic, occasionally upper-tract bleeding will be seen on a study
ordered for a suspected lower GI bleed. Gastric hemorrhage must be
differentiated from free Tc-99m pertechnetate. With both, gastric
activity will transit to the small bowel and eventually the large bowel.
An image of the neck can help confirm free Tc-99m pertechnetate by
the presence of salivary and thyroid gland uptake. A recent
intravenous contrast study may prevent thyroid uptake.
Interpretive Pitfalls
Interpretive pitfalls are normal, technical, or pathological findings that
might be misinterpreted as active hemorrhage (see Box 10.13). The
presence of free Tc-99m pertechnetate caused by poor radiolabeling or
dissociation of the label in vivo is a technical pitfall. A not uncommon
imaging interpretive pitfall is activity in the genitourinary tract.
Urinary renal pelvic or ureteral activity resulting from free
pertechnetate or another Tc-99m labeled reduced compound might be
wrongly thought to be active bleeding because of its movement.
Upright positioning and oblique or posterior views can be helpful to
clarify the source of activity.
Intraluminal intestinal radioactivity first detected on delayed static
images can pose a diagnostic dilemma. Blood in the colon or rectum
may have originated from anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract, and
one should be cautious in diagnosing its site of origin on a single
image. Misinterpretation can best be avoided by acquiring dynamic 1-
minute images for at least 30 minutes whenever delayed imaging is
required. An active bleeding site should only be diagnosed by using
the criteria already described (i.e., new and increasing activity moving
in a pattern consistent with intestinal transit; see Box 10.12).
Background subtraction may be helpful.
FIG. 10.32  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC): Bleeding from cecum. (A)
Focal low-intensity uptake is first seen on the first image, which
increases over time and appears to be in the region of the cecum. The
third row of images shows transit to the hepatic flexure. (B) Further
imaging shows transit to the transverse colon.
FIG. 10.33  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC): Sigmoid bleed. (First row):
No active bleeding. (Second row) Increasing activity is seen in the
region of the sigmoid colon. (Third row) Activity is seen in the rectum
just below the medial aspect of sigmoid activity. The bladder would be
higher.
FIG. 10.34  Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC): Rectal bleed. (A) The last
three 1-minute images show increasing activity just superior and to the
left of the bladder (arrowhead), very suggestive of rectosigmoid colon
bleed. (B) Left lateral view confirms that blood is in the rectum (arrow).
FIG. 10.35  Potential false positive for active gastrointestinal bleeding.
(A) Summed images every 10 minutes show activity in the lower middle
and left pelvic region that moves over time. (B) Anterior (left) and left
anterior oblique (LAO; right) images acquired at 90 minutes show the
activity to be penile blood pool (arrowhead). Left lateral or LAO views
should be obtained when pelvic activity is seen, to separate rectal,
bladder, and penile activity.
Other potential pitfalls include abdominal varices, hemangiomas,
accessory spleen, arterial grafts, aneurysms, ectopic kidneys, and renal
transplants, all of which show fixed and nonmoving activity (see Fig.
10.35). Activity clearing through the hepatobiliary system and
gallbladder can be caused by hemobilia; however, patients with renal
failure may have gallbladder visualization as a result of radiolabeled
fragmented heme breakdown products (porphyrins).
Accuracy
Many investigations have reported very good accuracy for the
radionuclide GI bleeding study; however, some have not found it so
helpful (Table 10.3), and thus controversy exists regarding its clinical
utility.
Reasons
for
the
discrepancy
are
likely
several.
Misinterpretation, especially in the older literature, may have been
due to now-outdated methodology (e.g., infrequent image acquisition,
static rather than dynamic imaging, pitfalls in interpretation already
described, and incorrect localization based on single delayed images).
An additional issue is whether the bleeding studies were performed
early in the course of a workup or only after extended hospitalization
and negative clinical workup. The radionuclide study has the highest
yield when performed as soon as possible after arrival in the
emergency room or on hospital admission.
The gold standard used in some published investigations is a
potential problem for determining accuracy. Of patients who have
visceral angiography, only the positive studies are diagnostic. False
negatives may occur because the patient is not actively bleeding at the
time of the study, which is not uncommon if not performed promptly
after the scintigraphic study. Bleeding is intermittent. Colonoscopy is
often not possible during active bleeding, but commonly patients are
put to rest and prepped for colonoscopy the next day. This is time lost
for the GI bleeding study. Detection of pathological abnormalities on
radiographic studies or colonoscopy after bleeding has ceased does
not necessarily indicate that they were the source of bleeding.
FIG. 10.36  Aortic aneurysm and acute bleed. (A) Blood-flow study
demonstrates aortic flow and distal aorta fusiform configuration. (B) In
1-minute dynamic summed images over 90 minutes, an acute bleed
originates in the midpelvic region, moving with time to the ascending
and transverse colon, consistent with cecal bleeding. The abdominal
aortic aneurysm shows persistent activity throughout the study. This
fixed activity of an aortic aneurysm is unrelated to the active bleed.
Box 10.12 Diagnostic Criteria for Diagnosis of Active
Bleeding Site With Tc-99m Red Blood Cells (RBCs)
Focal activity appears where none was initially.
Radioactivity increases over time.
Movement of activity conforms to intestinal anatomy.
Movement may be antegrade and/or retrograde.
Box 10.13 Pitfalls in Interpretation of Tc-99m Red
Blood Cell (RBC) Scintigraphy for Gastrointestinal
(GI) Bleeding
Common
Gastrointestinal (free Tc-99m pertechnetate): stomach, small
and large intestine
Genitourinary
Pelvic kidney
Ectopic kidney
Renal pelvic activity
Ureter
Bladder
Uterine blush
Penis
