background activity can also be drawn as smaller crescents below or
laterally along the cortex.
During the clearance phase, activity moves from the cortex into the
collecting system and is excreted into the bladder, with the TAC
showing an exponential decline nearly to baseline by the end of the
acquisition. In addition to slow uptake, when function is poor, the
kidney may gradually accumulate activity over time with poor
cortical washout, so-called cortical retention (Fig. 11.13). Cortical
retention is a nonspecific finding that can be seen from multiple
causes of acute and chronic renal failure (Box 11.3).
Normally, the calyces and pelvis usually begin filling by 3 minutes
and ureters or bladder by 5 to 6 minutes, with the collecting-system
activity decreasing through the final clearance phase. In some healthy
subjects, pooling of activity in the dependent calyces can result in
focal hot spots that usually clear at least partially over time.
Hydronephrosis shows delayed or absent clearance, and the collecting
system may appear enlarged, although areas with increased activity
appear larger than they actually are, so caution must be taken when
trying to gauge size.
Given the variability of peristalsis and other factors, the normal
ureter may or may not be seen and may appear as a thin column of
transient activity. Dilated ureters may visibly accumulate activity.
Care must be taken in diagnosing reflux into the ureters. Indirect
determination of reflux can be done when ureteral activity persists or
recurs after the kidneys have cleared. However, reflux is best detected
on a direct vesicoureterogram (VCUG) with activity introduced
directly into the bladder via a catheter.
The prevoid and postvoid bladder images help evaluate emptying
and postvoid residual. In infants and small children, the bladder may
appear quite large and higher in position than might be expected
when looking at the outline of the child’s body on the image.
Clinical Applications of Renal Scintigraphy
Urinary Tract Obstruction
Background
Obstruction can lead to recurrent infection, diminished function,
progressive loss of nephrons, and parenchymal atrophy. Patients may
present with pain, hematuria, or decreased function, or signs of
obstruction may be discovered in the asymptomatic patient or neonate
by ultrasound. Box 11.4 lists potential causes of hydronephrosis and
obstruction—conditions for which furosemide (Lasix) renography is
indicated. Within hours of onset, renal blood flow, glomerular
filtration, and renal output are decreased. If a high-grade obstruction
is corrected promptly, function can recover fully; however, if it is left
uncorrected for more than a week, only partial recovery is expected.
FIG. 11.10  Normal renogram time activity curve (left) can be divided
into phases. Right, Initial blood flow (30–60 seconds). 2, Cortical
uptake phase (normally 1–3 minutes). 3, Clearance phase representing
cortical excretion and collecting-system clearance.
FIG. 11.11  Differential function and viability. (A) Tc-99m MAG3
images and time–activity curve (B) acquired shortly after injury from a
car accident show little function in the right kidney (calculated at 6%).
(C) Postcontrast computed tomography (CT) on admission revealed
flow to the kidney but severe cortical injury. (D) 3 months later, a
noncontrast CT shows chronic effects with the right kidney, now small
and scarred.
FIG. 11.12  Renal blood-flow analysis. (A) Sequential 2-second frames
show moderately delayed and decreased blood flow to the right kidney
(arrowhead). (B) Sixty-second time–activity curves confirm the imaging
findings. Initial upslope of the right kidney (R) is delayed compared with
the aorta (A) and left kidney (L).
Ultrasound is a sensitive method of identifying hydronephrosis but
may not reliably indicate whether the dilation is due to mechanical
obstruction or merely nonobstructive hydronephrosis (such as from
reflux, primary megaureter, or a previous obstruction that has been
relieved). CT and more invasive tests such as retrograde pyelography
can often identify the cause of an obstructed system. However, the
etiology of the hydronephrosis may not be evident.
The loop diuretic furosemide inhibits sodium and chloride
reabsorption, markedly increasing dilute urine flow and renal
washout. If mechanical obstruction is present, the narrowed lumen
prevents augmented washout; prolonged retention of tracer is seen
and can be measured with a Tc-99m MAG3 or Tc-99m DTPA nuclear
medicine scan. This can help differentiate if dilation is the result of
ongoing obstruction or prior obstruction, quantitate function to
determine whether the kidney is salvageable were the obstruction
corrected, and assess effects of therapy, helping plan safe stent
removal or additional procedures. Additionally, some cases of partial
ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction benefit from periodic
monitoring to determine whether critical obstruction is developing,
requiring intervention.
Methods
Numerous diuretic renography protocols exist, although many areas
have been agreed on. An example protocol is listed in Box 11.5. The
40-mg furosemide dose (80 mg or more when function is decreased) is
injected slowly over 1 to 2 minutes, with an onset of action within 30
to 60 seconds and a maximal effect at 15 minutes. The time of diuretic
administration varies at different centers. A commonly used method
is the F + 20 furosemide protocol, giving furosemide 20 minutes after
the radiotracer, allowing an identifiable of washout of pooled activity.
However, earlier administration, giving furosemide at the same time
(F + 0) as or 15 minutes before (F-15) the radiopharmaceutical may be
useful in cases with diminished renal function because this gives
additional time for the diuretic effect to occur, allowing radiotracer
washout. Additionally, one study has shown that giving a diuretic at
10 minutes and imaging the patient in an upright position provides
similarly accurate results. Alternatively, some centers still follow older
methods and divide the examination into two parts, the first 30
minutes as described previously, then an additional 30-minute
acquisition after Lasix injection.
Interpretation
Diuretic renography interpretation can be complex (Box 11.6). A
dilated nonobstructed system responds to furosemide infusion and
causes prompt clearance, in a linear or exponential manner, as a result
of increased dilute urine flow (Fig. 11.14). An obstructed system, on
the other hand, will not respond to the diuretic challenge; activity will
continue to accumulate or sometimes stay at a plateau (Fig. 11.15).
Acute high-grade obstruction often shows uptake but no excretion,
which can look similar to severe cortical retention. Different patterns
can be seen in response to furosemide (Fig. 11.16). In very distended
systems, delayed washout may be seen regardless of whether
obstruction is present. An “indeterminate” clearance pattern is seen
with little change on the images or TAC (see Fig. 11.16D).
FIG. 11.13  Acute and chronic renal failure. (A) Tc-99m MAG3 images
in a patient with newly elevated creatinine initially showed slow uptake
and clearance with bilateral cortical retention (top row). It is not
possible to predict whether any improvement can be expected. No
improvement occurred 6 months later, and uptake slightly diminished
as function gradually worsened (bottom row). (B) The time–activity
curves show poor uptake and clearance with a slight worsening
between the two studies, with a more gradually rising slope on the
right. In long-standing renal failure, uptake tends to diminish over time,
with kidneys appearing small, scarred, and less intense.
FIG. 11.14  Diuretic renography with no obstruction. A right pelvic
renal transplant was noted to have new hydronephrosis on ultrasound.
The Tc-99m MAG3 diuretic examination (A) and time–activity curves
(B) with furosemide given at 10 minutes shows the prominent collecting
system clearing promptly without evidence of obstruction.
FIG. 11.15  Hydronephrosis from obstruction. (A) An enlarged left
collecting system progressively fills, with no clearance in response to
Lasix given at 10 minutes, unlike the normal right kidney. The visual
impression of obstruction is confirmed by the time–activity curve (B).
After left ureteropelvic junction obstruction correction in the same
patient, Tc-99m MAGs Lasix images (C) and TAC (D) show residual
hydronephrosis but correction of the obstruction.
Box 11.3 Causes of Cortical Retention
Native Kidneys
Severe obstruction
Chronic medical renal disease
Ischemia
Venous thrombosis
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
Dehydration
Renal Transplants
Posttransplant delayed graft function/ATN
Acute rejection
Immunosuppressive drug toxicity
Drug toxicity
Chronic rejection
Box 11.4 Indications for Diuretic Renography
Hydronephrosis
Unexplained
Obstructing pelvic mass
Obstructing calculi: current, prior
Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction
Ileal loop diversion
Megaureter: obstructive, nonobstructive, refluxing
Horseshoe kidney
Polycystic kidney
Prune-belly syndrome
Ectopic ureterocele
Urethral valves
Postoperative states
Pyeloplasty
Ureteral reimplantation
Urinary diversion
Renal transplant ureteral obstruction
Box 11.5 Diuretic Renography Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
Hydration should be as described in dynamic renography
protocol.
Place Foley catheter in children; consider in adults with
bladder outlet issues.
If not catheterized, complete bladder emptying before diuretic
injection.
Furosemide (Lasix)
Children: 1 mg/kg to maximum 40 mg (may require more in
severe azotemia)
Adults: 40 mg intravenous (IV) normal creatinine level, 80 to
100 mg for elevated creatinine
Timing: 20 minutes after injection; consider 15 minutes before
(F-15) or with Tc-99m MAG3 (F + 0) in azotemia
Imaging Procedure
Inject Tc-99m MAG 3 to 5 mCi (111–185 MBq).
Acquire study for 20 minutes as per the renal scan protocol.
Slowly infuse furosemide intravenously over 60 seconds.
Continue imaging 10 to 30 minutes.
Obtain prevoid and postvoid images.
Image Processing
On computer, draw region of interest around entire kidney
and pelvis.
Generate time–activity curves.
Calculate a half-emptying time or fitted half-time.
Box 11.6 Factors Affecting Diuretic Renography
Interpretation
Causes of diminished response to furosemide:
Dehydration
Pressure from distended bladder
Massive hydronephrosis
Azotemia
In infants: insufficient time for diuretic action
Diuretic given at T0 or before Tc-99m MAG3
Acts steadily, does not give visible drop in curve
T1⁄2 values not applicable
Administration at T(0) or T(-15) useful with azotemia
Uteropelvic junction may present with partial obstruction, but
critical blockage is often detected on serial examinations.
Use of diuretics in patients with spinal cord injury can result
in dangerous hypotension.
Postoperative obstruction in renal transplants can be best
assessed with diuretic scans.
External fluid collections
Anastomotic swelling or stricture follow-up
Hydronephrosis
Diuretic response may also be diminished with azotemia, so an
increased furosemide dose or early diuretic infusion (F-15) may be
used. However, even with additional modifications, it may not be
possible to induce sufficient diuresis to exclude obstruction in a
poorly functioning kidney (Figs. 11.17 and 11.18). Although elevated
serum creatinine may indicate severe renal dysfunction, GFR or ERPF
may be more accurate, especially if the lesion is unilateral. If the GFR
on the affected side is less than 15 mL/min, diuretic renography is
unreliable.
At times, it is useful to quantitate collecting-system clearance half-
time or washout half-time (T1⁄2), the length of time it takes to reach
