half-peak after the diuretic. Generally, a T1⁄2 less than 10 minutes
indicates there is no significant obstruction present, whereas values
greater than 20 minutes are considered obstructed. Values between 10
and 20 minutes fall in a gray zone or indeterminate range. When a
collecting system is very large, it may clear abnormally slowly even if
not obstructed.
Renovascular Hypertension
Significant renal artery stenosis (RAS) causes glomerular perfusion
pressure to drop, and as the GFR falls, renin secretion from the renal
juxtaglomerular apparatus is stimulated, leading to angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) activation of the powerful vasoconstrictor
angiotensin II. The resulting constriction raises blood pressure
peripherally, including the efferent arterioles of the glomerulus,
raising filtration pressure and thus maintaining GFR (Fig. 11.19).
Although more than 90% of patients with hypertension have
essential hypertension, renovascular hypertension (RVH) from RAS is
common among patients who have a correctable cause. Early
intervention decreases arteriolar damage and glomerulosclerosis,
increasing the chance for cure. However, in many cases, treating the
stenosis does not cure the patient. ACE inhibitor (ACEI) renography
(or “captopril scan”) is an accurate method to diagnosis reversible
RVH. ACEIs block conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II (Fig.
11.20). This causes patients with RVH who rely on the compensatory
mechanism to show a drop in GFR and renal clearance, which can be
imaged. The ACEI renal scan should be considered in scenarios such
as those listed in Box 11.7.
FIG. 11.16  Diuresis time–activity curve (TAC) examples of Lasix
effects. Arrows mark Lasix injection. (A) Normal kidney response to
diuretic. The short plateau before further emptying represents diuretic-
induced flow just before rapid clearance. (B) Dilated nonobstructed
kidney. The slowly rising curve represents progressive pelvocaliceal
filling. With a diuretic, rapid clearance occurs. (C) Obstructed kidney.
The diuretic has no effect on the abnormal TAC. (D) Indeterminate
response. After the diuretic, very slow partial clearance is seen. This
can be the result of an extremely distended system, but obstruction is
not excluded.
Imaging Protocol
Patient preparation involves discontinuation of all ACEIs before the
study or sensitivity for the diagnosis of RVH is reduced by
approximately 15%. Stopping angiotensin receptor blockers and
halting calcium channel blockers also should be considered. Care
must be taken with other diuretics to prevent dehydration. Otherwise,
most antihypertensive agents have little or no effect on the results.
A decision must be made as to which imaging protocol to use. Oral
captopril requires an hour delay for absorption but does not require
intravenous (IV) access and is usually cheaper than enalapril. A 1-day
protocol can be performed by first doing a baseline examination using
a low dose of 1 mCi (37 MBq) of Tc-99m MAG3 radiopharmaceutical
followed by a post-ACEI study using 5 mCi (185 MBq) of Tc-99m
MAG3. However, doing the pre- and post-examinations on separate
days, at least 24 hours apart, makes interpretation easier, with the
baseline examination performed only on those with an abnormal
ACEI test. An example protocol is listed in Box 11.8.
Although a drop in blood pressure is expected after ACEI
administration, blood pressure should be monitored, making sure the
patient is stable.
Image Interpretation
In patients with renin-dependent RVH, decreased blood flow to the
affected kidney is not seen, even after giving an ACEI. If decreased
perfusion is seen, it is usually related to decreased tissue volume.
Instead, effects from stenotic lesions are primarily manifested on the
scan as cortical retention (cortical staining) from delayed Tc-99m
MAG3 washout (Fig. 11.21). If the radiopharmaceutical used is Tc-99m
DTPA, a positive scan will show a dramatic decrease in uptake and
overall function instead (Fig. 11.22). Other signs have been reported
but are less common or specific. Comparison to a baseline scan is
needed to be sure the abnormal scan is an acute result of ACEI effects
rather than chronic change from some other condition.
If the protocol has been properly followed, the sensitivity and
specificity of ACEI renography are reportedly 90% and 95%,
respectively. In general, ACEI renography is accurate when the serum
creatinine is normal or only mildly elevated (creatinine < 1.7 mg/dL).
False-positive results are rare but have been reported in patients on
calcium channel blockers. If bilateral cortical retention is seen, it is
likely artifact from dehydration or hypotension and not bilateral renal
artery stenosis. Among patients with bilateral cortical retention
undergoing arteriogram, roughly two-thirds had no significant
stenosis (Fig. 11.23).
FIG. 11.17  Decreased function resulting from high-grade obstruction.
(A) Dynamic sequential Tc-99m MAG3 images performed 15 minutes
after giving Lasix reveal normal function on the right. The left kidney
shows only a thin rim of cortex with delayed uptake, a photopenic
hydronephrotic collecting system, and continual collecting-system filling
without washout consistent with obstruction. (B) Findings are confirmed
on the time–activity curve.
FIG. 11.18  Impact of ongoing obstruction. Untreated high-grade right-
sided vesicoureteral junction obstruction secondary to tumor results in
dilation of the central collecting system and a thin cortex functioning
poorly, with slow uptake.
FIG. 11.19  Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone pathways and site of
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor captopril action.
