Urinary Tract
Over the years, radiopharmaceuticals and scintigraphic techniques
have been developed to assess different aspects of renal function.
Using a variety of radiopharmaceuticals, these techniques can answer
clinical
questions
not
possible
with
ultrasound,
computed
tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Some
indications for nuclear scintigraphy are listed in Box 11.1. These
include problem-solving and quantification applications that break
down roughly into issues related to function and excretion and those
related to cortical abnormalities.
Renal Anatomy and Physiology
It is useful to know the anatomy and physiology of the kidney and
urinary tract in order to best understand and interpret the functions
and disease processes that affect various parts of the kidney (Fig.
11.1). The outer renal cortex contains the proximal convoluted tubules
as well as the basic functional unit of the kidney, the nephron.
Nephrons consist of glomeruli, the terminal capillary tufts from the
renal arterial system, surrounded by the Bowman’s capsule formed by
the proximal end of the renal tubule. The more central medullary
portion of the kidney contains the renal pyramids, collecting tubules,
and the loops of Henle. At the apex of the pyramids, papillae drain
into the renal calyces of the collecting system.
Normally, the kidneys receive 20% of cardiac output, with renal
plasma flow (RPF) averaging 600 mL/min. The kidneys clear waste
products from the plasma, which can be calculated as follows:
Box 11.1 Clinical Indications for Urinary Tract
Scintigraphy
Differential function quantification
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) calculation
Hydronephrosis versus obstruction (ureteropelvic junction
[UPJ], ureteral)
Renal artery stenosis
Monitoring partial UPJ obstruction
Assessing effects of corrective surgeries
Renal transplant rejection
Acute renal failure
Surgical and trauma complications: leak, vascular occlusion,
etc.
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal artery occlusion
Pyelonephritis
Renal mass
Vesicoureteral reflux
Bladder residual volume (postvoid retention) calculation
Plasma clearance occurs by both glomerular filtration and tubular
secretion (Fig. 11.2). If a substance undergoes 100% first-pass
extraction, it could measure the total RPF. However, the actual
extraction possible clinically is less than 100%, so the term effective
renal plasma flow (ERPF) is generally a better description. The
glomerular filtrate rate (GFR) is normally around 125 mL/min
(approximately 20% of RPF delivered to the kidney) as water, polar
molecules, and small crystalloids from the intravascular space pass
through the semipermeable membrane into the ultrafiltrate. Larger
material, such as cells, colloids, and protein-bound compounds, will
not be filtered. The remaining plasma moves from the glomerulus into
the efferent arteriole, where some molecules that could not be filtered
are actively secreted by the tubular epithelial cells.
Paraaminohippurate (PAH) is the classic molecule used for ERPF
measurement; its high clearance mirrors RPF distribution, with 20% of
PAH cleared by glomerular filtration and 80% secreted into the
proximal convoluted renal tubules by anionic transporters. The
molecule inulin, on the other hand, is the historical gold standard for
GFR measurement, with 100% of its clearance the result of filtration.
These molecules help form the basis for some radiopharmaceuticals.
