Measuring Renal Function: Glomerular
Filtration Rate
The normal GFR varies according to age, sex, and body size. The
estimated GFR can be fairly reliably calculated using these factors and
the serum creatinine. However, these estimations may not be reliable
when function is very abnormal, and changes from a unilateral
abnormality may be difficult to detect. It should be noted that any
method for measuring function may not be “precise,” but the methods
are generally reproducible and generally superior to creatinine-based
methods in the very young and the elderly or when function is poor.
Nuclear medicine techniques using different combinations of
plasma sampling and imaging techniques have evolved. Although
these are the most accurate, few institutions have the wet laboratory
setup for the more accurate blood sample methods; therefore, camera-
based techniques are more practical. Camera-based methods require
no blood sampling and only a few minutes of imaging time (Fig.
11.33). Precise adherence to protocol is necessary, however, because
they are more prone to error than the blood-sampling methods.
For camera-based GFR calculation, a small known dose of Tc-99m
DTPA is counted at a set distance from the camera face. The actual
administered dose is then corrected for the postinjection residual in
the syringe and serves as a standard. If the dose is too large, it may
overwhelm the counting capabilities of the system, and lost counts
would affect accuracy, causing overestimation of GFR. Some camera
systems no longer have software to easily perform these studies, but
manual calculations are possible.
After injection, images are acquired for 6 minutes. ROIs are drawn
around the kidneys, and the background is subtracted. Photon
attenuation caused by varying renal depth is corrected using a
formula based on patient weight and height. The fraction of the
standard taken up by the kidneys in the 1- to 2.5-minute or 2- to 3-
minute frames can be correlated with GFR measured by other
methods (e.g., multiple blood sample, single blood sample, or, less
accurately, by creatinine clearance). A similar camera-based approach
can be used for a modified ERPF calculation using Tc-99m MAG3 but
is less frequently performed.
FIG. 11.27  Time course of acute rejection. Baseline Tc-99m MAG3
images (A) and curves (B) show prompt uptake and transit into ureter
and bladder. Two months later, function deteriorated, and the scan (C)
and time–activity curve (D) reveal marked cortical retention with
delayed and decreased clearance into bladder. Function improved a
week later with immunosuppressive therapy, as seen in (E) and (F).
