Renal Cortical Imaging
It is often difficult to clinically distinguish upper urinary tract
infections from lower tract infections. However, pyelonephritis can
lead to cortical scarring, renal failure, and hypertension.
In specific instances, nuclear medicine cortical imaging can show
changes over time that are difficult to see with anatomical imaging
modalities. Tc-99m DMSA offers superior cortical resolution over Tc-
99m MAG3 and can be used to evaluate suspected pyelonephritis or
scarring in a patient with reflux. Differentiating benign oncocytoma
from renal cell cancer has recently become an area of interest.
Technetium-99m Dimercaptosuccinic Acid
Although agents such as Tc-99m MAG3 and Tc-99m DTPA can
provide significant information about the renal cortex, their dynamic
clearance through the region does not allow optimal resolution. A
significant fraction, roughly 40% to 50%, of Technetium-99m
dimercaptosuccinic acid (Tc-99m DMSA), however, binds to the renal
cortical proximal tubules, providing a stable target for high-quality,
detailed pinhole or SPECT imaging (Fig. 11.34). Renal cortical imaging
with Tc-99m DMSA is most commonly used to detect areas of
pyelonephritis and differentiate areas of scarring. Pyelonephritis
causes tubular dysfunction and thus reduced uptake. Although other
radiopharmaceuticals were available in the past with cortical binding,
only Tc-99m DMSA remains available.
FIG. 11.28  Development of chronic renal allograft nephropathy
(chronic rejection). (A) 24 hours after surgery, a baseline Tc-99m
MAG3 study and (B) time–activity curve (TAC) are normal. A year later,
the images and TAC show continued good function. Three years later,
the patient presented with decreased urine output and rising creatinine.
Images (E) and TAC show poor function, with decreased target to
background, peak activity, and clearance rate in a patient found to have
chronic rejection. Cortical retention is usually less significant than with
acute rejection.
Method
Pinhole images, SPECT, or SPECT-CT can be utilized; all provide
improved resolution. The preference as to which usually depends on
the level of comfort or expertise at the individual center. A sample
protocol is outlined in Box 11.9. Pinhole imaging requires precise
positioning, with the patient at the same distance and angle on each
oblique view. Children frequently require anesthesia for SPECT in
order to keep them still.
Imaging is generally done after a 2- to 3-hour delay to allow for the
relatively slow background clearance, and in cases of diminished
renal function, further delay may be needed. The properties of the
radiopharmaceutical make it unsuitable for the assessment of the
collecting system and lower urinary tract given a low level of urinary
excretion.
FIG. 11.29  Effects of long-standing chronic rejection. A Tc-99m
MAG3 scan in a patient with an old transplanted kidney shows cortical
scarring, delayed transit into collecting system, and slow washout. The
prominent collecting system is often present at this stage but is not well
seen in this particular case.
FIG. 11.30  Renal vein thrombosis. (A) Renal vein thrombosis in a
native kidney. The Tc-99m DTPA scan reveals poor uptake and
delayed clearance in the left native kidney. (B) Function improves on a
follow-up scan 4 months later. Tc-99m MAG3 in another patient with a
renal allograft and renal vein thrombosis shows no perfusion on the
radionuclide angiogram (C) and a photopenic defect (arrowheads)
resulting from nonviable allograft causing attenuation but having no
uptake (D).
FIG. 11.31  Postoperative urinary leak.
FIG. 11.32  Postoperative obstruction. Images from a recent transplant
reveal a photopenic area in the pelvis from a postoperative fluid
collection pressing on the ureter and causing obstruction. Delayed
images (not shown) failed to show active urine leak in the region.
FIG. 11.33  Gamma camera technique for glomerular filtration rate
calculation. (A) A 1-minute image of the Tc-99m DTPA syringe before
and after injection is taken at a 30-cm distance from the center of the
collimator. (B) After injection, 15-seconds-per-frame images are
acquired for a total of 6 minutes. (C) Kidney and background regions
are selected on images to obtain counts. After correcting for
background and attenuation, the net renal cortical uptake as a
percentage of the total injected dose is calculated.
FIG. 11.34  Normal appearance of the kidneys in a child using Tc-99m
DMSA.
Box 11.9 Renal Cortical Imaging Protocol Summary
Radiopharmaceutical: Tc-99m DMSA
Child: 1.85 MBq/kg (50 μCi/kg) minimum dose: 22 MBq (600
μCi)
Adult: 185 MBq (5 mCi)
Instrumentation
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT):
dual-head camera; low-energy, high-resolution collimator
Planar: pinhole collimator for small children; converging may
be used for adults
Differential calculation: parallel-hole collimator
Imaging Procedure
Patient should void before beginning.
After intravenous (IV) injection, delay imaging for 2 to 3
hours.
Planar Technique
Low-energy, high- or ultrahigh-resolution collimator
Acquire anterior and posterior 300,00 to 500,00 counts (or 10
minutes) for differential function:
Pinhole: kidneys centered in field of view (FOV), equidistant
from camera on each view,
posterior and posterior oblique images 100,000 to 150,000
counts/view (or 10 minutes)
SPECT
128 × 128 or 256 × 256 matrix, zoomed as needed for
infants
Orbit: noncircular body contour, rotate 180 degrees; 40
views/head, 3 degrees/step, 40 sec/step
Reconstruction
Prefilter: Hann cutoff frequency 0.9/cm, order 0
Postfilter: Butterworth cutoff frequency 0.5/cm, order 10;
2 iterations, 10 subsets
Image Interpretation
The shape of the kidney is variable, as is the thickness of the cortex.
The upper poles often may appear less intense because of splenic
impression, fetal lobulation, and attenuation from the liver and
spleen. The central collecting system and medullary regions are
photon deficient because Tc-99m DMSA tubular binding occurs in the
cortex. The columns of Bertin will show radiopharmaceutical uptake
and may appear quite prominent.
When assessing the cortex, areas of abnormally decreased activity
can be seen from infection or evolving scar not always obvious on
anatomical imaging modalities like CT. Areas of cortical tubular
dysfunction from infection or scarring present as cortical defects (Figs.
11.35 and 11.36). Scars would be expected to have localized, sharp
margins and may occur in a small kidney with associated cortical loss.
However, it is often difficult to tell an area of acute inflammation from
a scar without serial images to show resolution, particularly in
patients with clinically silent infections (Fig. 11.37).
Diseases affecting the renal tubules, such as renal tubular acidosis
and Fanconi syndrome, inhibit Tc-99m DMSA uptake. Nephrotoxic
drugs, including gentamicin and cisplatinum, also may inhibit uptake.
When renal function is poor, uptake may be so poor that no useful
diagnostic information can be gained.
A tumor will present as a defect because cortical scanning is not
specific. Therefore, comparison with ultrasound is advisable.
However, if increased activity is present, the area represents a
prominent column of Bertin. Renal tumor imaging is discussed in the
F-18 FDG oncology chapter (Chapter __). Differentiating oncocytoma
from renal cell carcinoma is covered in the section on Tc-99m
sestamibi in oncology imaging beyond FDG (Chapter __).
