Renal mass
Vesicoureteral reflux
Bladder residual volume (postvoid retention) calculation
Plasma clearance occurs by both glomerular filtration and tubular
secretion (Fig. 11.2). If a substance undergoes 100% first-pass
extraction, it could measure the total RPF. However, the actual
extraction possible clinically is less than 100%, so the term effective
renal plasma flow (ERPF) is generally a better description. The
glomerular filtrate rate (GFR) is normally around 125 mL/min
(approximately 20% of RPF delivered to the kidney) as water, polar
molecules, and small crystalloids from the intravascular space pass
through the semipermeable membrane into the ultrafiltrate. Larger
material, such as cells, colloids, and protein-bound compounds, will
not be filtered. The remaining plasma moves from the glomerulus into
the efferent arteriole, where some molecules that could not be filtered
are actively secreted by the tubular epithelial cells.
Paraaminohippurate (PAH) is the classic molecule used for ERPF
measurement; its high clearance mirrors RPF distribution, with 20% of
PAH cleared by glomerular filtration and 80% secreted into the
proximal convoluted renal tubules by anionic transporters. The
molecule inulin, on the other hand, is the historical gold standard for
GFR measurement, with 100% of its clearance the result of filtration.
These molecules help form the basis for some radiopharmaceuticals.
Dynamic Renal Imaging
Radiopharmaceuticals: Excretion and
Washout
Renal radiopharmaceuticals are classified by their uptake and
clearance mechanisms as agents for glomerular filtration, tubular
secretion, or cortical binding. A list of important renal imaging agents
is found in Table 11.1. The distribution and clearance rates vary
considerably among these radiopharmaceuticals. Their uptake and
clearance occur in different areas of the kidney (Fig. 11.3). Imaging
characteristics and patterns vary considerably (Fig. 11.4), as do the
clinical protocols used.
Of the various types of agents, those undergoing both filtration and
secretion have greater clearance rates, allowing adequate visualization
even in cases of fairly significant renal failure. The radiolabeled analog
of PAH, I-131 Hippuran, with its high extraction of roughly 85%,
could provide diagnostic studies as the creatinine rises, whereas
radiopharmaceuticals dependent solely on glomerular filtration
rapidly become nondiagnostic in the same situation. Although it was
utilized in the past, the limited resolution of its images compared with
Technetium-99m–based agents led to its replacement with another
tubular agent, Tc-99m MAG3.
FIG. 11.1  Renal anatomy. (A) The outer cortex is made up of
glomeruli and proximal collecting tubules. The columns of Bertin
separate the pyramids in the cortex, extending into the medulla. The
inner layer, or medulla, contains pyramids made up of distal tubules
and loops of Henle. The tubules converge at the papillae, which empty
into the calyces. The renal artery and vein enter at the hilum and divide
and become arcuate arteries that give rise to the straight arteries, from
which afferent arterioles feed the glomerular tuft. (B) The nephron
consists of the glomerulus and the afferent vessels leading to the tuft of
capillaries in the glomerulus and the efferent vessels leaving the
glomerulus. Bowman’s capsule surrounds the glomerulus and connects
the proximal and distal renal tubules and loops of Henle.
FIG. 11.2  Renal plasma flow and function. (A) Of renal blood flow to
the kidneys, 20% is filtered at the glomerulus. (B) The remaining renal
plasma flow moves on, with tubular secretion occurring into the
proximal tubules, accounting for 80% of the output.
FIG. 11.3  Different mechanisms of renal radiopharmaceutical uptake
and excretion include glomerular filtration, tubular secretion, and
cortical tubular binding.
Table 11.1
Mechanism of Renal Radiopharmaceutical
Clearance Agent
Glomerular Filtration
(%)
Tubular Secretion
(%)
Tc-99m DTPA
Cr-51 EDTA a
I-125 Iothalamate b
Tc-99m MAG3
I-131 Hippuran a
a  Currently not available in the United States for clinical use.
b  Laboratory use without imaging.
Tc-99m Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) is a heavy metal chelator
used for the treatment of poisoning. When small, nontoxic amounts
are labeled with Tc-99m, it is cleared via glomerular filtration with no
tubular secretion or reabsorption, similar to other chelators. Different
pharmaceutical preparation techniques result in variable impurities
and, subsequently, different levels of protein binding, which affects
clearance because protein-bound DTPA cannot be filtered. In practice,
normal first-pass Tc-99m DTPA extraction is less than the 20% of RPF
because of binding, resulting in an underestimation of the GFR.
However, if properly prepared, Tc-99m DTPA is generally adequate
to measure GFR clinically. It should be noted that the alternative GFR
agent, Cr-51 ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), does not suffer
from such significant variable binding but is not available for clinical
use in the United States. In addition to estimating GFR, Tc-99m DTPA
imaging can assess flow and function in a variety of scenarios where
Tc-99m MAG3 is also an option.
Technetium-99m Mercaptoacetyltriglycine
Currently, Technetium-99m mercaptoacetyltriglycine (Tc-99m MAG3)
is the most commonly used renal radiopharmaceutical (Fig. 11.5 ). It is
highly protein bound (97%), and because of this, it is essentially
cleared entirely by tubular secretion. This also results in high target-
to-background ratios because it cannot diffuse into the extravascular
spaces. Although its clearance is only about 60% of that of I-131
Hippuran, the extraction efficiency is considerably higher than that of
