Dynamic Renography Imaging Protocols
Preparation
Patients must also be properly hydrated to ensure prompt radiotracer
clearance, avoiding any appearance of obstruction or decreased
function. Because neurogenic bladder or bladder outlet obstruction
can create the appearance of diminished renal function or obstruction,
maneuvers including bladder catheterization, voiding, and upright
positioning may be utilized. Finally, a clear understanding of the
clinical question being posed and the patient’s history is needed as
protocols are tailored to each situation.
Acquisition and Processing
For both Tc-99m DTPA and Tc-99m MAG3, images are acquired in
two phases utilizing similar protocols. An initial dynamic perfusion
imaging sequence consists of images acquired every 1 to 4 seconds
after radiotracer injection for 60 seconds. Then, over the next 25 to 30
minutes, images are acquired to assess renal uptake and clearance. An
example protocol is provided in Box 11.2.
FIG. 11.4  Radiopharmaceutical comparison in a renal transplant
patient. (A) I-131 Hippuran provides excellent functional information but
has poor image quality compared with technetium agents. (B) Tc-99m
DTPA image from the same day shows higher resolution. (C) Tc-99m
MAG3 done 30 hours later reveals the highest level of detail as well as
an improved target-to-background ratio compared with DTPA.
FIG. 11.5  Normal Tc-99m MAG3. (A) Normal dynamic functional
images with prompt symmetrical radiotracer uptake and rapid
clearance over the study. The liver is usually visible in the right upper
corner of the images, which are usually acquired posteriorly. (B)
Normal time–activity curves with a steep uptake slope, distinct peak,
and rapid clearance confirming the visual analysis of the images.
A time–activity curve (TAC) can be generated for both phases,
placing a region of interest (ROI) on the aorta (or iliac artery for
transplants), around the kidneys, and on a background near each
kidney (Fig. 11.9). In cases of severe hydronephrosis, it may be
desirable to draw the kidney ROI as a thin cortical crescent, excluding
elevated counts from the central collecting system. Different types of
background ROIs have been used, from small boxes to a 1- to 2-pixel
rim around the kidney, but all are generally successful. The counts
detected in the ROIs are then translated into a graph, a TAC, or a
renogram (Fig. 11.10).
The differential or split function, the amount that each kidney
contributes to overall function, is determined at the peak cortical
activity, before excreted activity is accumulating in the collecting
system, usually about 2 to 3 minutes after injection. Children normally
have more rapid transit, so a 1- to 2-minute interval may be more
accurate. This measurement may be particularly useful when
unilateral abnormalities have not been identified when global function
and serum creatinine remain in the normal range (Fig. 11.11).
Normally, each kidney contributes 50% of function, and each should
normally contribute at least 45%. This information can be combined
with measurements, such as GFR, to best indicate how the kidneys are
functioning.
Interpretation
If the radiopharmaceutical dose is given as a rapid bolus, then
perfusion to the kidneys should be seen immediately as the adjacent
aorta (or iliac artery for transplants) and at a similar level within a
couple seconds. Any asymmetry, delayed, or diminished flow on the
images or TAC may represent decreased tissue volume from scarring
or an active disease (Fig. 11.12).
FIG. 11.6  Many abnormalities can be detected in the cortical phase of
imaging with Tc-99m MAG3 examples revealing cortical abnormalities.
(A) Multiple cortical defects from polycystic kidney disease are seen
throughout the examination in poorly functioning kidneys. (B)
Asymmetrical cortical uptake, decreased on the right, with a right upper
pole scar (arrow) in a patient with a duplicated collecting system. The
upper pole moiety collecting system fills without response to
furosemide due to obstruction.
FIG. 11.7  Cortical function is readily assessed during the dynamic
function portion of Tc-99m MAG3 imaging. The left kidney in (A) is
small and scarred secondary to vesicoureteral reflux, contributing only
15% to overall function. (B) Obstructed right kidney secondary to
cervical carcinoma is draining well through a nephrostomy tube, and
function is relatively preserved, with good bilateral function. Prominent
left pelvis and calyces are mostly cleared by the end of the study. The
last image was taken with the bladder in view.
FIG. 11.8  After the peak cortical phase, many abnormalities can be
detected during radiopharmaceutical excretion. (A) Duplicated right
collecting system, a congenital abnormality sometimes associated with
lower pole reflux and upper pole obstruction. (B) Postoperative ureteral
leak on left (arrow) detected on sequential images.
Box 11.2 Dynamic Renal Scintigraphy Protocol
Summary
Preparation
Hydrate patient for 30 to 60 minutes.
Adult: 300 to 500 mL
Young children may require intravenous (IV) 10 to 15
mL/kg normal saline (with 5% dextrose for < 1 year).
Void bladder before injection.
Radiopharmaceuticals
Tc-99m MAG3
Adult: 78 to 111 MBq (2–3 mCi) if no flow, 111 to 185 MBq (3–
5 mCi) if flow performed
Child: 3.7 MBq/kg (0.1 mCi/kg), minimum dose 37 MBq (1
mCi)
Tc-99m DTPA
Adult: 185 to 370 MBq (5–10 mCi) IV
Child: 1.9 MBq/kg (0.05 mCi/kg) IV, minimum dose 37 MBq (1
mCi)
Instrumentation
Large-field-of-view camera, positioned posteriorly for native
kidneys (anterior for horseshoe or transplant)
Low-energy, high-resolution collimation; photopeak 15% to
20% window centered at 140 kreV
Acquisition
Blood flow: 1 to 2 seconds/frame for 60 seconds
Dynamic: 30-second frames for 25 to 30 seconds
Prevoid image 500,000 counts; postvoid image for same time
length
Processing
Draw region of interest around kidneys; draw background
regions next to each.
Generate time–activity curves and differential function.
During the initial cortical or nephrogram phase, the kidneys
accumulate activity for the first 1 to 3 minutes, and the collecting
system is either not seen or slightly photopenic. Peak overall activity
on the TAC should normally occur by 4 to 6 minutes. The kidneys
should be symmetrical in size. Chronic scarring causes an abnormal
kidney to become smaller and less intense. Acutely, kidneys can
appear enlarged, such as in high-grade obstruction.
FIG. 11.9  Regions of interest (ROI) for time–activity curves. (A) Left,
An image at 3 minutes with peak cortical activity is chosen for the
ROIs. Right, Regions of interest are drawn for the kidney (dark lines)
and for background correction (gray lines). (B) Regions to assess
background activity can also be drawn as smaller crescents below or
laterally along the cortex.
During the clearance phase, activity moves from the cortex into the
collecting system and is excreted into the bladder, with the TAC
showing an exponential decline nearly to baseline by the end of the
acquisition. In addition to slow uptake, when function is poor, the
kidney may gradually accumulate activity over time with poor
cortical washout, so-called cortical retention (Fig. 11.13). Cortical
retention is a nonspecific finding that can be seen from multiple
causes of acute and chronic renal failure (Box 11.3).
Normally, the calyces and pelvis usually begin filling by 3 minutes
and ureters or bladder by 5 to 6 minutes, with the collecting-system
activity decreasing through the final clearance phase. In some healthy
subjects, pooling of activity in the dependent calyces can result in
focal hot spots that usually clear at least partially over time.
Hydronephrosis shows delayed or absent clearance, and the collecting
system may appear enlarged, although areas with increased activity
appear larger than they actually are, so caution must be taken when
trying to gauge size.
Given the variability of peristalsis and other factors, the normal
ureter may or may not be seen and may appear as a thin column of
transient activity. Dilated ureters may visibly accumulate activity.
Care must be taken in diagnosing reflux into the ureters. Indirect
determination of reflux can be done when ureteral activity persists or
recurs after the kidneys have cleared. However, reflux is best detected
on a direct vesicoureterogram (VCUG) with activity introduced
directly into the bladder via a catheter.
The prevoid and postvoid bladder images help evaluate emptying
and postvoid residual. In infants and small children, the bladder may
appear quite large and higher in position than might be expected
when looking at the outline of the child’s body on the image.
