FIG. 11.20  Pathophysiology of renin-dependent renovascular
disease: pharmacological effect of captopril. (A) Normal glomerular
filtration rate (GFR). (B) Renovascular hypertension. Because of
reduced renal plasma flow, filtration pressure and GFR fall. Increased
renin and resulting angiotensin II produce vasoconstriction of the
efferent glomerular arterioles, raising glomerular pressure and
maintaining GFR. (C) Captopril blocks the normal compensatory
mechanism, and GFR falls.
Box 11.7 Indications for Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme Inhibitor (ACEI) Renography (Captopril Scan)
Severe hypertension
Hypertension resistant to medical therapy
Abrupt or recent onset of hypertension
Onset of hypertension < 30 years or over 55 years of age
Abdominal or flank bruits
Unexplained azotemia
Worsening renal function during ACEI therapy
Occlusive arterial disease in other beds
Known renal artery lesion to assess potential reversibility of
renovascular hypertension (RVH)
Assess effects of therapy, also allowing differential function
calculation.
Renal Transplant Evaluation
Kidneys for transplantation come from one of three sources: a
deceased donor (cadaveric kidney), a living related donor, or a living
unrelated donor. Although cadaveric kidneys are carefully screened
and transported, allografts from living donors generally have the best
prognosis. Allograft 1-year survival rates are 90% to 94% for living-
related-donor kidneys and 88% to 90% for cadaveric transplants.
Having an understanding of common complications can help in
correctly recommending testing and correctly interpreting scan
findings. Table 11.2 lists common complications.
FIG. 11.21  Positive Tc-99m MAG3 captopril study. (A and B) The
baseline study was performed first. Note prompt, fairly symmetrical
initial uptake and good washout over time. (C and D) A follow-up
examination performed later the same day with captopril shows marked
cortical retention on the right, considered “high probability” for renal
artery stenosis as a cause for renovascular hypertension.
FIG. 11.22  Effects of captopril on renovascular hypertension with Tc-
99m DTPA. Top, The baseline study shows mildly decreased function
on the left. Bottom, Examination after captopril reveals severe
deterioration on the left kidney with diminished peak and overall
function.
FIG. 11.23  Captopril-stimulated Tc-99m MAG3 study (A) and the
captopril time–activity curve (TAC) (B) show marked bilateral cortical
retention and minimal urinary bladder clearance over 30 minutes. The
patient had abstained from food and drink for nearly 12 hours before
the examination. Repeat captopril images (C) and TAC (D) after
hydration are normal. Bilateral positive captopril findings are most
commonly a false positive from dehydration.
Box 11.8 Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitor
(ACEI) (Captopril) Protocol Summary
Preparation
Discontinue ACEIs 2 to 3 days for short acting, 5 to 7 days for
long acting.
Consider stopping calcium channel blockers.
No food for 4 hours before examination; drink fluids to
hydrate during this time.
Before injection, use hydration protocol as per the general
renal protocol.
Medications and Dose
ACEI
Captopril 50 mg PO, monitor blood pressure for 1 hour -
OR-
Enalapril 40 μCi/kg (minimum 2.5 mg) intravenous (IV)
over 3 to 5 minutes, leave IV line in place, monitor for 5
minutes
Lasix 40 mg IV
Inject Tc-99m MAG3
Acquisition
2-day protocol: day 1 Tc-99m MAG3 111 to 185 MBq (3–5
mCi); day 2 perform baseline if phase 1 is abnormal
1-day protocol: 37 to 74 MBq (1–2 mCi) IV baseline before
Captopril; then 185 to 296 MBq (5–8 mCi) phase 2 after
ACEI
Imaging
Use methods for dynamic imaging protocol (see Box 11.2).
Transplant Complications
Delayed Graft Function (ATN)
Poor function in the immediate posttransplant period can be caused
by ischemia, volume depletion, and nephrotoxic drugs in the
pretransplant period. The terms delayed graft function and acute tubular
necrosis (ATN) have been used interchangeably to describe this
process, although ATN is just one of the possible causes. It is more
common in cadaveric transplants, seen in up to 50%, but it can also
occur in a small fraction of kidneys from living related donors (5%).
Delayed graft function presents immediately or in the first few days as
decreased urine output. This typically resolves from a few days to up
to 4 to 6 weeks.
Acute Rejection
Hyperacute
rejection
is
seen
immediately
from
major
incompatibilities, and the prognosis for survival is grim. Accelerated
acute rejection develops in the first few days after transplantation,
caused by preformed antibodies, likely from prior sensitization.
Cellular-mediated acute rejection (AR) is not seen until after a week or
so, commonly presenting with decreasing urine output, although the
patient may have fever and painful swelling of the kidney. AR
becomes less common after several months or a year if the patient is
taking his or her medication because the patient becomes relatively
desensitized.
Table 11.2
Renal Allograft Complications
Complications
Timeline
Comments
Delayed graft function/acute tubular
necrosis (ATN)
Minutes to
hours
Presurgical damage
Cadaveric transplants may take days or
weeks to recover
Autoimmune Rejection and Functional Damage
Hyperacute rejection
Minutes
Preformed antibodies, irreversible
Accelerated acute rejection
1–5 days
History of transfusion or prior transplant
Acute rejection
7 days on
Most common first 3 months
Cell-mediated humoral
Chronic rejection
Months to
Humoral, irreversible
years
Cyclosporine toxicity
months
Reversible with drug withdrawal
Surgical
Urine leak/urinoma
Days or
weeks
Hematoma
First few
days
Infection
First week
Lymphocele
2–4 months
Vascular
Renal artery stenosis
After first
month
Vascular occlusion
Days to
weeks
Infarcts
Renal obstruction
Days to
months
Pelvic mass, stricture, calculi
Chronic rejection is a common term for an autoimmune, cumulative,
and irreversible process typically not seen for weeks to months.
Vascular
constriction,
chronic
fibrosis,
tubular
atrophy,
and
glomerulosclerosis from immunological and nonhumoral causes
occur. Over months to years, this fibrosis causes cortical loss and
decreased function. Relative dilation of the collecting system may be
seen as the cortex thins. Risk factors for early development (<1 year)
and allograft loss include damage from early ischemic injury (severe
ATN),
prior
severe
AR
episodes,
and
subclinical
rejection.
Calcineurin-inhibitor therapy (cyclosporine and tacrolimus) is thought
to play a role in thrombotic microangiopathy.
Immunosuppressive Drug Toxicity
Another important cause of allograft dysfunction is nephrotoxicity of
therapeutic drugs. In the past, this was often due to high levels of
cyclosporine. Cyclosporine toxicity is less commonly seen because it
has been largely replaced with other agents or is prescribed at lower,
safer levels. Similar changes can be seen with other antirejection
agents.
Surgical Complications and Renal Diseases
Major vascular abnormalities can occur, including arterial thrombosis
and renal vein thrombosis. Issues can also arise at the ureteral
anastomosis: obstruction, leak, or lymphoceles. These issues generally
present in the first few days after surgery. Transplanted kidneys may
also develop problems like renal artery stenosis with renovascular
hypertension as well as ureteral obstruction.
Transplanted kidneys are usually evaluated by ultrasound and
biopsy
when
complications
occur.
However,
radionuclide
scintigraphy has been widely used to evaluate not only renal function
but also complications in renal allografts.
Methods
Renal allograft evaluation is performed using the dynamic
scintigraphy protocol with Tc-99m MAG3 listed in Box 11.2, except
the camera is anterior, centered over the allograft in the lower pelvis.
It is useful to include at least some of the native kidneys in the field of
view because they may contribute to overall function. Some portion of
the bladder should be seen, and the entire bladder is included on
prevoid and postvoid images. Delayed images for up to 1 to 2 hours
or single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/CT may be
helpful to assess fluid collections. Lasix or captopril studies can be
performed when needed.
Interpretation
Renal transplant scans must be interpreted with the age of the
transplant in mind as well as the type of allograft. The two most
common issues to consider in the early posttransplant period are
ATN/delayed graft function and AR (Table 11.3). Because both
manifest clinically with decreased function, the scan typically shows
slower uptake initially, progressively increasing cortical activity over
time, and a delay in the appearance of collecting-system and bladder
activity from the expected 3- to 6-minute time frame. Unlike ATN, AR
affects the small renal parenchymal vessels. The classic dynamic
imaging pattern of AR is decreased perfusion and then marked
cortical retention with Tc-99m MAG3 (Fig. 11.24). ATN, on the other
hand, shows normal perfusion but poor function with delayed cortical
clearance and decreased urine excretion immediately after surgery
(Fig. 11.25).
ATN is the result of damage occurring before transplant insertion
and so is present from the start. Although function usually improves
in the first couple of weeks (Fig. 11.26), it often persists in severe cases,
overlapping with the time frame expected of acute rejection. In these
cases, worsening function suggests that another process is developing
(Fig. 11.27).
The degree of renal dysfunction can vary widely. Severe cortical
retention or function that does not rapidly improve on serial studies
has strong negative prognostic implications, with increased transplant
loss in the first 6 months. Multiple episodes of AR, especially if severe,
also have a negative effect on transplant survival.
Nephrotoxicity from immunosuppressive drugs causes delayed
clearance similar to that of delayed graft function/ATN. The time
frame of the examination usually allows these two processes to be
differentiated. In some cases, the history will point to a cause for ATN
occurring long after transplant surgery, such as from cardiovascular
collapse or medication issues.
When renal function is initially normal, it is simpler to differentiate
AR from delayed graft function. However, it may be difficult to
differentiate AR from the toxicity effects of immunosuppressive
therapy.
In chronic rejection, the blood flow and function images may
initially appear normal. As it worsens, serial examinations show mild
to moderate parenchymal retention. Over time, nephron loss causes
cortical thinning and the associated “ex-vacuo” central collecting-
system prominence. Uptake appears patchy, the allograft appears
small or scarred, and clearance is delayed (Figs. 11.28 and 11.29).
The rare acute renal artery occlusion leads to absent perfusion and a
photopenic defect on the functional portion of scintigraphy, often with
a surrounding rim of activity. Renal vein thrombosis can have the
same appearance. Because there are no collaterals or lymphatics, the
kidney is rapidly destroyed and does not look enlarged and hot like
acute renal vein thrombosis in native kidneys (Fig. 11.30).
FIG. 11.24  Acute allograft rejection. Postoperative Tc-99m MAG3
images of a right iliac fossa cadaveric transplant show good baseline
blood flow (A) and reasonably good function (B). Six days later, the
patient developed fever, allograft tenderness, and elevated serum
creatinine. Repeat blood flow is diminished (C), and functional images
show cortical retention (D). These findings are consistent with acute
rejection.
Table 11.3
Comparison of Acute Rejection and Postoperative Acute Tubular Necrosis (ATN)
Disease
Baseline Scan
Early Follow-Up Scan
Perfusion
Renal Transit Time
Acute rejection
Normal
Worsens
Decreased
Delayed
ATN
Abnormal
Improves
Normal
Delated
FIG. 11.25  Postoperative function in a cadaveric transplant. Imaging
at 72 hours after surgery reveals normal perfusion (A) with decreased
function (B) with slightly slower uptake, mildly delayed transit to
bladder, and significant cortical retention. The time–activity curve (C)
confirms the impression of postoperative acute tubular necrosis (ATN).
If flow images are inadequate to differentiate delayed graft function
from acute rejection, the time course of the functional changes or
biopsy and follow-up may be needed.
FIG. 11.26  Delayed graft function/acute tubular necrosis (ATN). Top
row, Baseline blood-flow images (A) and time–activity curve (B)
obtained 24 hours after transplantation reveal significant cortical
retention, confirming the diagnosis of delayed graft function, often
called acute tubular necrosis. Bottom row, A follow-up examination
shows improving function (C), with more rapid transit into bladder and
decreased cortical retention, confirmed on the time-activity curve (D).
Other problems seen on CT or ultrasound can be characterized.
Perinephric fluid collections from a leak can show radiotracer
accumulation, sometimes not visible until delayed images at 1 to 2
hours (Fig. 11.31). An obstructed allograft may present with
hydronephrosis or diminished urine output. Diuretic renography can
