Image Interpretation
Normal F-18 FDG Distribution
The brain is an obligate glucose user, so uptake is normally very high.
The kidneys, ureters, and bladder also show intense activity from
excreted radiotracer in urine. Moderate activity should be seen in the
liver, mildly greater than the mediastinal background, and the spleen
should be less intense than the liver. Bone marrow accumulation is
normally low. Variable activity is seen in the bowel, muscle, heart,
salivary glands, tonsils, testes, and uterus.
Pharyngeal and Parapharyngeal
Mild activity is normally present in the salivary glands. Marked
uptake is often seen in oropharyngeal lymphoid tissue, including the
palatine and lingual tonsils. Asymmetry can occur normally or as the
result of therapy and inflammation but may make the evaluation for
tumor more difficult. Diffuse marked uptake is often seen in the vocal
cords and oropharynx and is increased from speaking. In vocal cord
paralysis, unilateral uptake may occur in the normal vocal cord, along
with decreased activity in the contralateral abnormal vocal cord (Fig.
12.6).
Myocardial Metabolism
Minimizing cardiac activity is desirable when evaluating cancer. The
myocardium uses glucose as an optional fuel source. In a fasting state,
fatty acid metabolism dominates over glycolysis, leading to decreased
FDG uptake. However, fasting yields inconsistent results, and
significant cardiac uptake is seen in up to 50% of fasting patients,
often very heterogeneous in the left ventricle. Glucose loading, such as
done for a cardiac viability study, increases glycolysis and, therefore,
FDG uptake. Benign, fairly intense activity is occasionally seen in the
intraatrial septal fat.
Urinary Excretion
Activity in excreted urine can create interpretation difficulties.
Although the ureters usually appear as long, tubular structures, they
can be seen as very focal areas of activity that may be confused with
tumor or lymph node metastasis. Correlation with CT and MIP
images can help confirm ureter activity or rule out a soft tissue lesion.
In addition, activity in the filling bladder can obscure lesions in the
pelvis, and urine contamination on the skin may be difficult to
differentiate from an actual superficial lesion.
FIG. 12.6  F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) images (computed
tomography [CT], left; positron emission tomography [PET], center;
fused, right) at the level of the larynx in a patient previously treated for
lung cancer reveal marked asymmetrical increased activity in the left
vocal cord but no mass—from right vocal cord paralysis and
compensatory hypertrophy on the left.
FIG. 12.7  Computed tomography (CT) and fused images from
positron emission tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT)
performed for lung cancer show stranding in the fat around the sigmoid
colon on CT and focal radiotracer uptake in the area of a diverticulum,
consistent with diverticulitis.
Gastrointestinal Tract
The esophagus normally shows no significant uptake. Nonspecific
focal or more diffuse activity could be due to inflammation from
reflux. In general, this is less than that seen with cancer or acute
radiation. Significant activity in the stomach, especially when
collapsed, can limit the usefulness of F-18 FDG in the evaluation of
gastric adenocarcinoma or lymphoma. Highly variable activity in both
the small and large bowel is especially problematic because it may
obscure tumor in the bowel and mesentery. Focal transient activity is
frequently seen in the small bowel, possibly the result of lymphoid
tissue uptake. Marked uptake in the bowel can occur from metformin.
Inflammation, such as from colitis, inflammatory bowel disease,
appendicitis, and diverticulitis, can cause radiotracer accumulation
(Fig. 12.7). However, these diseases should cause corresponding
changes on CT: fat stranding, inflammatory fluid collections, changes
in the bowel wall, and air within forming abscesses.
Reproductive Organs
Cyclical changes can be seen normally in the uterus and ovaries in
premenopausal women (Fig. 12.8). Uniform, diffuse, mild to moderate
endometrial uptake normally occurs, with maximal uptake occurring
during menstruation (menstrual cycle days 0–4) and near ovulation
(approximately day 14). Activity is lower during proliferative (days 7–
13) and secretory (days 15–28) phases. Normal activity can occur in
the ovaries related to ovulation and occasionally in association with
follicle growth and the development of the corpus luteum cyst.
Increased F-18 FDG uptake can be seen in benign uterine leiomyomas
and endometrioma. In men, the testes vary widely but often show
high-F-18 FDG levels normally.
FIG. 12.8  Two different young women (with breast cancer and
lymphoma in the chest) showing benign activity related to cyclical
changes from the menstrual cycle in the uterus (A) and in the right
ovary along the periphery of a small adnexal cyst related to ovulation
(B). Follow-up studies performed to restage cancer were then
performed at a different point in the cycle.
Benign F-18 FDG Distribution Variants
Thyroid Disease
Thyroid activity is normally low or absent; however, multiple uptake
patterns can occur (Fig. 12.9). Diffusely increased uptake may be seen
in thyroiditis, radiation thyroiditis, and Graves’ disease. The
significance of low-level diffuse activity in patients without
identifiable thyroid disease is uncertain; it may be normal or the result
of subclinical thyroiditis. Focal uptake can be seen in benign
adenomatous nodules. However, focal activity can be the result of
malignancy in 30% to 50% of cases, and evaluation with ultrasound is
warranted to determine whether a biopsy is needed.
Brown Adipose Tissue Activation
Brown fat (or BAT) plays a role in nonshivering heat generation and
can be stimulated by the adrenergic system as well as the cold (Fig.
12.10). It is particularly important in the young but is also occasionally
seen in adults. When BAT stimulation is present, F-18 FDG uptake is
seen in the fat of the supraclavicular region and neck and occasionally
in the upper mediastinum and suprarenal regions. Uptake frequently
occurs bilaterally in the region of costovertebral junctions. Sedatives
(e.g., lorazepam or diazepam) and beta-adrenergic blockers (e.g., 20
mg oral propranolol) are sometimes used to decrease this uptake,
although the effectiveness is variable. Rather, it is generally preferred
to keep the patient warm for a period before injection until the
examination is complete because this tends to be more effective. In
some cases, a scan may have to be repeated because it may be difficult
to rule out lymph node involvement such as from lymphoma (Fig.
12.11).
FIG. 12.9  Patterns of thyroid activity. The normal thyroid should show
no significant fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake. (A) Diffuse activity can
be seen in benign thyroiditis such as Graves’ disease, and multifocal
activity (B) can be due to multinodular goiter. (C) Focal activity,
however, is associated with a malignant thyroid nodule in 30% to 50%
of cases and requires follow-up by ultrasound and then possibly with
fine-needle aspiration.
Inflammation, Infection, and Trauma
One of the greatest challenges that arises with F-18 FDG is uptake that
occurs in infectious and inflammatory processes, which can be
difficult to differentiate from malignancy. In infections, the cause has
been attributed to glycolytic activity in leukocytes and the impact of
molecules associated with inflammation (e.g., cytokines) on the glut-1
transporters. Infections such as pneumonia will have intense
radiotracer accumulation. Inflammatory uptake in a lymph node or
mass cannot be reliably differentiated from malignancy. Such findings
are commonly problematic in sarcoidosis and granulomatous disease
(e.g., histoplasmosis and tuberculosis) in the chest (Fig. 12.12 and Fig.
12.13). Other inflammatory processes in the lungs, such as
occupational lung diseases and active interstitial fibrosis and
pneumonitis, may also cause markedly abnormal uptake.
Low-level radiotracer can be seen in atherosclerotic plaque and
higher levels in arteritis. Mild F-18 FDG may routinely localize to
vascular bypass graft walls. However, if more focal intense activity is
seen, the CT should be examined for signs of infection or abscess, such
as gas, fluid collections, or stranding. Abdominal wall surgical mesh
and biliary stents may remain hot indefinitely.
Healing fractures normally accumulate F-18 FDG, but evidence of
fracture should be clear on CT (Fig. 12.14). Because PET is more
sensitive than CT for bone metastasis, the lack of a fracture on CT
could mean the activity is caused by metastatic disease, even if no
lytic or blastic CT change is seen. Arthritis can cause increased
activity, with activity on both sides of the joint, and increased activity
can also be seen around the joint capsule or surrounding soft tissues,
with CT fusion helping confirm lack of bone involvement.
Effects of Therapy
Therapy often causes an inflammatory response resulting in increased
activity (Figs. 12.15 and 12.16). No definitive rules indicate how long
to wait after therapy to perform a PET scan. At times, repeat or even
serial imaging is needed to confirm that a change is iatrogenic.
Waiting 2 to 4 weeks or so after procedures will help minimize the
impact of surgery (Fig. 12.17). Delaying the PET for 2 to 3 months is
often recommended after external-beam radiation due to expected
acute inflammation and increased uptake. Although this may allow
soft tissues to return to background, activity intensifies and often
remains high over time in the lungs. However, the pattern of radiation
change will mirror the evolution of scarring, with air bronchograms
occurring on the CT, and uptake is normally fairly homogeneous if no
residual tumor is present (Fig. 12.18). Bones within the radiation port
usually show decreased activity after a short interval.
FIG. 12.10  Brown adipose tissue (BAT) or “brown fat,” which helps
generate heat (more common in the young), can cause benign activity
in the fat of the neck and supraclavicular region, sometimes involving
the thoracic inlet and fat around the diaphragm, along with bilateral
costovertebral junction uptake, likely related to stimulation of the
ganglia at the nerve root. Activity in the right antecubital region is
residual from the injection.
FIG. 12.11  In some cases, it may be difficult to exclude tumor
involvement in lymph nodes when brown adipose tissue (BAT) activity
(left) is present because the pattern may be nodular, as seen in
lymphoma (right), or when the activity occurs in areas where lymph
nodes seen on computed tomography (CT).
FIG. 12.12  Marked uptake (right) is seen in areas of interstitial fibrosis
on computed tomography (CT) (left) as a result of occupational lung
disease. This level of activity could also be seen from pneumonia or
sarcoid.
FIG. 12.13  Pulmonary sarcoid can show marked uptake (right) in
prominent or enlarged lymph nodes (left). Although this can be difficult
to differentiate from lymphoma, evidence of granulomatous disease
may be seen, such as partially calcified lymph nodes.
FIG. 12.14  F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in fracture. (A)
Computed tomography (CT) shows a left rib fracture (arrow) after
biopsy of lung cancer. (B) Positron emission tomography (PET) shows
uptake in the fracture and the left suprahilar mass, which is not well
seen on the single noncontrast CT slice.
FIG. 12.15  Positive positron emission tomography (PET) scan from
talc pleurodesis shows calcified pleura plaques on computed
tomography (CT; upper) associated with marked uptake on PET (lower)
that can last indefinitely. Posttherapy changes can be extensive or
focal and can be difficult to distinguish from infection or mesothelioma.
F-18 FDG accumulates in the bone marrow as a result of marrow
stimulation from anemia, marrow-stimulating drugs (filgrastim
[Neupogen] or epoetin alfa [Procrit]), or certain cancer therapies. This
activity may be intense enough to obscure underlying lesions, and
although usually more homogeneous than changes from tumor (Fig.
12.19), it can be patchy and asymmetrical, particularly in the long
bones. Because the duration of these marrow-stimulating agents is
frequently long lasting, it may not be practical to delay a study until
their effects subside.
Chemotherapy often causes a lesion to appear to worsen on PET.
The impact can be minimized by delaying a study for at least 2 weeks
after treatment, but in some cases, a several-week delay or waiting
until just before beginning the next chemotherapy cycle is optimal.
There is, however, some evidence suggesting that imaging early after
chemotherapy can better predict long-term response in certain
tumors, most notably in lymphoma. In some cases, therapy causes a
change in the thymus, known as thymic rebound, where the normal
low-level shield-shaped uptake in the anterior mediastinum in
younger patients intensifies and the organ increases in size on CT (Fig.
12.20). It is important not to confuse this with residual active or
worsening lymphoma.
FIG. 12.16  Intense pleural activity is seen in mesothelioma (A, B) with
early contralateral right hilar (A) and left adrenal metastases (C).
FIG. 12.17  Postoperative change. (A) Two weeks after laparotomy,
the computed tomography (CT) scan shows secondary changes in the
midline anterior abdominal wall. Stranding of the left-lower-quadrant
peritoneal fat around a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid tumor implant
could be increased by the recent procedure. (B) Activity can be
indefinitely increased when associated with mesh, as here in the
midline abdominal wall.
FIG. 12.18  Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) posttherapy uptake. Computed
tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) images
show radiation changes in the posterior medial left lung 3 months after
external-beam radiation therapy. The uptake may decrease slightly on
follow-up scans, but marked uptake typically persists in the lungs.
FIG. 12.19  Patterns of bone marrow fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
uptake. (A) Diffuse uptake in the marrow is frequently seen in patients
with cancer after therapy with colony-stimulating factors. (B) Osseous
metastases usually present with heterogeneous focal lesions.
FIG. 12.20  Benign fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the thymus.
Area of uptake above the heart (arrow) in the typical configuration of
the thymus (A) corresponds to a normal thymus (B) on computed
tomography (CT). After chemotherapy, this uptake may be even more
intense, the so-called thymic rebound.
Artifacts
When metal or dense-iodinated contrast is present, the attenuation-
correction images may mistakenly show increased radiotracer activity
around the area (Fig. 12.21). Correlation with CT helps identify the
source
of
such
artifacts,
and
examining
the
corresponding
nonattenuation-correction images will show a significant drop in
activity that leads to the correct interpretation. Uptake in tumor or
infection, on the other hand, will tend not to decrease on the
nonattenuation-correction images (Fig. 12.22).
Hybrid PET/CT systems can generate certain artifacts. One common
problem is misregistration of PET and CT images. Often, patients
move their head or limbs between the two portions of the
examination. Also, because the PET must be acquired in quiet
respiration, the CT is usually performed by having the patient stop
breathing for a few seconds or while in quiet respiration. Although
this minimizes the significant organ shift that would be seen if the CT
was done using maximal inspiratory effort, motion and low lung
volumes can obscure lesions or make them project in an incorrect
location. A well-known example of this can occur in lesions around
the diaphragm, such as hepatic metastases that project over lung or
rib on the PET due to patient breathing (Fig. 12.23). Motion can
additionally decrease lesion intensity as the counts are spread over
adjacent voxels. Many systems possess respiratory gating capabilities
where image acquisition is triggered only during one portion of the
breathing cycle, resulting in decreased motion and improved lesion
conspicuity. Because this technology requires extra time and radiation
(from added CT slices), it is usually reserved for limited areas
containing known smaller lesions (Fig. 12.24).
FIG. 12.21  Differentiating metal artifact from pathology. Coronal
computed tomography (CT; left) scans demonstrate streak artifact in
the pelvis from bilateral hip prostheses. On positron emission
tomography (PET) attenuation-corrected images (center), the effect of
the metal manifests as linear increased activity along the edge of the
metal. The nonattenuation-corrected images (right) confirm this is
artifact because the activity is significantly decreased.
Patterns of Malignancy
Aggressive tumors usually have greater uptake because of higher
levels of metabolic activity. This pattern must be differentiated from
the intense activity often seen in infection or after radiation therapy.
Low-level activity may be seen in low-grade tumors and tumors with
a lower relative number of cells, such as well-differentiated carcinoid
and mucinous adenocarcinoma. Malignant pleural effusions most
often have low-level F-18 FDG activity, and some are even negative,
which may be due to the dispersion of tumor cells in the fluid so that
uptake is not detected.
Areas of central necrosis, often seen in large malignant and
inflammatory masses, will have diminished F-18 FDG accumulation.
By localizing areas of necrosis and differentiating areas of increased
activity, PET scans can help direct biopsy for increased sensitivity and
more accurate sampling. It may not be possible to differentiate a
cavitary infectious process from a necrotic tumor on PET because both
will have a cold center and a peripheral rim of increased activity (Fig.
12.25).
Levels of background activity play a role in the detection of
malignant lesions. For example, the high background activity of the
brain contributes to limited sensitivity for metastatic disease, with
perhaps only a third of lesions being visualized. Also, if background
uptake is heterogeneous, as may happen in the bowel, liver, or bone
marrow, it can make lesion detection more difficult.
FIG. 12.22  Infection or tumor should be suspected adjacent to metal
prosthesis when it is fairly intense, such as this case of recurrent
metastatic melanoma to the knee in a patient with widespread
metastatic disease. The lack of change between nonattenuation-
correction and attenuation-correction images also favors the presence
of true pathology in the region.
Quantification: The Standard Uptake Value
Lesion activity can be described in comparison to contralateral
background, blood pool, or liver activity. Areas can be graded as mild,
moderate, or marked depending on the level compared with normal
structures. However, it is often desirable to use a numerical value, and
this is usually done with the standard uptake value, or SUV.
A region of interest (ROI) is drawn around an area or volume of
tissue. The number of photons detected will reflect the actual
radiopharmaceutical concentration in the body once differences in
photon attenuation are compensated for by applying the attenuation-
correction map from the CT data. This calculation also requires the
precise knowledge of the injected activity, determined by subtracting
the postinjection residual in the syringe from the known activity
initially present and decay-correcting for time. Therefore, the dose
calibrator quality control must be maintained, and dose infiltration
must be avoided during injection. The formula used to determine SUV
is:
Activity in a lesion often is reported in terms of the SUVmax, or the
value of the most intense pixel in the ROI. This allows the exclusion of
low counts from areas of necrosis or adjacent normal structures. An
SUVmean is an average of all counts in the ROI, which may be more
representative because a spurious single hot area will not cause
incorrect data to be recorded. Many experts advocate using an
SUVpeak, which is calculated as an average of the counts from a
circular volume (often 1 cm) surrounding the hottest pixel. The
SUVpeak may more accurately represent maximal tumor metabolism
with a higher degree of statistical significance than the SUVmax. In
addition, a correction can be applied for body mass or body surface
area (SUVlean or SUVbsa). This helps eliminate the problem created by
the fact that the very low distribution of F-18 FDG in fat leads to
higher activity values in tumor and normal tissues in heavier patients
than in thin patients.
In general, an SUV greater than 2.5 has been considered suspicious
for malignancy, although most tumors have an even higher level, and
considerable overlap occurs with inflammatory processes. Numerous
factors affect SUV levels (Table 12.3). When evaluating the response to
therapy on serial scans or when comparing data from multiple sites
participating in a trial, SUV accuracy is critical. All parameters that
could alter the SUV must be controlled. However, variability still
occurs, and most consider that the SUV must change at least 20% to be
significant. Reports describe greater technical differences when
considering a multicenter trial. Because of difficulties in maintaining
protocol compliance and other issues, a 34% change was required
before it could be considered significant.
FIG. 12.23  Respiratory motion artifact. Coronal (A) and axial (B)
computed tomography (CT) scans in lung windows and corresponding
positron emission tomography (PET) scans show intense
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity in liver metastases and the right lung
base. However, no lung mass is seen on CT. (C) Two axial-enhanced
CT images show liver metastases. Differences in respiration have
caused misregistration, and a posterior liver lesion projects over the
lung on PET.
