cesium-137 rods) rotated around the patient, requiring several
minutes. CT radiography, on the other hand, requires only seconds to
cover the entire body. Based on the interactions of the x-ray photons
with tissues, an attenuation-correction map is built and applied to the
photons detected from the patient during the second phase of
imaging, the emission PET scan. Attenuation correction allows PET
data to be displayed with the proper intensity and is necessary for
quantification of activity. The emission scan is acquired as a series of
partially overlapping blocks of data, or bed positions, as the patient is
moved through the camera. The scan time for each bed position can be
modified depending on the patient’s body habitus but is typically a
couple of minutes on modern TOF scanners, nearly half that of
previous-generation scanners. Traditionally, a whole-body PET/CT
refers to a scan extending from skull base to midthigh, although
studies can include the extremities and brain, depending on the
situation.
Although most PET/CT studies are performed without intravenous
CT contrast, its use has been increasing because it helps identify
normal structures and makes pathology more conspicuous. Water can
be used to distend the stomach and duodenum. Dilute oral or water-
equivalent negative oral contrast are also acceptable. Attenuation
correction can help overcome any questions or artifacts if dense
contrast builds up, causing artificially elevated counts.
Displays include a three-dimensional maximum-intensity projection
(MIP) image and sagittal, coronal, and axial fused and unfused slices.
Software can fuse PET images to CT scans performed at other times or
to an MR image if desired. If the examination was performed on a
dedicated PET/MR camera, it is still advisable to compare the study to
a recent CT in order to visualize some abnormalities, such as small
lung nodules.
Dedicated PET/MR
Although dedicated PET/MR scanners are still primarily a research
tool, they are increasingly being utilized clinically. By eliminating the
CT component, patient radiation exposure may be decreased by 50%
to 70%, with the benefit of superior soft tissue characterization (Fig.
12.5). However, hybrid PET/MR scanners have a relatively small
central bore, and examinations are much longer than PET/CT; thus,
some patients may not tolerate the examination due to claustrophobia
and positioning difficulties (Box 12.3). Before scheduling an
examination,
the
patient
should
be
prescreened
for
MR
contraindications, the most important being metallic foreign bodies,
implants, or devices.
Because the MR signal is based on proton density and not beam
attenuation, attenuation correction needed for standardized uptake
value (SUV) calculations is challenging. MR attenuation correction
(MRAC) is only possible with a limited number of sequences. Most
often, a two-point three-dimensional (3D) isotropic Dixon T1-
weighted (T1W) sequence is used for a process called segmentation
attenuation correction. Four components are identified: fat, soft tissue,
lung, and air. MRAC maps built from this are then applied. This
process does not fully compensate for cortical bone, and artifacts can
result, especially in the skull base. Methods such as an atlas-based
attenuation-correction algorithm are likely a better option when
imaging the brain. The SUV measurements generated from the
MRAC-corrected PET/MR data may vary significantly from those
obtained using PET/CT. Therefore, direct comparison is not advised.
FIG. 12.4  (A) Elevated muscle activity can occur from increased
insulin levels (i.e., injected insulin in a diabetic and postprandial
secretion in nondiabetics) activating membrane glut-transporters. (B)
Strenuous exercise can also alter distribution. When muscle activity is
extensive, scans may need to be repeated after adequate preparation
because it can result in diminished activity in lesions.
FIG. 12.5  Positron emission tomography with magnetic resonance
(PET/MR) from a patient with metastatic recurrent melanoma of the left
arm demonstrates intense F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity in
lesions in the axilla, chest wall, and liver capsule on axial (left) and
coronal (right) projections. Whole-body images can be obtained from
the top of the head through the toes when needed.
Box 12.3 Example Protocol Items for Hybrid PET/MR
Acquisition
Patient Preparation
Follow preparation guidelines for PET/CT.
Before arrival, screen for:
Metal implants/implantable devices, fragments, or foreign
bodies
Assess the safety of the specific device model and serial
number (resources include http://www.mrisafety.com).
Claustrophobia, difficulty caused by body habitus given
smaller scanner bore size
Radiopharmaceuticals
Follow guidelines for PET/CT.
Acquisition
Whole-body localizing scan
MR sequences for whole-body simultaneous PET and MR
acquisition:
1. MR attenuation correction (MRAC):
• Coronal isotropic fast T1-weighted three-dimensional
(3D) 2-point Dixon sequence
• For segmentation: spoiled 3D GRE (e.g., VIBE, LAVA)
• Display in fat-only, water-only, in-phase, and opposed-
phase sequences
2. Coronal (and/or) axial T2: SS-SFE or HASTE
• Instead, some sites still use alternate fast sequences:
• STIR, with its uniform fat suppression, and radial fast
spine echo imaging (PROPELLER, BLADE), which helps
create motion-free image during free breathing
3. Additional options:
• Fast T1(VIBE or LAVA) whole-body coronal—for bone
lesions fat-saturation sequences
• T1 postgadolinium contrast: whole body for myeloma or
regional for other disease
• Small FOV in areas of concern, such as female pelvis
(depending on disease)
• Axial or coronal DWI with two b-values
• Dedicated T2-weighted sequences for chest and/or liver
regions
• May use respiratory gating
• Regional MR scans: With/without contrast as indicated;
scans/ADC map with high B values may minimize need
or replace contrast images for some purposes, such as
marrow evaluation in myeloma
ADC, Apparent diffusion coefficient; FOV, field of view; DWI,
diffusion-weighted imaging; GRE, gradient echo; HASTE, half-
Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin echo; LAVA, liver
acquisition with volume acceleration; MR, magnetic resonance;
PET, positron emission tomography; PET/CT, positron emission
tomography with computed tomography; PET/MR, positron
emission tomography with magnetic resonance; SS-SFE, single-shot
fast spin echo; STIR, short-tau inversion recovery sequence; VIBE,
volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination.
The Dixon sequence data can be reconstructed, fused to MR, and
displayed as fat-weighted, water-weighted, in-phase, and opposed-
phase sequences. Although these may be sufficient for some purposes,
spatial resolution is lower than from standard MR sequences. Most
sites will routinely obtain additional free-breathing whole-body axial
and/or coronal T2-weighted (T2W) images done with a fast technique
such as the more rapid single-shot spin echo (single-shot fast spin
echo [SS-FSE], single-shot turbo spin echo [SSh-TSE], or half-Fourier
acquisition single-shot turbo spin echo [HASTE] depending on
vendor). These images will demonstrate higher-quality anatomical
resolution and tissue contrast, as well as better visualization of
pathology, than can be seen with the MRAC data alone and can be
completed perhaps 75% faster than standard sequences. Any
additional sequences must be carefully considered in terms of the
