F-18 FDG Oncology Protocol
PET/CT Imaging
Many factors affect F-18 FDG uptake, distribution, and clearance.
Table 12.1 outlines different causes for altered F-18 FDG distribution
in tissues. Measures are required to optimize tumor-to-background
radiotracer uptake, making patient preparation and scheduling
complex. An example protocol is listed in Box 12.2. PET/CT
scheduling is often complicated by factors that alter F-18 FDG
distribution, and some recommendations on PET scheduling
modifications are outlined in Table 12.2.
Patient Preparation
Because glucose competes with F-18 FDG for uptake, the patient’s
glucose level should be checked before injection. The upper-limit
cutoff varies among institutions, but a value under 200 mg/dL is
generally considered acceptable.
FIG. 12.2  Normal distribution of F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
Uptake is normally intense in the brain and urinary tract, moderately
intense in the liver, and variable in muscles (especially of the
oropharynx), heart, and bowel.
Insulin, whether endogenously released in response to a meal or
following administration to diabetics, stimulates the glucose
transporters (e.g., glut-1), which are highly expressed in muscle cell
membranes. This dramatically increases muscle uptake (Fig. 12.4),
thereby potentially decreasing uptake in tumor. To minimize the
impact, patients fast overnight or for at least 4 to 6 hours before
injection and avoid carbohydrates in the meal (or even the day) before
injection. Patients with diabetes should not be given short-acting
insulin within 2 hours of radiotracer injection, and long-acting insulin
should be held overnight. The scan must be carefully scheduled
because it may be difficult to coordinate with the diabetic patient’s
serum glucose levels, which can fluctuate widely over the course of
the day. When this is the case, optimal times often include early
morning, before eating or taking insulin, and early afternoon, with the
patient fasting after eating a light early breakfast and taking the
morning short-acting insulin dose. For non–insulin-dependent
diabetics taking the medication metformin, consideration should be
given to withholding it for 1 to 2 days because metformin has been
shown to dramatically increase uptake in the bowel.
Muscle activity is also minimized by limiting vigorous exercise for 1
to 2 days before the examination, and sedatives (e.g., alprazolam oral
0.5 mg) are routinely administered for patients with head and neck
cancer who have undergone surgery in the past, helping to prevent
frequently problematic increased background muscle activity.
FIG. 12.3  Normal variants. (A) Marked uptake can be seen normally
in the small and large bowel. In some cases, the increased bowel
activity is related to metformin use. (B) Axial positron emission
tomography (PET) and corresponding computed tomography (CT)
images show uptake in the oropharynx. Normal activity is typically
symmetrical and may be intense when patients swallow or talk. L,
Lingual tonsil; M, mandible; Mx, maxilla; P, parotid gland; PT, palatine
tonsils; S, submandibular gland.
Table 12.1
Lesion Characterization: F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) Activity Levels
Increased Uptake
Decreased Uptake
High-grade malignancy
Benign lesion
Indolent or low-grade tumor
Highly cellular lesion
Low cellularity: mucinous, cystic/fluid filled
Increased patient body mass/weight
Lesion:
• Size too small
• In area of motion
Infection, abscess
Scar, chronic fibrosis
Increased vascularity, inflammation
Prior chemotherapy
Trauma, surgery
Attenuation: breast implant or metal
Radiation (acute)
Radiation (delayed)
Dose Administration and Uptake
Administered doses of F-18 FDG have been steadily decreased over
the years. With the introduction of improved camera technology, such
as time-of-flight (TOF) detection, typical doses are on the order of 7 to
8 mCi (259–296 MBq), up to half that used with the previous-
generation scanners.
Patients should remain completely still and quiet for the uptake
period, which is usually 50 to 65 minutes to achieve the optimum
target-to-background ratio balanced with the physical decay T1/2.
Some studies have suggested that additional delayed images at 90 to
120 minutes may improve sensitivity and specificity because tumors
tend to continue accumulating F-18 FDG while activity continues to
decrease from other tissues and benign processes. In the case of
astrocytomas, which are especially difficult to image with F-18 FDG,
an even greater interval (on the order of hours) may increase the
accuracy. However, prolonged waiting periods are not generally
practical in the clinic. Whatever delay is used, subsequent studies
should be performed in a consistent manner to be certain that the
changes seen are not artificially created.
Table 12.2
Alterations in Scheduling Due to Clinical Factors
History
Course of Action
Prior surgery
Delay scan 4 weeks (2–6 weeks).
Chemotherapy
Delay scan 6–8 weeks posttherapy (minimum 3 weeks) or schedule just before
next cycle.
Radiation therapy
Delay scan ≥ 3 months.
Colony-
stimulating
drugs
Consider scan delay of 1 week for short-acting drugs or several weeks for
long-acting drugs.
Serum glucose
Reschedule until controlled (<200 mg/dL).
Insulin
administration
Wait 2 hours for short-acting insulin or 8–12 hours for long-acting insulin.
Turn off insulin pump for 4–6 hours.
Breastfeeding
Discontinue for at least 6 hours postexamination.
Prior brown-fat
Warm patient for 30–60 minutes before injection; consider medication if
activity
ineffective.
Box 12.2 Patient Protocol for Fluorine-18
Fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) PET/CT Imaging in
Oncology
Patient Preparation
Avoid exercise for 1 to 2 days.
Diabetes: Serum glucose controlled
Insulin: Stop long-acting insulin 8 to 12 hours before scan; no
short-acting insulin within 2 hours of injection.
Oral metformin (Glucophage): May continue
If colon is area of concern, consider holding 48 hours if
serum glucose can be controlled otherwise.
Hydrate patient orally.
NPO except water for 4 to 6 hours; avoid carbohydrates 6 to
24 hours prior; no caffeine.
Check serum glucose before dosing (<200 mg/dL).
Patient kept warm, quiet, and relaxed for 30 to 60 minutes
before injection.
Consider sedation (diazepam, benzodiazepine) for
claustrophobia, anxiety or tense muscles, or prior head and
neck surgery.
Prior brown-fat uptake: Warming the patient is best.
Alternative: 5 mg intravenous (IV) diazepam 10 minutes
prior or 80 mg oral propranolol 2 hours prior
Radiopharmaceutical
Adult: 8 mCi F-18 FDG IV [5–12 mCi (185–444 MBq)]
0.09 mCi/kg (3.2 MBq/kg) to 0.14 mCi/kg (5.3 MBq/kg)
Child: 0.10 mCi/kg (3.7 MBq/kg), minimum 1.0 mCi (37 MBq)
Wait (quiet, inactive) 50 to 65 minutes.
Void bladder immediately before imaging.
Image Acquisition
Patient supine
Field of view: 80 to 90 cm (varies by patient size and camera
manufacturer, 50–90 cm for PET/CT)
CT transmission scan (varies):
Scout: Determine bed/slice positioning and automatic CT
exposure settings 5 mAs.
Localizing (PET/CT): mAs automatic tube modulation
(max 125 mAs), 100 kVp (70–120 kVp)
CTDI: 3 to 7 mGy (arms down slightly higher)
Diagnostic: 80 to 300 mAs; 100 to 140 kVp (e.g., 100 kVp
in chest)
CTDI: 10 to 15 mGy
PET emission scan: TOF scanner 1 to 4 minutes/bed position;
non-TOF 5 to 10 minutes/position
Processing: Iterative reconstruction, 128 × 128 or 256 × 256
matrix, pixel size typically 2 to 4 mm
CT, Computed tomography; CTDI, computed tomography dose
index; PET/CT, positron emission tomography with computed
tomography; TOF, time of flight.
PET/CT Scan Acquisition
Patients are usually imaged in the supine position after bladder
voiding. Because CT artifact occurs when the arms are in the field of
view, they are most often placed above the head when the pathology
is in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis but left at the patient’s side when
the tumor is in the head and neck.
The study is acquired in two phases. First, a transmission scan is
performed using an external radiation source for attenuation
correction. Originally, radiation sources (e.g., germanium-68 or
cesium-137 rods) rotated around the patient, requiring several
minutes. CT radiography, on the other hand, requires only seconds to
cover the entire body. Based on the interactions of the x-ray photons
with tissues, an attenuation-correction map is built and applied to the
photons detected from the patient during the second phase of
imaging, the emission PET scan. Attenuation correction allows PET
data to be displayed with the proper intensity and is necessary for
quantification of activity. The emission scan is acquired as a series of
partially overlapping blocks of data, or bed positions, as the patient is
moved through the camera. The scan time for each bed position can be
modified depending on the patient’s body habitus but is typically a
couple of minutes on modern TOF scanners, nearly half that of
previous-generation scanners. Traditionally, a whole-body PET/CT
refers to a scan extending from skull base to midthigh, although
studies can include the extremities and brain, depending on the
situation.
Although most PET/CT studies are performed without intravenous
CT contrast, its use has been increasing because it helps identify
normal structures and makes pathology more conspicuous. Water can
be used to distend the stomach and duodenum. Dilute oral or water-
equivalent negative oral contrast are also acceptable. Attenuation
correction can help overcome any questions or artifacts if dense
contrast builds up, causing artificially elevated counts.
Displays include a three-dimensional maximum-intensity projection
(MIP) image and sagittal, coronal, and axial fused and unfused slices.
Software can fuse PET images to CT scans performed at other times or
to an MR image if desired. If the examination was performed on a
