Oncology
F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron
Emission Tomography
Background
For decades, positron emission tomography (PET) imaging was
largely limited to use in research. The development of dedicated PET
cameras, the widespread expansion of cyclotron production facilities,
and the approval of new radiopharmaceuticals have all contributed to
the dramatic growth of clinical PET in recent years. PET agents often
incorporate radioactive isotopes of atoms normally present in organic
substances (e.g., oxygen-15, nitrogen-13, carbon-11, and the hydroxyl
analog, fluorine-18) and thus can image cellular or molecular
processes that are otherwise difficult to image. Several different PET
applications are clinically available (Box 12.1). However, most clinical
PET imaging is currently done with the glucose analog F-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) for the evaluation of cancer.
Malignant cells are usually more metabolically active than normal
tissues and tend to accumulate higher levels of glucose, which is
reflected in increased radiopharmaceutical uptake.
Functional imaging with PET can provide substantially different
information than conventional modalities, such as computed
tomography (CT). Because CT relies on changes in size and
architecture to diagnose malignancy, sensitivity and specificity are
limited. For example, in patients with cancer, enlarged lymph nodes
are assumed to harbor malignancy, whereas nodes of normal size are
characterized as benign. This can result in errors when adenopathy
occurs from infection or when early metastases are present in small
lymph nodes. In addition, the results of therapy can be difficult to
determine because masses may change in size slowly or not at all, and
residual or recurrent disease can be obscured by radiation or
postsurgical scar distortion of normal tissues. Use of F-18 FDG, on the
other hand, permits metabolic activity to be monitored serially, with
quantitative
and
semiquantitative
analysis
helping
to
better
characterize lesions and predict therapy outcome.
Box 12.1 Common Clinical Applications of PET
Imaging
F-18 Fluorine Deoxyglucose (F-18 FDG)
Cancer: Staging, restaging, therapy monitoring
Lung nodule diagnosis/characterization, localization of cancer
of unknown primary
Dementia imaging
Seizures (interictal)
Cardiac: Viability, sarcoidosis
F-18 Florbetaben/F-18 Florbetapir/F-18
Flutemetamol: Detection of Amyloid
Rubidium-82 (Rb-82): Cardiac perfusion
Ammonia N-13: Cardiac perfusion
F-18 fluciclovine: Prostate cancer recurrence, metastasis
Gallium-68 prostate-specific membrane antigen (Ga-68
PMSA): Prostate cancer recurrence
Ga-68 DOTATE or DOTATOC: Neuroendocrine/somatostatin-
receptor tumor imaging
F-18 sodium fluoride: Bone metastases and tumors
PET, Positron emission tomography.
One limitation of PET is the lack of anatomical detail in the images.
Normal uptake in structures such as the bowel, muscles, and ureters
can be mistaken for tumor. Therefore, correlation with CT or magnetic
resonance (MR) is critical for proper image interpretation. Differences
in positioning between the two scans are minimized when studies are
performed on a dedicated PET camera combining the CT or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scanner in a single hybrid PET/CT or
PET/MR device.
F-18 FDG PET/CT has become a key component in tumor
evaluation and significantly affects patient care. This was shown by
data obtained during the National Oncologic PET Registry (NOPR)
established by the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) to gather evidence to help determine when payment would be
authorized. Findings from the NOPR trial were impressive, with PET
found to alter patient management in 36.5% of cases. Changes
included redirecting biopsy, avoiding surgery (after upstaging a
patient), changing the overall treatment goal or causing a major
change in therapy, and detecting additional primary malignancies
(Coleman et al. 2010; Hilner et al. 2008). Based on the success of the
NOPR trial, F-18 FDG PET/CT reimbursement was approved for most
solid tumors.
Radiopharmaceuticals
Physical Properties
In positron radioactive decay, a positron (β +) ejected from the atom
travels a short distance before meeting a negative particle (electron)
and undergoing annihilation. The resulting two 511-keV photons
travel at 180 degrees from each other. These high-energy photons do
not interact well with routine gamma cameras but are optimally
detected by the specialized ring of detectors in a PET camera. Photons
received within a short enough time interval at opposing detectors are
registered as “coincidence photons,” or those originating from the
same decay event. The result is a superior image to those achieved
with gamma camera single-photon studies (e.g., with technetium-
99m–labeled agents).
FIG. 12.1  Glucose and F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) intracellular
kinetics. F-18 FDG uses the same uptake and phosphorylation
pathways as glucose, although it cannot be metabolized further through
glycolysis. In cancer cells, radiotracer accumulation is increased
because of different levels of enzymatic activity. G-6-P, Glucose-6-
phosphatase.
Many PET-emitting isotopes have very short half-lives (T1/2),
requiring a cyclotron to be in extremely close proximity. The 109.7-
minute T1/2 of F-18 means it can be shipped from local and even
regional production facilities. On the other hand, the T1/2 is not
excessively long, and radiation exposure is lower than many agents
with longer-lived radiolabels. Dosimetry information is outlined in
Appendix 1.
Kinetics and Distribution
In malignant cells, increased expression of membrane glucose
transporters (e.g., glut-1) results in higher levels of intracellular
glucose. Within these cells, the levels of hexokinase (hexokinase II)
