Clinical F-18 FDG PET Use in Oncology
Evaluation of lung cancer in solitary pulmonary nodules was the first
clinical indication for F-18 FDG PET scanning in the United States
approved by the CMS. Since that time, its use has rapidly evolved. It
is important to understand the strengths and weakness of this
examination for each type of tumor. F-18 FDG PET is very sensitive
for many cancers (Table 12.4), whereas the examination is frequently
less sensitive for others (Table 12.5). Several of the indications for PET
are described in the following subsections. Brain tumor assessment
with F-18 FDG is discussed in Chapter 13.
Cancers Not Localized to an Organ or Region
Lymphoma
Lymphomas can be divided into Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL) in
approximately 10% of cases and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) in
the remainder. Characterization also depends on the type of
lymphocyte the tumor arises from: NHL can originate from T cells or
B cells, whereas HL involves the B lymphocytes, and numerous
subtypes have been identified under these main groupings. Each
individual cancer can follow an aggressive, moderate, or more
indolent course, but even cases that initially behave in a low-grade
manner can undergo malignant transformation, turning highly
aggressive and frequently fatal. Patients may also relapse after
remission, and in such cases, tumors are often refractory to therapies.
HL progression tends to involve contiguous nodal chains and
lymphoproliferative structures. It most frequently presents with
painless supraclavicular or cervical adenopathy (60%–80%), axillary
adenopathy (30%), and/or mediastinal mass (50%–60%). Disease
outside of the lymph nodes is rare (10% to 15%), but when it happens,
involvement is most often in the lung, bone marrow, bone, or liver.
Disease in NHL does not tend to spread in a similar orderly fashion,
and patients frequently present initially with widespread disease.
FIG. 12.24  Coronal slices of a lung nodule performed with normal
quiet respiration (A) and then with respiratory gating (B) showed
decreased blurring of the nodule. In addition, standardized uptake
value (SUV) measurements of the nodule saw a mild but potentially
significant 4% increase in the SUVmax that could improve lesion
conspicuity.
Survival has improved over the years but is worse if disease is not
localized. In HL, the overall 5-year survival rate of greater than 90%
decreases to 77% for distant involvement, and for NHL, the overall
survival rate of more than 86% falls to roughly 63% when disease is no
longer localized. Accurate staging and assessment of treatment
response can help prevent unnecessary or ineffective therapy, which,
given the high cure rates and long survival times, may be especially
important to decrease toxicity from therapy. However, the tumor,
node, metastasis (TNM) system commonly used for solid tumors is
not as useful for lymphoma.
Methods used for staging and assessment of therapy response have
evolved over the years. The Ann Arbor staging system has been
widely used for years, relying on lesion location and size changes in
lymph nodes, lymphoproliferative tissue, and other organs (Box 12.4).
Over the years, classification and grading systems have evolved to
better reflect actual changes in tumor activity as opposed to the
location of lesions. This is essential because the presence of fibrosis
and scar can mean lesions seen on CT do not fully resolve, even after
tumor has been successfully eradicated (Fig. 12.26). However,
metabolic activity on PET tends to be proportional to tumor grade and
can better identify and differentiate sites of active disease from
scarring. Changes in F-18 FDG metabolic activity on PET/CT can be
used to significantly improve the accuracy concerning changing
disease status over anatomical measurement alone on CT or MR. In
order to better standardize descriptions of lesion intensity, the
Deauville Criteria established a 5-point scale, comparing maximal to
background structures:
FIG. 12.25  Central tumor necrosis on positron emission tomography
(PET). A left-upper-lung carcinoma seen as a solid mass on computed
tomography (CT) actually contains significant central necrosis that is
revealed as absent uptake on fused PET axial (A) and coronal (B)
images. Visualization of regional differences in tumor metabolic activity
with PET can help direct biopsy.
Table 12.3
Factors Altering the Standard Uptake Value (SUV)
Factor
Change in SUV
↑ Serum glucose
↓
↑ Body mass
↑
↓ Dose from extravasation
↓
↑ Uptake period
↑
↓ Region-of-interest size
↑
↓ Pixel size
↑
Table 12.4
F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET Common Applications in Oncology
Tumors With Greater Uptake/Sensitivity
Primary Tumor Region
Head and neck
cancer
Squamous (most
common)
Adenocarcinoma
Solitary lung
nodule (SPN)
>7–8 mm
Lung cancer
Non–small cell Small
cell
Lower for ground-glass/subsolid adenocarcinoma
(formerly bronchoalveolar cancer)
Small cell
Mesothelioma
Breast cancer
Moderate uptake—lower in lobular and in situ lesions
Esophageal
Gastric cancers
May be difficult to see due to background
Colon cancer
Rectal cancer
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma
Cervical cancer
Endometrial cancer
Uterine cancer
Testicular cancer
Seminomatous +/– more than nonseminomatous
Tumors With Primary Not Regionally Localized
Lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin’s
Usually hot: Low-grade tumors may not be FDG+
Hodgkin’s
Almost always hot
Melanoma
Multiple myeloma
Sarcoma
(locations vary)
Tumors With Moderate Sensitivity
Hepatocellular
cancer
Use enhanced CT/MR using noncontrast, arterial phase, venous phase, and
delayed washout timing
Ovarian cancer
Glioblastoma multiforme
CT, Computed tomography; MR, magnetic resonance; PET, positron emission tomography.
Table 12.5
Malignant Tumors With Lower Sensitivity on F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET
Cancer Type From Head to Toe
Comments
Low-grade glioma
Improved in GBM and lymphoma but accuracy < outside
the brain
Best assessed with enhanced MR
Brain metastases
Detects ≈1/3
Well-differentiated thyroid
cancer
Imaging with radioiodine preferred
Pulmonary neuroendocrine
tumor (carcinoid)
F-18 FDG is useful when Ga-68 DOTATATE uptake is poor
(i.e., poorly differentiated tumor).
NSCLC bronchoalveolar
Lowest in ground-glass opacities
FDG still commonly used
Lobular breast cancer
Detects ≈40%
FDG still commonly used
Cholangiocarcinoma
Bowel and pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors
(NETs)
F-18 FDG is useful in when Ga-68 DOTATATE uptake is poor
(i.e., poorly differentiated tumor).
Cystic borderline or low-grade pancreatic neoplasm
Renal-cell carcinoma
NSGCT testicular cancer
Cystic, borderline, or low-grade ovarian tumor
Prostate adenocarcinoma
FDG is useful when hormonal control/castration no longer
inhibits growth (de-differentiates).
ENMZL (MALT lymphoma)
Liposarcoma
ENMZL, Extranodal marginal-zone lymphoma; GBM, glioblastoma; MALT, mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma; MR, magnetic resonance; NSCLC, non–small-cell lung cancer;
NSGCT, nonseminomatous germ-cell tumor; PET, positron emission tomography.
1 = no activity above background
2 ≤ mediastinal blood pool
3 > mediastinum
4 > liver (moderately)
5 >> liver (markedly)
The Lugano Criteria, which combine staging parameters based on
the Ann Arbor system with the 5-point visual PET grading system,
were published in 2014 and are now in widespread use (Table 12.6).
F-18 FDG PET imaging of lymphoma has been one of the most
successful applications of F-18 FDG. It is clearly superior to the
previous nuclear medicine examination for lymphoma assessment,
Ga-67 (Fig. 12.27), and compares very favorably with CT scanning,
which has been the preeminent lymphoma imaging examination for
years. Overall, the reported sensitivity and specificity of PET/CT for
detecting active tumor are approximately 86% and 96%, respectively,
compared with a CT sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of 41% in HL.
Viable NHL lymphoma is also almost always FDG avid, particularly
in diffuse large B cell (DLBCL). A baseline examination is
recommended, however, to confirm each tumor is FDG avid because
some low-grade tumors do not accumulate significant amounts of
radiopharmaceutical. In addition to facilitating interpretation of
subsequent examinations, the pretreatment PET reportedly modifies
the disease stage in 15% to 20% and may affect management in 5% to
15%. The sensitivity of FDG PET/CT for several types of lymphoma is
outlined in Table 12.7. Tumors with lower sensitivity are often
extranodal, and some of these include primary cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma (40%), extranodal marginal-zone lymphoma (54%–66%),
and gastrointestinal (GI) tract lymphoma (67%); Fig. 12.28). It has been
known for a long time that posttherapy PET/CT can predict long-term
outcomes
in
HL,
with
patients
with
positive
examinations
demonstrating markedly decreased survival compared with those
whose areas of abnormal uptake clear (69% compared with 95%,
respectively). Results with other tumors have varied somewhat.
However, recent Lugano Criteria recommendations support the use of
F-18 FDG PET/CT in all lymphomas that show positive uptake.
Box 12.4 Ann Arbor Staging System With Cotswold
Modifications
Stage I
Single lymph node region or lymphoid organ (i.e., spleen,
Waldeyer’s ring, thymus)
Stage IE involves a single extralymphatic site.
Stage II
Two or more lymph node regions on same side of diaphragm
or localized contiguous involvement of one extranodal organ
and its regional lymph nodes
Stage IIE involves other lymph node regions on the same side
of the diaphragm.
Stage III
Lymph node involvement on both sides of the diaphragm
Stage IIIS also involves the spleen.
Stage IIIE involves one extranodal organ on one side of the
diaphragm.
Stage IIISE involves one extranodal on both sides of the
diaphragm.
Stage IV
Multifocal/dissemination of one or more extranodal organs
(including marrow) or structures, with or without associated
lymph nodes, or
Involvement of an isolated extralymphatic organ with
nonregional/distant lymph node involvement
Additional designations:
A—No symptoms
B—Fever, drenching night sweats, unexpected >10%
weight loss in 6 months
X—Bulky disease
Decreased number of target lesions from 10 to 5
Potential challenges with F-18 FDG can at times include detection of
bone marrow lesions. Because background bone marrow activity
greatly varies, lesions may be difficult to detect. However, although
the reported sensitivity has varied compared with bone marrow
biopsy, the sensitivity has been reported as high as 90% to 92% with
PET/CT (Fig. 12.29). Another important issue to consider is the
significance of residual masses after therapy, which can be seen in up
to 85% of HL patients and 40% with NHL. In general, PET/CT is much
more specific than CT (86% vs. 31%). However, such masses can show
residual uptake, particularly when occurring in the anterior
mediastinum, where nonspecific, mild residual activity is sometimes
seen but represents active tumor in <50% of cases. In addition,
postchemotherapy thymic rebound can cause a false positive with
mild to moderately increased F-18 FDG activity and enlargement on
CT. A follow-up examination may be needed if an anterior
mediastinal soft tissue lesion does not have the characteristic shield-
shaped configuration.
FIG. 12.26  Evaluation of a residual mass. (A) During chemotherapy
for lymphoma, a large partially enhancing anterior mediastinal mass on
computed tomography (CT) showed persistently abnormal
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in one region of the mass. (B)
When the follow-up CT showed residual mass, a repeat positron
emission tomography (PET) was done. No FDG uptake was seen,
consistent with fibrosis and scar.
FIG. 12.27  Improved sensitivity of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) over gallium-67 (Ga-67). PET shows a
large right neck mass and involvement in the left neck, spleen, and
abdomen from lymphoma (A), whereas a 10-mCi Ga-67 scan at 96
hours has inferior image quality and fails to detect lesion outside of the
right neck (B). Ga-67 was used extensively in the past to evaluate
lymphoma but is less sensitive than F-18 FDG PET, as seen in this
patient.
Table 12.6
Lugano Criteria for Lymphoma Response Assessment
Deauville
Score
Definition of Score
Posttherapy PET
Lugano Score (hottest
lesion)
Posttherapy CT
Lymphoma
Status
No abnormal ↑
activity
Score 1, 2, or 3
(+/– residual
Lymph node ↓ ≤
1.5 cm
Complete
response
≤ Mediastinal
blood pool
> Mediastinal
blood pool
mass)
No new FDG+
lesion
No FDG+ bone
marrow
disease
Radiographic
lesions
completely
disappear
(CR)
Mildly > liver
Score 4 or 5 with↓
uptake
compared
with baseline
and with
residual
mass(es)
Bone marrow
lesion activity
↓ from
baseline but
not cleared
No new lesions
Lesion SPD or
PPD ↓ ≥50%
No progression of
nonmeasured
lesions
Partial response
(PR)
>> Liver
(2–3 times
greater)
New lesions
Score 4 or 5 w/o
significant
change in
uptake
No change in
bone marrow
uptake from
baseline
No new lesions
Lesions ↓ <50%
No evidence of
progression
Stable
disease
(SD) or
no response
Score 4 or 5 with
↑ uptake from
baseline
New lesions
consistent
with
lymphoma
New or recurrent
FDG+ bone
marrow
Lesion SPD or
PPD ↑ ≥50%
from nadir
Lesions ≤2.0 cm ↑
by 0.5 cm and
those >2 cm ↑
by 1.0 cm
New or larger
nonmeasured
lesions
Splenomegaly↑
50% if no prior
splenomegaly,
length ↑2 cm
Progressive
disease (PD)
X
Activity unlikely
related to
lymphoma
Single CT lesion: PPD = product of perpendicular diameter (short axis × long axis) in cm;
multiple CT lesions: SPD = sum of the product of each lesion’s perpendicular diameter
(SPD = lesion A [short axis × long axis] + lesion B [short axis × long axis] +..., etc.).
CT, Computed tomography; FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography.
Melanoma
For patients with melanoma, survival strongly depends on the stage at
the time of diagnosis, and the prognosis is extremely poor with nodal
or distant metastases. Apart from the presence or absence of
metastatic disease, the depth to which the primary lesion extends is
the most important prognostic factor, and grading is based on
thickness according to the Breslow classification. Metastases are
frequently found in high-risk patients (i.e., >4-mm Breslow depth), but
metastatic disease frequently occurs even in lower-risk patients. In
high-risk cases, PET/CT often identifies lesions in unpredictable and
unusual locations, often distant from the primary (e.g., other
cutaneous and subcutaneous sites, spleen, distant nodes, liver, and
gallbladder), and it often uncovers lesions not detected by CT (Fig.
12.30). Thus, many sites perform head-to-toe imaging on patients with
melanoma. The sensitivity of FDG PET is reported to be greater than
90%, with a specificity of 87%. Lesions that are not detected are likely
microscopic or in the brain, where enhanced MR is most effective. PET
alters therapy in approximately 25% of patients and is useful in
staging disease in patients at high risk for metastases or who relapse.
FIG. 12.28  Monitoring therapy of lymphoma. (A) Positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) images show
intense uptake in a gastric lymphoma and an adjacent lymph node.
Gastric involvement may not be detected, but when present, positron
emission tomography (PET) may be useful for follow-up. (B) After one
cycle of chemotherapy, no tumor could be identified. This suggests a
better prognosis than for a late responder or nonresponder.
Table 12.7
F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) Activity in Lymphoma PET/CT
High FDG Uptake
Positive Lymphomas
With More Variable FDG
Uptake
Lower FDG Uptake
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Follicular lymphoma
(ranges low to
moderate)
CLL/SLL
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Nodal marginal-zone
lymphoma (none to
high activity)
ENMZL (previously called
MALT marginal-zone
lymphoma)
Burkitt lymphoma
Mantle-cell lymphoma
(low to high activity)
Splenic marginal-zone
lymphoma
Lymphoblastic lymphoma
Primary cutaneous T-cell or
B-cell lymphoma
Anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma
Mycosis fungoides
Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (variable
sensitivity with positive lesions in
40%–98%)
Posttransplant
lymphoproliferative
disorder (PTLD)
NK/T-cell lymphoma
CLL, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia; ENMZL, extranodal marginal-zone lymphoma; MALT,
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma; NK, natural killer; PET/CT, positron emission
tomography with computed tomography; SLL, small lymphocytic lymphoma.
In terms of lymph node staging, however, PET does not replace
sentinel lymph node scintigraphy with Tc-99m sulfur colloid or Tc-
99m Tilmanocept in intermediate-risk (>1.4-mm Breslow depth) or
high-risk patients diagnosed with melanoma. Evaluating the resected
sentinel lymph node with histochemical staining is the most sensitive
method to reveal microscopic disease. Although PET often identifies
metastases in stage I or II patients, positive examinations are not seen
in lower-risk patients without more extensive involvement in the area
of the sentinel nodes.
FIG. 12.29  Restaging lymphoma. (A) The initial positron emission
tomography (PET) image in a patient with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
shows extensive abdominal adenopathy and involvement of the spleen,
chest, and supraclavicular nodes. (B) After two cycles of
chemotherapy, much of the adenopathy has resolved in the abdomen,
but worsening disease is seen in the spleen, bone marrow, and
mediastinum, requiring a change in therapy protocol.
Head and Neck Cancer
Squamous-cell tumors make up approximately 90% of all head and
neck cancers (HNCs), with adenocarcinoma making up most of the
remainder. Smoking and alcohol have long been recognized as the
most important risk factors for squamous-cell cancer. In these tumors,
the extent of lymph node involvement was historically the critical
discriminating factor determining patient prognosis. Since 2007,
however, the World Health Organization has officially recognized
human papilloma virus (HPV) as a cause for HNC that can be
identified by staining tissue for the immunohistochemical marker p16.
It has become clear recently that HPV-positive HNC is a separate class
of disease, showing unusually good response to therapy and positive
outcomes even for stage III and stage IV disease using the prior
standard classification system (TNM). Therefore, a different staging
system was required with subgroups that better reflected differences
in survival/prognosis (i.e., hazard discrimination) than the traditional
system for squamous-cell cancer (i.e., HPV negative).
In 2018, the eighth edition of the American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual went into effect for squamous-
cell HNC using the TNM system. Restaging of HNC is broken down
into three main groups: (1) nasopharynx (+/– Epstein–Barr virus
[EBV]), (2) HPV-negative oro-/hypopharynx, and (3) HPV-positive
oro-/hypopharynx. In addition to creating an entirely new staging
system for HPV-positive oro pharyngeal cancers, modifications were
made for HPV-negative tumors, including determination of T by not
only tumor size but also the depth of invasion (DOI), expanding nodal
disease (N) classification to include extranodal extension, and
modifying the “unknown primary” classification. The TNM
classifications for HPV-negative and HPV-positive disease are
outlined in Tables 12.8 and 12.9, respectively. The new staging
systems for HNC are outlined in Table 12.10 for HPV-negative tumors
and in Table 12.11 for HPV-positive tumors.
FIG. 12.30  Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography
(PET) in melanoma. (A) Diffuse tumor involvement including uptake
near the primary tumor in the left thigh, multiple lymph nodes, organs,
and soft tissue metastases from melanoma. This result led to changing
the planned radiation therapy to systemic chemotherapy. PET can also
identify subtle disease not found on computed tomography (CT). (B)
Regional metastases are seen in numerous right cervical lymph nodes
in a patient with a recently resected melanoma of the right ear.
Table 12.8
Staging/Restaging HPV-Negative Head and Neck Cancers a
Category
Oropharyngeal
Oral Cavity (includes DOI)
Tumor Size
Tx
Cannot be assessed due to lack of
Cannot be assessed due to lack of
information
information
T0
(Deleted category)
Tis
Carcinoma in situ
Carcinoma in situ
T1
≤2 cm
≤2 cm, DOI ≤5 mm
T2
>2 cm but ≤4 cm
≤2 cm, DOI >5 mm but ≤10 mm or >2
cm but ≤4 cm, ≤10 mm
T3
>4 cm or extension lingual surface
epiglottis
>4 cm or any tumor DOI >10 mm
T4a
Tumor invades larynx, extrinsic
tongue muscles, medial pterygoid,
hard palate, or mandible
Invades lip or adjacent structures
through bone; involves inferior
alveolar nerve, floor of mouth, or
skin of face
T4b
Any size invading lateral pterygoid
muscle, skull base, pterygoid
plates; or surrounds carotid artery
or invades
Invades masticator space, pterygoid
plates, or skull base and/or encases
internal carotid artery
N Classification
Clinical LN Category
Pathological LN Category
NX
Cannot be assessed
Cannot be assessed
N0
No LN involvement
No LN involvement
N1
1 ipsilateral LN ≤3 cm, ENE–
1 ipsilateral LN ≤3 cm, ENE–
N2a
1 ipsilateral LN >3 cm but not >6 cm,
ENE–
1 ipsilateral LN ≤3 cm, ENE+, or 1 LN
>3 cm but not >6 cm, ENE–
N2b
Multiple ipsilateral LN, none >6 cm,
ENE–
Multiple ipsilateral LN, none >6 cm,
ENE–
N2c
Contralateral or bilateral LNs, none >6
cm, ENE–
Contralateral or bilateral LNs, none >6
cm, ENE–
N3a
1 ipsilateral LN >6 cm, ENE–
1 ipsilateral LN >6 cm, ENE–
N3b
Any LN(s) with clinically overt ENE+
1 ipsilateral LN >6 cm, ENE–, or
Single ipsilateral LN >3 cm, ENE+,
or Multiple ipsilateral,
contralateral, or bilateral LNs
if any are ENE+
M0
No distant spread
M1
Distant spread
DOI, Depth of invasion; ENE, extranodal extension; HPV, human papilloma virus; LN, lymph
node.
a  According to American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual, eighth
edition.
PET/CT is highly sensitive for these tumors and their metastases
(Fig. 12.31) and is able to alter management in 15% to 25% of cases
overall. Despite this sensitivity, most patients are initially diagnosed
by contrast-enhanced CT or MR and physical examination. Up to 10%
of patients, however, present with adenopathy from a “cancer of
unknown primary” that escapes detection by standard means.
Primary tumor identification allows the clinician to modify treatment
and limit radiation fields. F-18 FDG is able to localize these lesions in
an additional 25% to 56% of cases (sensitivity more limited in small
tumors).
Although roughly 60% of cases present with locally advanced
disease, distant metastases are unusual at the time of diagnosis
(approximately 5%; Fig. 12.32). Although false positives from infection
or inflammatory processes must be avoided, F-18 FDG has high
sensitivity for lymph node involvement (90% compared with 82% for
CT and 80% for MR). In high-risk patients (T3–T4 and N2–N3
disease), PET is often used to better detect the distant metastases and
can detect a second primary tumor in a significant number of patients.
Table 12.9
AJCC TNM Classification for HPV-Positive Squamous-Cell Oropharyngeal Cancer
Category Tumor Size
T0
No primary identified
T1
≤2 cm
T2
>2 cm but ≤4 cm
T3
>4 cm or growing into epiglottis
T4
Growing into larynx, extrinsic tongue muscle, mandible, hard palate, or medial
pterygoid plate
(Separation into T4a/b eliminated; no prognostic difference)
Lymph Node Status
Clinical Classification
Pathological Classification
NX
Cannot assess regional LN
NX
Cannot be assessed
N0
No LN involvement
pN0
No regional LN
N1
≥1 LN, none >6 cm
pN1
≤4 LN involved
N2
Contralateral or bilateral LN; none >6 cm
pN2
>4 LN with metastasis
N3
≥1 LN >6 cm
AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; HPV, human papilloma virus; LN, lymph node;
TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
Table 12.10
Staging of HPV-Negative Squamous-Cell Oropharyngeal Head and Neck Cancer
Tumor Category
Node Category
N0
N1
N2a, b, c
N3a, b
T1
I
III
IVA
IVB
T2
II
III
IVA
IVB
T3
III
III
IVA
IVB
T4a
IVA
IVA
IVA
IVB
T4b
IVB
IVB
IVB
IVB
Also: IVC = M1 disease
HPV, Human papilloma virus.
Table 12.11
Clinical Staging in HPV-Positive Oropharyngeal Head and Neck Cancer
Tumor Category
Node Category
T
N0
N1
N2
N3
T0
NA
I
II
III
T1
I
I
II
III
T2
I
I
II
III
T3
II
II
II
III
T4
III
III
III
III
HPV, human papilloma virus.
PET is most commonly used for restaging and has consistently been
found superior to conventional imaging modalities. Although a loss of
symmetry and elevated background uptake posttherapy can make the
evaluation for recurrence difficult, fusion images allow better
identification of potential sources of error, such as increased uptake in
normal structures, muscles, and brown fat. PET/CT has a known high
negative predictive value (>90%–95%) and is superior to CT or MR in
the detection of recurrent disease. The ability of FDG to predict
survival is promising, but additional work is needed.
Consistent terms must be used to describe the location of HNC. In
addition to an understanding of the key spaces of the region, this
includes an accurate description of the station of involved nodes
(Table 12.12; Figs. 12.33 and 12.34).
Thyroid Cancer
Thyroid cancer must be considered separately from other HNC. F-18
FDG may accumulate with equal intensity in benign thyroid
adenomas and thyroiditis as well as malignant lesions. Although an
incidentally detected F-18 FDG–avid nodule should be pursued to
exclude malignancy, PET has no role in the diagnosis of thyroid
cancer. Most thyroid cancers are derived from the follicular cells of the
gland, giving rise to papillary, follicular, or mixed-cellularity variants.
These differentiated tumors accumulate iodine-131 (I-131) and are best
evaluated and treated with radioactive iodine. The sensitivity of F-18
FDG in these patients is low.
FIG. 12.31  Metastatic head and neck cancer can be seen as multiple
areas of uptake in cervical nodes (A). Although the primary tumor may
be hard to detect in areas of increased background from inflammation,
biopsy, and normal lymphoid tissue, soft tissue fullness and
asymmetrical uptake raises suspicions, as in this tumor involving the
right epiglottis and tongue base (B).
FIG. 12.32  Head and neck carcinoma staging. Positron emission
tomography (PET) images reveal several abnormal lymph nodes in the
right cervical and supraclavicular region and an unexpected
mediastinal metastasis to a normal-size lower paratracheal node
(arrows).
Table 12.12
Lymph Node Imaging Stations in the Neck
Rouviere System AJCC System
Imaging-Based System
Submental
I
IA: Medial to medial edge
anterior belly digastrics
Below mylohyoid
muscle, above
hyoid bone
Submandibular
I
IB: Lateral to IA and
anterior to back of
submandibular gland
Internal jugular
II: Skull base to hyoid,
anterior to back edge
sternocleidomastoid
II: Skull base to bottom of
hyoid, anterior to back
edge
sternocleidomastoid
IIA: Anterior, lateral,
or inseparable
from internal
jugular vein
IIB: Posterior to
internal jugular
vein with fat plane
between
Retropharyngeal
III: Hyoid to
cricothyroid
membrane, anterior
to back edge
sternocleidomastoid
III: Bottom of hyoid to
bottom of cricoid arch,
anterior to back edge
sternocleidomastoid
Lateral to carotid,
level VI nodes
medial to carotids
Midjugular
IV: Cricothyroid
membrane to clavicle,
anterior to back edge
of
sternocleidomastoid
IV: Bottom of cricoid arch
to top of manubrium,
anterior to back edge
sternocleidomastoid
Lateral to carotids,
level VI nodes
medial to carotids
Spinal accessory
V: Posterior to
sternocleidomastoid,
anterior to trapezius,
above clavicle
V: Posterior to
sternocleidomastoid,
anterior to trapezius
VA: Skull base to
bottom of cricoid
arch
VB: Bottom cricoid
arch to level
clavicle
Anterior
compartment
VI: Below hyoid, above
suprasternal notch,
between carotid
sheaths
VI: Below bottom of hyoid,
above top of
manubrium, medial to
carotid arteries
Visceral nodes
Upper
mediastinal
VII: Below suprasternal
notch Anterior
compartment
VII: Below top manubrium
and above innominate
Overlaps highest
mediastinal nodes
of chest
classification
between carotids
Supraclavicular
Clavicles in field of view,
above and medial to
ribs
All systems use facial, parotid, retropharyngeal, and occipital groups.
AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer.
FIG. 12.33  Transaxial diagram of cervical lymph node stations at (A)
the level of the floor of the mouth and submandibular gland (S), (B) the
hyoid bone (H), (C) the thyroid cartilage and cricoid cartilage, and (D)
just above the clavicles (C) with a portion of the thyroid gland (Th) in
view. Note the appearance of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SC),
which is a key landmark. A, Arteries; Ant, anterior.
FIG. 12.34  Cervical lymph node levels according to the imaging-
based classification system described in Table 12.12. m, Muscle.
The clinical utility of F-18 FDG PET scanning is generally limited to
thyroid malignancies that do not accumulate I-131—that is, poorly
differentiated, aggressive tumors. This may occur in metastatic and
recurrent tumors that transform from previously well-differentiated,
iodine-avid disease. In cases in which the I-131 scan is negative but
serum thyroglobulin levels remain elevated, the sensitivity of PET is
greater than 90%. PET has also shown sensitivity in the more
aggressive Hürthle cell variant (up to 92%–95%, compared with 64%
for iodine-131).
Medullary thyroid cancers are slow-growing neuroendocrine
tumors (NETs) that arise from the calcitonin-producing parafollicular
C cells and comprise 5% to 8% of thyroid cancers. Therapy is more
challenging because they do not accumulate radioiodine. The
sensitivity of F-18 FDG PET averages roughly 59%, but sensitivities
are reportedly higher in recurrent disease when calcitonin levels are
significantly increased (e.g., 75% when calcitonin >1000 ng/mL and
40% when <150). In fact, there is a complementary role for the PET
somatostatin receptor analog, Ga-68 DOTATATE. Somatostatin-
receptor–positive tumors tend to be lower grade, and imaging with
receptor analogs is not only more sensitive but also identifies targets
amenable to targeted radioactive somatostatin-receptor therapy. The
more aggressive lesions not visualized with Ga-68 DOTATATE, on
the other hand, tend to accumulate FDG.
Thoracic Cancers
Lung Carcinoma
Lung carcinoma is the most common malignancy and has the highest
cancer-related death rate. Non–small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
accounts for roughly 85% of cases, and small-cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC) accounts for the remaining 20%. Approximately 75% of SCLC
cases are initially diagnosed with disseminated disease. Therefore,
surgery is rarely indicated, and chemotherapy and radiation therapy
are used. NSCLC, on the other hand, is often resectable. Early
diagnosis and proper staging are critical to therapeutic planning in
NSCLC.
Presenting clinical and radiographic findings are variable in lung
cancer. Patients may be asymptomatic or experience hemoptysis,
cough, weight loss, and symptoms of metastatic disease. Radiographic
findings are also nonspecific. A mass with an irregular, spiculated
border is malignant in up to 85% of cases, but lesions with smooth
margins may be cancerous over a third of the time. Larger and thick-
walled cavitary lesions, especially in an upper-lobe location, must be
considered suspicious. Workup for patients with these abnormal
radiographs
might
include
sputum
cytology,
bronchoscopy,
transthoracic needle biopsy, and mediastinoscopy. Each of these
procedures has limitations. For example, although bronchoscopy has a
sensitivity of 85% for central tumors, it is much lower for small and
peripheral lesions. The image-guided percutaneous transthoracic
needle biopsy has an approximate sensitivity of 93% and a specificity
98%, although many lesions are too small or in an inaccessible
location. Transthoracic needle biopsy also carries a 10% to 60% risk for
pneumothorax (with a 2%–20% risk that it will require a chest tube).
Patients may require thoracotomy and surgical biopsy for definitive
diagnosis.
Diagnosis of Solitary Pulmonary Nodule
A pulmonary nodule is defined as a well-circumscribed lesion
measuring less than 3 cm. With the increased use of CT, the detection
of these nodules has risen tremendously; about half will prove to be
malignant. The presence of central calcifications in a nodule indicates
it is a benign granuloma. However, most pulmonary nodules are
indeterminate
based
on
radiographic
appearance.
Revised
recommendations for the evaluation of incidentally discovered
indeterminate nodules, based on number, size, and character, were
released by the Fleischner Society in 2017. Patients are placed into risk
groups (Box 12.5) that help guide follow-up, as noted in Table 12.13.
The timing of follow-up imaging depends on a series of factors. The
changes associated with malignancy that can be seen over the course
of serial examinations include increasing size, spiculation, or
irregularity as well as a ground-glass lesion that develops a solid
component. Such changes should lead to a tissue diagnosis.
Characterization of a solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) was one of
the earliest clinical applications for F-18 FDG PET (Fig. 12.35). The
specificity is hampered by the prevalence of granulomatous disease
(e.g., sarcoid, histoplasmosis), which tends to be very FDG avid. In
addition, the sensitivity is more limited in small nodules (i.e., less than
7 mm) and is very low for primary pulmonary carcinoid NETs. The
sensitivity is mildly decreased in subsolid lung adenocarcinomas
(formerly known as bronchoalveolar cancer), which are often lower-
grade, ill-defined ground-glass lesions rather than solid tumors.
Often, these lesions show increasing size or density on serial CT (Fig.
12.36). Although the reported sensitivity in these tumors was 88%
overall, the sensitivity increased to 96% when small and semisolid
tumors were excluded (compared with a sensitivity of CT at 81%).
Box 12.5 The 2017 Fleischner Society
Recommendations on Incidental Lung Nodule Follow-
Up
Exclusions
Patients <35 years: In these younger patients, the risk of
malignancy is low, and nodules are most likely benign. (The
lifetime risk of cancer is roughly 1% at 30 years of age and 2%
by 40 years of age.)
High-risk patients already enrolled in CT cancer screening
programs
Patients with known cancer: Pulmonary metastases are
common in cancer, found in slightly more than half of
patients. Because nodules are more likely malignant, follow-
up should be based on individual risk factors.
Immunocompromised patients: Opportunistic infections are
an extremely common cause for CT abnormality.
Technical CT Factors
A 1.0- to 1.5-mm thin-slice CT is recommended, which allows
for the best characterization.
Consider a targeted repeat thin-slice baseline to follow lesions
discovered with >2 mm.
Risk Groups
Clinical factors increasing risks: Heavy smoking, exposure to
carcinogens, emphysema, positive family history, upper-lobe
location of lesion, older age
American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) cancer risk
categories:
Low risk (<5% risk): Younger age, less smoking history,
smaller nodule, regular margins, located outside upper
lobes
High risk (>65% risk): Older age, heavy smoking history,
larger lesion, irregular or spiculated margin, upper-lobe
location
Intermediate risk (5%–65% risk): Mixture of parameters
CT, Computed tomography.
In fact, the sensitivity and high negative predictive value mean a
negative examination virtually excludes malignancy, especially in a
low-risk patient (<1%). Such patients with reasonably sized nodules
(at least 8–10 mm) would not require further CT follow-up, unlike
high-risk patients, who could still have up to a 10% risk of cancer.
FDG can also help identify abnormal regional lymph nodes that might
be good biopsy targets or visualize distant metastases that might
change the type of diagnostic tissue sampling performed and would
certainly affect further surgery and therapy decisions (Fig. 12.37).
Although the current Fleischner recommendations include more
limited use of PET/CT, many studies in the literature used in decision
making were performed on older equipment: PET only or PET/CT
without the more sensitive TOF capabilities. Also, it must be kept in
mind that these guidelines apply to the incidentally discovered SPNs,
and more aggressive follow-up is likely warranted in those with prior
primary cancer.
Lung Cancer
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in both men and
women, accounting for approximately 1.6 million deaths annually.
Tumors originating from the airways or lung parenchyma, also
referred to as bronchogenic carcinomas, comprise roughly 95% of
primary lung cancers and are broken down into two main groups:
non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small-cell lung cancer
(SCLC). NSCLC is by far more common (80%–85%), and the most
common types of lung cancers are both types of NSCLC:
adenocarcinoma (40%–50%) and squamous-cell carcinoma (20%–30%).
Table 12.13
Fleischner Society Recommendations for Incidental Lung Nodule Imaging Follow-Up (FU)
A. Solid Nodules
Nodule Size
Nodule
Type
<6 mm
6–8 mm
>8 mm
Comments
Single
Low
risk
No routine
FU
CT 6–12 mo;
then
consider
CT @ 18–24
mo
Consider CT 3
mo, PET/CT,
or tissue
sampling
Nodules <6 mm require no routine
follow-up.
High
risk
Optional
CT @ 12
mo
CT 6–12 mo,
then CT @
18–24 mo
Consider CT 3
mo, PET/CT,
or tissue
sampling
A 12-mo CT may be warranted in
some patients with suspicious
morphology or upper-lobe
location.
Multiple
Low
risk
No routine
FU
CT 3–6 mo;
then
consider
CT 3–6 mo; then
consider CT
@ 18–24 mo
Use the most suspicious nodule to
guide management.
CT @ 18–24
mo
High
risk
Optional
CT @ 12
mo
CT 3–6 mo;
then
consider
CT @ 18–24
mo
CT 3–6 mo; then
consider CT
@ 18–24 mo
Use the most suspicious nodule to
guide management.
B. Subsolid Nodules
Nodule Size
Nodule
Type
<6 mm
≥6 mm
Notes
Single
Ground
glass
No routine
FU
CT 6–12 mo to confirm
persistence, then CT
every 2 yr until 5 yr
In certain suspicious nodules <6 mm,
consider FU @ 2 and 4 yr. If solid
component or growth develops, consider
resection.
Part solid
No routine
FU
CT 3-6 mo to confirm
persistence. If
unchanged and
solid component
remains <6 mm,
annual CT for 5 yrs
Part-solid nodules cannot be defined until ≥6
mm, and nodules <6 mm do not usually
require FU. Persistent part-solid nodules
with solid components should be
considered highly suspicious.
Multiple
CT 3–6 mo;
if stable,
consider
CT at 2
and 4 yr
CT 3-6 mo, subsequent
management based
on most suspicious
nodule(s)
Multiple ground-glass nodules of <6 mm are
usually benign, but consider FU in high-
risk patients.
CT, Computed tomography; mo = months; PET/CT, positron emission tomography with
computed tomography.
FIG. 12.35  Characterization of solitary pulmonary nodules. (A) A left
lung nodule on computed tomography (CT) had no fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) uptake on positron emission tomography (PET), consistent with
a benign process. This lesion remained stable on CT follow-up,
confirming this impression. (B) A small, well-circumscribed right-lower-
lobe nodule with increased FDG accumulation on PET was later found
to be an adenocarcinoma.
FIG. 12.36  An incidentally discovered ground-glass nodule shows
nonspecific low-level activity on positron emission tomography with
computed tomography (PET/CT; upper). However, given highly
suspicious gradually increasing density on serial computed tomography
(CT) images performed at 6- to 12-month intervals (lower), biopsy was
performed, revealing cancer.
FIG. 12.37  Detection of metastatic disease with positron emission
tomography (PET). (Upper row) Focal markedly increased
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake consistent with tumor involvement
was seen in a normal-size lymph node. This was normal 6 months
earlier (lower row).
The way lung cancers are organized and staged has recently
evolved. Pathological lung cancer groupings put in place in 2015
recognize the importance of molecular and immunohistochemical
markers as opposed to emphasizing only features seen with a
microscope. In addition, there has been a redefinition of the
adenocarcinoma category; elimination of the bronchoalveolar tumor
group, with those tumors reclassified as subtypes of adenocarcinoma;
and the move of all NETs into a single class (Table 12.14).
An updated lung cancer staging system also went into effect in
2018, based on the TNM classification (Tables 12.15 and 12.16) and on
updated chest lymph node descriptors (Table 12.17; Figs. 12.38 and
12.39). SCLC usually presents as systemic disease but is usually very
sensitive to chemotherapy or, in locally advanced disease, to
chemoradiation. Resection is only an option for a very limited number
of patients who present early with a lung nodule but no nodal
involvement. Most NSCLC (60%–75%) cases present with locally
advanced (stage III) or advanced disease (stage IV). Although stage I
and II tumors are generally considered resectable, up to 50% to 55% of
these patients will suffer recurrence, often in less than a year. Better
methods for determining risk and disease presence are needed.
Imaging does play an increasingly important role in the management
of lung cancer and could potentially improve staging accuracy.
Although chest CT is the primary examination most often utilized, it
is known to be limited (sensitivity 55% and specificity 81%).
Mediastinal lymph nodes with a short-axis length of >1 cm are
considered abnormal. However, normal-size nodes can harbor early
metastatic disease, and enlarged nodes can be the result of a
postinfectious or related inflammatory process. F-18 FDG PET/CT is
more sensitive, but values in the literature vary. Although it is able to
detect tumor in any one lymph node about 75% of the time, F-18 FDG
averages 91% for the detection of overall mediastinal involvement.
This still lacks sufficient accuracy to adequately stage the tumor, and
the issue is compounded by the known specificity issues of PET/CT in
the mediastinum. However, PET/CT can help direct biopsy away from
locations typically sampled to focus on areas with the highest
likelihood of yielding disease, even when nodes are normal in size.
In addition, F-18 FDG and chest CT have complementary roles in
patient evaluation. CT better assesses tumor size, invasion of the
pleura and mediastinum, and the distance of the tumor from the
carina. Also, abnormalities such as atelectasis and aspiration
pneumonia that can cause increased F-18 FDG uptake and are easily
confused with malignancy are often identifiable on CT. PET/CT leads
to a reported change in management in 19% to 50% of cases, including
a decrease in futile thoracotomies. This is often the result of the
superiority of PET over conventional modalities for the detection of
unsuspected distant metastases, which occur 10% to 14% of the time.
This includes bone metastases not visible on CT, which occur in 6% to
20% of cases in the literature. Bone involvement is also detected with a
somewhat higher sensitivity and a considerably greater specificity
than with bone scan. Other common sites of involvement include
retroperitoneal and pelvic lymph nodes as well as soft tissue lesions
(Fig. 12.40). Assessment of the adrenal glands is particularly
important because they are a frequent site of lung cancer metastasis.
CT reveals adrenal lesions in approximately 20% of cases, but the
majority are later proved to be benign adenomas. PET can detect
metastases in normal-size adrenals and can also help differentiate
benign from malignant adrenal gland lesions based on the level of
uptake (Fig. 12.41). Care must be taken when activity is only mild and
not greater than liver background because nodular hyperplasia and
benign adenomas can lead to mildly increased uptake. There is no
absolute SUV measurement to use when deciding if metastases are
present.
Table 12.14
Changes in the World Health Organization (WHO) 2015 Classifications for Epithelial Lung
Cancers
Adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma (40%–50%)
Subtypes: Mixed, acinar,
papillary, solid
Lepidic
Bronchoalveolar carcinoma
Acinar
Subtypes: Mucinous and
nonmucinous
Papillary
Fetal
Micropapillary
Mucinous (colloid)
Solid
Signet ring
Invasive mucinous
Clear cell
Colloid
Fetal
Enteric
Minimally invasive
Preinvasive (atypical adenomatous hyperplasia
Adenocarcinoma in situ (mucinous/nonmucinous)
Squamous-cell carcinoma
Squamous-cell carcinoma (25%–30%)
Papillary
Keratinizing
Clear cell
Nonkeratinizing
Small cell
Basaloid
Basaloid
Small-cell carcinoma
Neuroendocrine carcinoma
Small cell
Large-cell carcinoma
Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
Large-cell neuroendocrine (NE)
carcinoma
Carcinoid (typical and atypical)
Large-cell carcinoma with NE
morphology
Large-cell carcinoma (10%)
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Sarcomatoid carcinoma
Sarcomatoid carcinoma (0.1%–0.4%)
Pleiomorphic, spindle cell, giant cell, carcinosarcoma,
pulmonary blastoma
Travis WD, Brambilla EW, Burke AP, et al. WHO classification of
tumors of the lung, pleura, thymus, and heart. J Thorac Oncol.
2015;10(9):1243–1260.
Table 12.15
Revised Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) a Characterization for Lung Carcinoma
Designation Parameters
Tumor Description (T)
TX
Cannot be assessed or proven by cells from sputum or bronchoscopy
T0
No evidence of primary
Tis
Carcinoma in situ
T1
≤3 cm surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, no invasion proximal to lobar
bronchus
T1a
>3 cm but ≤5 cm; or involvement main bronchus, or visceral pleura invasion, or
associated with partial or complete lung atelectasis or pneumonitis
T1b
>3 cm but ≤2 cm
T1c
>2 cm but ≤3 cm
T2
>3 cm but ≤5 cm; or involvement main bronchus, or visceral pleura invasion, or
associated with partial or complete lung atelectasis or pneumonitis
T2a
>3 cm but ≤4 cm
T2b
>4 cm but ≤5 cm
T3
>5 cm but ≤7 cm; or directly invades parietal pleura, chest wall, parietal
pericardium, or a separate nodule of same lobe
T4
>7 cm that invades any of the following: mediastinum, diaphragm, heart, great
vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebra, carina, or
separate nodule(s) in different lobe of the same lung
Lymph Node Description (N)
NX
Cannot be assessed
N0
No regional LN metastasis
N1
Ipsilateral peribronchial and/or ipsilateral hilar and intrapulmonary LN (including
by direct extension)
N2
Ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal LN
N3
Contralateral: mediastinal, hilar, or supraclavicular nodes
Ipsilateral or contralateral scalene or supraclavicular
Distant Metastases (M)
Mo
No distant metastasis
M1
Distant metastasis
M1a
Separate tumor nodule(s) contralateral lung, malignant pleural effusion, pericardial
thickening/nodules/masses
M1b
Single distant (extrathoracic) metastasis in single organ
M1c
Multiple distant metastases in single or multiple organs
LN, Lymph node.
a  According to American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual, eighth
edition.
Modified from Goldstraw P, Chansky K, Crowley J, et al. The IASLC
Lung Cancer Staging Project: Proposals for revision of the TNM stage
groupings in the forthcoming (eighth) edition of the TNM
Classification for lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(1):39–51; and
Detterbeck FC. The eighth edition TNM stage classification for lung
cancer: what does it mean on the main street? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2018;155:356–359.
Restaging Non–Small-Cell Lung Cancer and Assessing Response
to Therapy
PET/CT can also increase accuracy during restaging and when
evaluating the response to therapy, with changes in radiotracer
uptake noted earlier than in lesion size (Fig. 12.42). Tumor masses and
lymph nodes may remain enlarged after disease has resolved and the
PET scan has normalized. Perhaps more importantly, PET/CT can
more often visualize patients who have progressive disease during
therapy. Thereby, unnecessary time, expense, and exposure to toxicity
can be avoided from an ineffective drug while potentially allowing
nonresponders to be switched to an alternative regimen.
When surgery and therapy distort anatomy, PET can detect residual
and recurrent tumor not found on CT. Caution must be used because
increased F-18 FDG accumulation may occur after therapy, most
significantly after radiation. Immediately after radiation, patchy areas
of uptake can be seen, corresponding to ground-glass-appearing
infiltrates. With time, these coalesce and contract, with a final
appearance on CT of a sharply marginated infiltrate containing air-
bronchograms. The PET findings also change over time, but intense
activity often does not resolve. It is generally advised to delay F-18
FDG PET until at least 3 months after therapy, although imaging can
be done sooner if needed. Even given these limitations, PET can
provide valuable information by identifying residual disease or
relapse. For example, distant recurrence after complete resection of
tumor occurs more than 20% of the time. PET restaging frequently
leads to changes in management.
Table 12.16
Revised Lung Cancer Staging a
T/M
Subcategory
No
N1
N2
N3
T1
T1a
IA1
IIB
IIIA
IIIB
T1b
IA2
IIB
IIIA
IIIB
T1c
IA3
IIB
IIIA
IIIB
T2
T2a
IB
IIB
IIIA
IIIB
T2b
IIA
IIB
IIIA
IIIB
T3
T3
IIB
IIIA
IIIB
IIIC
T4
T4
IIIA
IIIA
IIIB
IIIC
M1
M1a
IVA
IVA
IVA
IVA
M1b
IVA
IVA
IVA
IVA
M1c
IVB
IVB
IVB
IVB
T/M, Tumor/metastasis.
a  According to American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual, eighth
edition.
From Detterbeck FC. The eighth edition TNM stage classification for
lung cancer: what does it mean on the main street? J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2018;155:356–359.
Small-Cell Lung Cancer
SCLC staging usually involves categorizing the disease as limited or
extensive. If disease is confined to one hemithorax, it can be treated
more successfully by adding radiation to the chemotherapy. Small-cell
lung carcinoma shows intense F-18 FDG accumulation. In general,
data on the use of F-18 FDG PET in SCLC are more limited than for
NSCLC. PET may help detect additional metastasis and lead to
upstaging of disease in some patients originally thought to be surgical
candidates with localized disease.
Breast Carcinoma
Breast cancer is classified as being a noninvasive or invasive tumor,
usually of ductal or lobular type. Of invasive carcinomas, ductal
carcinoma accounts for ??, lobular for 10%, and medullary for 5%.
Noninvasive carcinoma, or carcinoma in situ, may be detected by
mammography when microcalcifications are present (i.e., ductal
carcinoma in situ [DCIS]) but may be difficult to detect when it
presents as architectural distortion as found in lobular carcinoma in
situ (LCIS). Prognosis is related to many staging factors, as well as the
genomic breakdown of the tumor. Hormone receptor expression
(estrogen, progesterone, and HER-2 receptor expression) and
overexpression of tumor markers have been found to be highly
predictive of outcome. In fact, the updated eighth edition of the AJCC
staging system now includes not only routine anatomical prognostic
groups but also a pathological prognostic system that includes such
markers and clinical prognostic staging groups. The majority of
patients (61%) present with localized disease confined to the primary,
whereas 32% have spread to the regional nodes, and about 5% have
metastatic disease.
Table 12.17
Mediastinal Lymph Node Definitions From the IASLC Lymph Node Map
Station
Borders/Description
Supraclavicular Zone
1 Lower cervical
Lower cervical, supraclavicular, sternal notch
Upper border: lower margin of cricoid
Lower border: clavicles laterally and upper manubrium at midline
Upper Zone
2 Upper
paratracheal
Borders:
On right: Superiorly right lung apex and pleural space to inferior border
at top of manubrium and medially to the left lateral tracheal wall
On the left:
Superiorly left lung apex and pleural space and upper manubrium
medially; inferiorly to top of aortic arch
3A Prevascular
Upper border: apex of chest
Lower border: level of carina
Anterior border: posterior sternum
Posterior border:
On right—anterior SVC
On left—left carotid artery
3P Retrotracheal
Posterior to trachea
Upper border: apex of chest
Lower border: carina
4R Right lower
paratracheal
Upper border: intersection caudal margin innominate vein with trachea
Lower border: lower border azygous vein
Medial border: left lateral margin trachea
4L Left lower
paratracheal
Upper border: upper margin aortic arch
Lower border: upper rim main pulmonary artery
Aortopulmonary Zone
5 Subaortic
Aortopulmonary (AP) window
Lateral to ligamentum arteriosum
Upper border: lower margin aortic arch
Lower border: upper rim left main pulmonary artery
6 Paraaortic
Anterior and lateral to ascending aorta and aortic arch
Upper border: line tangential to upper border aortic arch
Lower border: lower margin aortic arch
Subcarinal Zone
7 Subcarinal
Upper border: carina of trachea
Lower border:
On left—upper border of the left lower lobe bronchus
On right—lower border bronchus intermedius
Lower Zone (Lower Mediastinal)
8 Paraesophageal
Lateral to esophagus below subcarinal nodes
Upper border:
On left—upper border of lower lobe bronchus
On right—lower border bronchus intermedius
9 Pulmonary
ligament
Lie within pulmonary ligament
Upper border: inferior pulmonary vein
Lower border: diaphragm
Hilar and Interlobar Zone
10 Hilar
Immediately adjacent to mainstem bronchus and hilar vessels
Upper border:
On right—lower rim azygous
On left—upper rim pulmonary artery
Lower border: interlobar regions bilaterally
11 Interlobar
Between origin of lobar bronchi:
11Rs (right upper bronchus) and 11Ri (right middle and lower lobes)
Peripheral Zone (Pulmonary Nodes)
12 Lobar
Adjacent lobar bronchi
13 Segmental
Adjacent to segmental bronchi
14 Subsegmental
Adjacent subsegmental bronchi
IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer; SVC, superior vena cava.
Diagnosis
Mammography is the primary mode of breast cancer diagnosis and
screening, with a sensitivity of approximately 81% to 90 %, depending
on factors such as tumor type and size, breast density, and availability
of prior examinations. The specificity of this modality creates some
challenges.
More
than
50%
of
women
undergoing
annual
mammography for a decade will have a false-positive result,
frequently leading to biopsy as well as added cost and stress. Newer
techniques such as tomosynthesis can improve tumor-detection rates,
but with increased radiation exposure. MR and ultrasound are
excellent problem-solving tools that do not involve ionizing radiation.
MR has a high sensitivity (up to 90%–95%) for the detection of breast
cancer, although its specificity is lower. It is particularly useful in
high-risk patients and those with dense breasts but can also better
visualize multifocal disease, recurrence, and cancer in patients with
implants. Ultrasound has added considerably to the evaluation of the
breast in cases of palpable masses and discrete masses found on the
mammogram.
The role of nuclear medicine is limited for breast cancer diagnosis.
Although dedicated breast cameras have reportedly improved
sensitivity
with
Tc-99m
sestamibi
molecular
breast
imaging
(MBI)/breast-specific gamma imaging (BSGI) or F-18 FDG positron
emission
mammography
(PEM),
whole-body
PET/CT
is
not
recommended for breast cancer diagnosis apart from the breast
carcinoma incidentally detected during the evaluation of other
malignancies. One meta-analysis of the literature suggests that the
sensitivity of PET is 88%, and the specificity 79%, for detecting
primary tumors (Figs. 12.43 and 12.44) However, the ability of F-18
FDG PET to detect primary breast cancer is related to tumor size. The
reported sensitivity of PET is 92% for tumors measuring 2 to 5 cm but
is only 68% for tumors smaller than 2 cm. The false-negative rate of F-
18 FDG PET is insufficient for a screening test, especially because the
detection of early tumors is critical. The histological type of the tumor
also affects the sensitivity of F-18 FDG PET. For example, the detection
of LCIS and DCIS is limited in comparison with invasive ductal
carcinoma
(the
reported
sensitivity
for
lobular
cancers
is
approximately 40%).
FIG. 12.38  Chest lymph node levels. The International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) lymph node map, including grouping
of lymph node stations into “zones” for purposes of prognostic
analyses.
From Rusch VW, Asamura H, Watanabe H, et al. The IASLC lung
cancer staging project: a proposal for a new international lymph node
map in the forthcoming seventh edition of the TNM classification for
lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2009;4:568–577.
FIG. 12.39  (A–F) Application of the International Association for the
Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) lymph node map to computed
tomography (CT).
From Rusch VW, Asamura H, Watanabe H, et al. The IASLC lung
cancer staging project: a proposal for a new international lymph node
map in the forthcoming seventh edition of the TNM classification for
lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2009;4:568–577.
FIG. 12.40  Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography
with computed tomography (PET/CT) can be used to detect subtle and
unexpected lesions, such as these in a patient with recurrent lung
cancer. (A) Small right anterior pleural implant (note low-level activity in
malignant right effusion). (B1) Peripancreatic metastasis. (B2) Left
adrenal gland (unremarkable on computed tomography [CT]). (C)
Normal-size pelvic node lateral to the ureter and (D) right thigh. Soft
tissue metastases are often overlooked on contrast-enhanced CT.
Note: Some images shown are from the enhanced CT performed 2
weeks earlier.
FIG. 12.41  Adrenal metastases are common in lung cancer, and
nodules are frequently found on computed tomography (CT). (A)
However, many of these lesions are benign fat-poor adenomas, as
seen in the left adrenal lesion on enhanced CT, which then showed no
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity. (B) Positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) can also identify
metastases earlier than CT, such as the small metastases on positron
emission tomography (PET) in a normal-appearing adrenal gland
(lower row). The diagnosis was confirmed 3 months later with a
centrally necrotic mass developing in the gland (upper row).
FIG. 12.42  Positron emission tomography with computed tomography
(PET/CT) images before (A) and during (B) chemoradiation therapy for
a non–small-cell lung cancer with mediastinal involvement (not shown)
reveal the value of positron emission tomography (PET) for monitoring
therapy, with some residual active disease seen on PET even though a
residual mass was not well seen on computed tomography (CT).
FIG. 12.43  Breast cancer staging. (A) F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
positron emission tomography (PET) often identifies malignant
adenopathy in advanced and recurrent breast cancer. In this case, the
large right breast tumor shows markedly increased uptake, as does an
axillary lymph node. (B) This postpartum patient presented with
lymphoma in the left cervical region. Intense breast uptake was seen,
resulting from hormonal stimulation rather than tumor.
Staging and Restaging
Lymph node involvement has important prognostic and therapeutic
implications in breast carcinoma. Axillary lymph node dissection fully
evaluates the draining lymph nodes. However, this is a highly
invasive procedure with potentially serious side effects (e.g.,
lymphedema). F-18 FDG PET imaging is able to visualize lymph node
metastases by detecting changes in metabolism, often before any
anatomical change occurs on CT. However, not all lymph nodes are
visualized because microscopic metastases will not be seen. In patients
with nonpalpable lymph nodes, sentinel lymph node localization with
Tc-99m sulfur colloid or Tc-99m Tilmanocept, with or without blue
dye, is still the best method to select which lymph nodes to selectively
biopsy. Additionally, if scans are interpreted in a highly sensitive
mode, the specificity is lowered because inflammatory conditions
frequently affect the axillary lymph nodes and cause increased FDG
accumulation.
Although the sensitivity of FDG is limited for the detection of
metastatic involvement in any individual lymph node and not
generally recommended for initial breast cancer diagnosis or
screening, it has proven useful for staging in patients with locally
advanced/advanced disease (stage IIIA or stage IV). FDG can identify
more positive internal mammary, mediastinal, and supraclavicular
nodes than other methods (Fig. 12.45). In bone, PET is best able to
identify more aggressive or lytic lesions, complementing the
technetium bone scan, which visualizes sclerotic disease. Clinical
guidelines may not recommend the use of PET for lower stages of
disease, but studies have shown that it is able to add information in
up to 29% of these cases. In stage IIB disease, several reports
demonstrated a significant change in management in up to 37%
(detecting occult N3 spread, detecting distant metastases, or even
downstaging some patients).
FIG. 12.44  Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography
with computed tomography (PET/CT) can detect primary lesions as
well as satellite lesions within the breast, as in this patient with an
unsuspected second hypermetabolic focus of tumor posterior to the
known cancer. The sensitivity is related to lesion size.
FIG. 12.45  Recurrent breast carcinoma in an internal mammary
lymph node. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT; A) is more sensitive
than computed tomography (CT; B) when changes are often subtle.
Positron emission tomography (PET) can identify metastases to
regional lymph nodes and distant disease. Internal mammary node
involvement is frequent in cancers of the inner or medial breast.
More accurate assessment of tumor response to therapy is possible
with PET. It is superior to conventional imaging techniques for the
detection of residual active or recurrent tumor after surgery or
radiation, altering management as much as 51% of the time. During
the course of therapy, performing the PET midcourse appears to result
in the greatest accuracy in differentiating nonresponders from
responders and predicting final outcome or response.
The assessment of bone lesions can be complicated by not only high
background activity but also the posttreatment flare phenomenon.
This paradoxical increase in radiotracer accumulation despite
clinically responding disease and sclerosis of healing lesions on CT
can also be seen with technetium bone scans. This pattern occurs not
only with traditional chemotherapy but also with hormonal therapy.
Gastrointestinal Cancers
Esophageal Carcinoma
Esophageal carcinoma is most commonly due to squamous-cell cancer
in the upper two-thirds of the esophagus, whereas adenocarcinoma
typically occurs in the lower third. It frequently presents as dysphagia
or is detected by endoscopic biopsy in patients with Barrett
esophagus, a known precursor of many cases of esophageal cancer.
Because whole-body scanners have limited sensitivity and specificity
for detecting tumor in patients with Barrett esophagus, PET has not
proved useful in screening these patients. However, F-18 FDG PET
has been used in cases of equivocal biopsy or to assess patients with
biopsy-confirmed tumor.
Diagnosis
Overall, the sensitivity of PET is greater than 90% in esophageal
cancer. The diagnosis of primary esophageal tumors by PET may be
limited by a small tumor volume. In adenocarcinoma, 10% to 15% of
patients may have false-negative PET results because of the low
uptake in mucinous- and signet-cell varieties. PET is not able to
determine the extent of the primary tumor and may not offer any
substantial advantage over the standard diagnostic modalities such as
endoscopic ultrasonography.
Staging and Response to Treatment
Esophageal cancer most commonly spreads to the regional lymph
nodes. The location of these nodes depends to a certain extent on the
level of the primary tumor. For example, cervical metastases are more
common
in
proximal
tumors,
and
abdominal
lymph
node
involvement may be more frequent in distal masses. However, disease
spread may occur in unexpected locations.
The accuracy of detecting lymph node involvement with F-18 FDG
PET, particularly with PET/CT, has been consistently shown to be
higher than that of CT and MRI alone. Nodes may be inseparable
from the primary mass, and small lesions may be below the resolution
of the PET detection systems (Fig. 12.46). However, skip metastases
can occur in 20% beyond local lymph nodes, and PET is commonly
used for tumor staging due to its high sensitivity for the detection of
regional and distant metastases compared with CT.
The ability to detect residual and recurrent disease is also
significant. PET has proven value in assessing patients during therapy
and after therapy for recurrence or interval development of distant
metastatic disease. A scan following neoadjuvant chemotherapy may
better predict patient survival than standard imaging methods (Fig.
12.47). However, caution must be taken when evaluating patients
immediately after therapy because an artifactual increase in activity
may be seen. After radiation therapy, this is frequently intense (Fig.
12.48).
Normal physiological activity or uptake related to inflammation in
the esophagus may confound interpretation. Similarly, moderate F-18
FDG uptake in a normal stomach limits the usefulness of PET in
evaluating tumors of the stomach and gastroesophageal junction.
Some gastric adenocarcinomas may show only low-level activity on
PET/CT. However, when a gastric tumor is F-18 FDG avid, PET
scanning may be used in monitoring therapy.
Colorectal Carcinoma
Colon cancer develops in colon polyps, with dysplastic elements
found in approximately one-third of adenomatous polyps. A
progression to invasive cancer occurs slowly. Tumor staging is
outlined in Table 12.18. The diagnosis of colorectal carcinoma depends
on direct visualization by colonoscopy as well as imaging with CT and
barium enema. When determining suitability for resection, CT often
identifies regional adenopathy and distant metastases. Subsequently,
30% to 40% of patients suffer a recurrence, most often detected by CT
and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA).
FIG. 12.46  Identification of regional lymph nodes in esophageal
cancer. (Left) Small but suspicious nodes along the lesser curvature of
the stomach (arrow) are seen on computed tomography (CT). (Middle)
Marked F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake is present in the
primary tumor at the gastroesophageal junction. However, as best seen
on fused images (right), only low-level FDG activity was present
despite the presence of metastases on endoscopic biopsy. The
difficulty in identifying regional nodes may relate to activity in adjacent
tumor or microscopic amounts of tumor present.
FIG. 12.47  Monitoring esophageal tumor response to therapy. Sagittal
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)
scans (left) before and (right) after chemotherapy show rapid resolution
of the abnormal activity within an esophageal tumor. This type of
response has been linked to a better prognosis.
Although more frequently recommended as a consideration in anal
cancers, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)
clinical guidelines include limited situations where PET/CT use is
recommended
for
colorectal
carcinomas
(e.g.,
assessment
of
potentially resectable M1 disease, differentiation of presacral fibrosis
from recurrent disease, and anal cancers with more advanced disease).
However, multiple studies have consistently shown PET/CT to be
superior to conventional imaging for the detection of liver and other
distant metastases. FDG affects treatment decisions during initial
planning and restaging (up to 39% in one study; Fig. 12.49).
Additional and unexpected sites of involvement are frequently found,
especially advanced rectal and anal cancers. Changes in activity
correlate with prognosis, but this has not translated to definite
survival benefits.
Cancer in lymph nodes may not be uncovered when immediately
adjacent to the primary tumor or when containing either a small
volume of disease or high mucin content. Care must be taken because
recurrence can occur at the anastomosis, and the activity can be
mistaken for normal bowel uptake. In addition, any activity in the
colon should not be attributed to colitis, inflammatory bowel disease,
or diverticulitis without inflammatory stranding, abscess, or
suspicious fluid collection on CT.
Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Tumors
The use of F-18 FDG PET in other tumors of the GI tract is more
limited, and CT remains critical in the analysis of these tumors.
However, PET may be helpful in tumors of pancreatic, biliary, and
hepatic origin. PET is often used in patients with CT scans that are
difficult to evaluate or in patients with elevated serum tumor markers,
including alpha-fetoprotein in hepatocellular carcinoma and Ca 19-9
in pancreatic cancer.
PET is highly sensitive for the detection of adenocarcinoma of the
pancreas (Fig. 12.50). However, CT is essential in defining tumor
extent and vascular involvement, as well as in determining
resectability. The detection of hepatic and lymph node metastasis is
usually done with CT or MRI. However, PET may identify lymph
nodes difficult to visualize on CT, such as in the upper portal regions,
and can identify undiagnosed distant metastases in 14% of cases.
These factors can lead to alterations in surgical management in a
significant number of cases. PET is often limited by poor sensitivity in
small tumors and in acute pancreatitis. The uptake in acute
pancreatitis can be as intense as in malignancy and can mask
underlying tumor. Acute pancreatitis often accompanies therapy or
obstruction by tumor, and PET in these cases is often nondiagnostic.
Some pancreatic masses seen on CT are benign, and PET can often
differentiate benign and malignant processes (with accuracies of 85%–
93%). This can support a negative fine-needle biopsy finding. PET
may also detect occult cancers not seen on CT in symptomatic
patients.
FIG. 12.48  Effects of radiation therapy on positron emission
tomography (PET) interpretation. (A) Initial sagittal computed
tomography (CT) and F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET images
reveal abnormal uptake in the esophagus from tumor. (B) Two months
after radiation therapy, diffusely increased activity is seen in an
extensive region of thickened esophagus. Although this was presumed
secondary to therapy, underlying tumor could go undetected, and
further follow-up was suggested.
Table 12.18
TNM Staging of Colorectal Cancer
AJCC
Stage
Stage
Grouping Stage Description
Tis
Carcinoma in situ or intramuscular carcinoma
N0
M0
I
T1 or T2
Growth through muscularis mucosa into submucosa (T1) and maybe into
muscularis propria (T2) but not spread to nearby nodes or distant sites
N0
M0
IIA
T3
Growth into outermost layers but not through them and not to nearby organs,
nearby nodes, or distant sites
N0
M0
IIB
T4a
Grown through bowel wall but not into nearby organs or tissues and no spread
to nodes or distant sites
N0
M0
IIC
T4b
Grown through bowel wall and grown into nearby organs but not to nodes or
distant sites
N0
M0
IIIA
T1 or T2
Grown through mucosa into submucosa or muscularis propria; spread to 1–3
nearby nodes (or into fat near nodes- N1c) but no distant sites
N1/N1c
M0
or
T1
Grown through mucosa into submucosa and spread to 4–6 nodes but not to
distant sites
N2a
M0
Table Continued
AJCC
Stage
Stage
Grouping Stage Description
IIIB
T3 or T4a
Grown into outermost bowel wall layers (T3) or through visceral peritoneum
(T4a) but not into nearby organs; spread to 1–3 nodes or fat near nodes but
not to distant sites
N1/N1c
M0
or
T2 or T3
Grown into muscularis propria (T2) or into outermost bowel layers (T3); spread
to 4–6 nearby nodes (N2a) but not to distant sites
N2a
M0
or
T1 or T2
Grown through mucosa into submucosa (T1) and maybe into muscularis
propria (T2) and spread to 7 or more nodes (N2b) but not to distant sites
N2b
Mo
IIIC
T4a
Grown through bowel wall including visceral peritoneum but not to nearby
organs; involves 4–6 nodes but not distant sites
N2a
M0
or
T3 or
T4a
Grown into outermost bowel layers (T3) or through visceral peritoneum (T4a)
but not spread to nearby organs; involves 7 or more nodes but not distant
sites
N2b
M0
or
T4b
Grown through bowel wall and attached to or grown into nearby organs (T4b);
has spread to at least 1 node or into fat near nodes but not to distant sites
N1 or N2
M0
IVA
Any T
Any T and any N with tumor in 1 distant organ but not to distant parts of
peritoneum
Any N
M1a
IVB
Any T
Any T and any N with spread to more than 1 distant organ or distant nodes but
not to distant parts of peritoneum
Any N
M1b
IVC
Any T
Any T and any N and spread to distant parts of peritoneum and may or may
not have spread to distant organs or distant nodes
Any N
M1c
AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
FIG. 12.49  Evaluation of metastatic rectal carcinoma. Axial-enhanced
computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET)
images before (A) and after (B) chemotherapy show a decrease in
activity in a malignant rectal mass. (C) Coronal images before (left) and
after therapy (right) in this patient show a decrease in hepatic lesions,
only one of which was ever detected by CT.
FIG. 12.50  Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of the
pancreas. (A) A malignant pancreatic head mass seen on contrast-
enhanced computed tomography (CT) had a high level of F-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, consistent with malignancy.
However, the inflammation that accompanies pancreatitis also can
cause intense uptake. (B) CT following biopsy of a pancreatic mass
showed inflammatory changes around the pancreatic tail positive on
PET. Note the central “cold” area corresponding to a pancreatic duct
dilated as a result of proximal obstruction from the mass.
FIG. 12.51  Gallbladder cancer can present as a focal mass or as
more diffuse wall thickening, as seen here on fused positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT; left). Enhanced
computed tomography (CT) from 2 weeks prior in this patient (right)
showed gallbladder wall thickening without fluid or inflammatory
changes that might be expected if acute cholecystitis were the cause of
the positron emission tomography (PET) abnormality. An indeterminate
low-attenuation liver lesion on the enhanced CT was stable over time
and non-FDG avid, consistent with benign a cyst.
Primary tumors of the liver are much less common than metastases
and are most often evaluated by CT. The two most common primary
liver tumors are hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. F-
18 FDG PET is highly accurate for detecting metastases to the liver but
has relatively low sensitivity for the detection of primary
hepatocellular carcinomas (50%–70%). Despite this, in patients with a
tumor known to accumulate FDG, PET/CT may be useful in
evaluating treatment and potential recurrence in patients who
undergo ablation, such as with transarterial chemoembolization
(TACE) or intraarterial Yttrium-90 labeled microspheres (Y-90
TheraSphere).
Cholangiocarcinoma is a rare cancer of the bile ducts that may not
be detected on CT. It may occur in extrahepatic or intrahepatic
locations. Tumors arising peripherally have a better prognosis because
they may be resected, whereas those near the hilum are infrequently
resectable. Tumors can be infiltrating, exophytic, or a polypoid
intraluminal mass. The sensitivity of PET is lower for the infiltrating
type in particular. Gallbladder cancer is a rare tumor that is generally
diagnosed late in the course of disease and usually shows significant
F-18 FDG uptake (Fig. 12.51). PET usually shows intense uptake and
may identify nodal metastases difficult to detect with CT, including
distant nodes and those high along the common biliary duct.
One tumor in which PET has proved quite useful is the
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST; Fig. 12.52). These tumors
usually show high levels of F-18 FDG accumulation. In cases in which
tumors respond to imatinib (Gleevec) therapy, markedly decreased F-
18 FDG accumulation is seen with PET in a matter of days. PET more
accurately assesses early response than CT and predicts improved
patient survival.
Genitourinary Tumors
Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian carcinoma diagnosis is challenging because physical
examination may not reveal disease, and symptoms do not present
until late in the course of disease. Hematogenous spread is rare, but
direct invasion and seeding of the omentum and organ surfaces is
common. Lymphatic spread can lead to malignant pleural effusions.
Tumor staging is outlined in Table 12.19. Although patients with
localized disease have a survival chance of more than 90%, most
patients present with stage III or IV disease. The prognosis of ovarian
carcinoma is poor, with overall survival of only 46% at 5 years.
Preoperative evaluation of patients often includes imaging with
sonography, CT, and MRI. Staging with CT has 70% to 90% accuracy.
However, small peritoneal lesions found with surgical exploration are
frequently overlooked or undetectable by CT. PET/CT often highlights
many of these abnormalities.
F-18 FDG PET has been used for staging and restaging but is most
widely used to detect recurrent disease. Often, this involves patients
with elevated serum markers (Ca-125, Ca 19-9, alpha-fetoprotein, and
human chorionic gonadotropin) and negative or inconclusive CT
findings. The reported sensitivity of PET varies from 50% to 90%, and
the specificity varies from 60% to 80%. The accuracy of PET depends
on tumor size and cell type. As with CT, small peritoneal nodules seen
during laparoscopy and small primary tumors confined to the ovary
may be missed. Well-differentiated and mucinous tumors may not be
seen, causing false-negative results, and many of the tumor types
listed in Box 12.6 fall under this umbrella. Also, PET scanning may not
be useful for initial tumor diagnosis because several benign conditions
may accumulate F-18 FDG Box 12.7. Despite these limitations, PET is
especially helpful in cases in which CT is negative but suspicion for
recurrence is high (Fig. 12.53). Overall, PET alters management in
approximately 15% of cases.
Cervical Carcinoma
Cervical carcinoma is the most common gynecological cancer. It may
be treated effectively by surgery when localized, but radiation and
chemoradiation may be required for locally advanced disease.
Cervical carcinoma usually spreads by local extension or lymphatic
spread to pelvic, paraaortic, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes.
However, distant metastases occur, such as to the supraclavicular
lymph nodes. The detection of nodal involvement is important in
planning therapy but may be difficult by CT. PET was first approved
for use in cervical cancer to improve staging accuracy for patients
with disease apparently confined to the pelvis on CT or MRI by
identifying potential disease that might otherwise be outside of the
treatment field for radiation therapy.
FIG. 12.52  Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography
(PET) in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). PET has proved useful
in monitoring the remarkable effects of imatinib (Gleevec) therapy on
GIST tumors. A baseline study (left) is needed to confirm the tumor is
FDG avid. Unlike with computed tomography (CT), rapid improvement
is often seen within days of therapy. In this case (right), uptake has
resolved even though the mass has decreased on CT only after 4
weeks of therapy.
F-18 FDG PET has shown a sensitivity of greater than 90% for the
detection of cervical cancer, with marked uptake in primary tumors
and lymph node metastasis. PET may help identify recurrent tumors
and is especially helpful in differentiating posttreatment scan on CT
from tumor (Fig. 12.54). Evaluation may be complicated by inflamed
superficial tissues, urinary contamination, and normal uptake in the
urinary tract and bowel. Although increased uptake can occur in
tissues affected by radiation therapy, the tumor response is usually
evident.
Testicular Carcinoma
Most testicular cancers fall into either the seminoma or nonseminoma
germ-cell tumor groups. Tumor usually presents as a painless mass
and spread first through the lymphatics to the retroperitoneal lymph
nodes and then hematogenously to the lungs. Although the overall
prognosis for these tumors is excellent, accurate staging and
surveillance can optimize treatment and planning. For example,
disease initially classified as stage I is commonly then found to have
nodal involvement at surgery. Other patients placed incorrectly in
high-risk groups may undergo unnecessary therapy. For example, it
has been common practice to treat all patients with seminoma with
radiation.
The primary tumor is usually adequately assessed by ultrasound or,
in complex cases, by MR. CT is the primary imaging modality used
for staging because it can visualize adenopathy and lung metastases
with reasonable accuracy.
In general, FDG has shown a sensitivity of greater than 90% and a
specificity of around 75% in lymph node assessment for testicular
cancer. In comparison with CT, PET has shown superior sensitivity
(80% vs. 70%), specificity (100% vs. 74%), positive predictive value
(100% vs. 37%), and negative predictive value (96% vs. 92%) in the
multicenter SEMPET trial. The high negative predictive value of PET
is useful for the evaluation of residual masses, which are frequently
seen on CT after therapy. Some studies have shown the sensitivity of
PET to be greater for seminomas in comparison with nonseminomas
(at perhaps 59%). However, other studies do not support this data and
show no difference or improved detection in nonseminomas. The
detection of small tumors and well-differentiated teratomas is
especially limited with PET. Relapse of testicular carcinoma is a
frequent occurrence, and PET is useful for surveillance.
Table 12.19
Staging of Ovarian Carcinoma
AJCC
Stage
Stage
Grouping
FIGO
Stage Stage Description
I
T1 N0 M0
I
Contained in ovaries or fallopian tubes
IA
T1a N0 M0
IA
Cancer in one ovary or fallopian tube; no cancer on their outer
surfaces; no cells in ascites
IB
T1b N0 M0
IB
Tumor in both ovaries or tubes but not on surfaces; no cells in ascites
or peritoneal washings
IC
T1c N0 M0
IC
Involves 1 or both ovaries/tubes and any of the following:
• Tissue capsule disrupted
• Tumor on surface ovaries/tubes
• Cancer cells in ascites or peritoneal washings
II
T2 N0 M0
II
One or both ovaries/tubes with spread to other pelvic organs (uterus,
bladder, sigmoid colon, rectum) or there is primary peritoneal
cancer
IIA
T2a N0 M0
IIA
Cancer spread to or invaded uterus, fallopian tube, or ovaries
IIB
T2b N0 Mo
IIB
Cancer on surface or grown into nearby organs
IIIA1
T1 or
T2
N1
M0
IIIA1
Cancer on one or both ovaries/tubes or there is primary peritoneal
cancer (T1) and spread to other pelvic organs—uterus, bladder,
sigmoid colon, rectum (T2)
IIIA2
T3a
N0 or
N1
M0
IIIA2
Cancer on one or both ovaries/tubes or there is primary peritoneal
cancer and microscopical tumor deposit in abdomen spread to
organs outside pelvis; may involve retroperitoneal nodes or not
IIIB
T3b
N0 or
N1
M0
IIIB
Cancer on one or both ovaries/tubes or there is primary peritoneal
cancer and visible tumor deposit in abdomen spread to organs
outside pelvis (none >2 cm); may involve retroperitoneal nodes or
not
IVA
Any T
Any N
M1a
IVA
Cancer cells in pleural effusion
IVB
Any T
Any N
M1b
IVB
Cancer spread to spleen, liver, nodes beyond retroperitoneum, and/or
organs outside peritoneal cavity (e.g., lung, bones)
AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; FIGO, International Federation of Gynecology
and Obstetrics.
Box 12.6 World Health Organization (WHO)
Histopathological Classification of Ovarian Tumors
Epithelial-Stromal Tumors
Serous tumors
Benign cystadenoma, borderline serous tumor, malignant
mucinous adenocarcinoma
Mucinous tumors
Benign cystadenoma, borderline mucinous tumor,
malignant mucinous adenocarcinoma
Endometrioid
Benign cystadenoma, borderline endometrioid tumor,
malignant endometrioid adenocarcinoma
Clear-cell tumors
Benign, borderline tumors, malignant clear-cell
adenocarcinoma
Transitional-cell tumors
Brenner tumor, Brenner tumor of borderline malignancy,
malignant Brenner tumor, transitional-cell carcinoma
(non-Brenner type)
Epithelial-stromal
Adenosarcoma
Carcinosarcoma (formerly Müllerian tumors)
Sex Cord–Stromal Tumors
Granulosa tumors
Fibromas, fibrothecomas, thecomas
Sertoli-cell tumors
Leydig-cell tumors
Others
Germ-Cell Tumors
Teratoma
Immature, mature, solid, cystic (dermoid cystic)
Monodermal (struma ovarii, carcinoid)
Dysgerminoma
Yolk sac tumor (endodermal sinus tumor)
Mixed germ-cell tumor
Malignant Tumors Not Otherwise Specified
Colonic, appendiceal
Gastric
Breast
Prostate Carcinoma
F-18 FDG PET has very limited sensitivity for prostate carcinoma.
Uptake in primary tumor is often low and similar to that in benign
prostatic hypertrophy, whereas focal uptake is most often due to
inflation or infection. In terms of staging, F-18 FDG PET detected
fewer than two-thirds of osseous metastases found on bone
scintigraphy and approximately half of nodal metastases found on
CT. CT is superior to F-18 FDG for the detection of pulmonary
metastases. Many patients are now being evaluated with F-18 FACBC
(approved by the Food and Drug Administration [FDA]) or Ga-68
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PMSA; not yet FDA approved)
PET/CT (discussed in Chapter 13). However, F-18 FDG PET is often
abnormal in advanced prostate carcinoma that has escaped hormonal
control. In such cases, abnormal lesions may be identified in many
areas, including bone and lymph nodes.
Box 12.7 F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) Processes
Mimicking Ovarian Cancer
Gastrointestinal activity
Infection/inflammation
Benign tumors
Germ cell: Benign teratomas
Epithelial tumors: Mucinous cystadenoma, serous cystadenoma
Dermoid cysts, hemorrhagic follicle cyst, corpus luteum cyst
Endometrioma
Fibroma
Benign thecoma
Schwannoma
Renal and Bladder Carcinoma
Renal cell cancers are divided into histopathological groups: clear cell
(60%–80%), papillary (10%), chromophobe oncocytic (5%), and a
variety of other cell types. These lesions are increasingly being
detected by CT, and CT remains the most common imaging modality
used for the diagnosis and staging. F-18 FDG PET is not generally
useful in the diagnosis of primary tumors. Although there is high
sensitivity for papillary sarcomatoid tumors, overall sensitivities are
only approximately 60% to 69%. In addition, benign renal
oncocytomas, which cannot be differentiated from renal-cell tumors
by CT, may show marked FDG uptake. Tc-99m sestamibi is taken up
with high sensitivity and specificity in oncocytomas (discussed in
Chapter 13).
Although some have suggested that the urinary excretion of F-18
FDG might obscure adjacent tumors, these masses often show no
radiotracer uptake. The cause for this finding, such as variations in
glucose transporter expression, is being investigated. However, PET
may play a role in diagnosing distant metastases and detecting
recurrent disease. Although a negative result is not meaningful in a
patient suspected of recurrent or metastatic disease, PET may identify
positive lesions.
In bladder tumors, more than 90% of cases are transitional-cell
tumors of uroepithelial origin, with the remaining consisting of
squamous-cell cancer (5%) and adenocarcinomas (2%). Although
transitional-cell tumors are usually FDG avid, excreted activity in
urine may limit detection, and PET has shown no benefit over other
tests for diagnosis. It does, however, detect more metastatic lesions
and recurrent tumors than conventional imaging, potentially
changing management in as many as 68% of patients undergoing
staging and 17% for restaging. Sensitivities reported in the literature
vary but range from 65% to 84% for PET, with an accuracy of about
92% compared with roughly 80% with CT. Cell type may affect
sensitivity.
FIG. 12.53  Recurrent ovarian carcinoma. A patient with a rising CA-
125 had numerous metastases on the coronal positron emission
tomography (PET; left), including metastases studding the surface of
the liver (arrow) and an anterior peritoneal lesion studding the right
colon on axial images (right).
FIG. 12.54  (A) Positron emission tomography (PET) images of
vaginal cuff show tumor (arrow) responding to radiation therapy (B) in a
patient with cervical cancer. In the same patient, the detection of F-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in a normal-size right paraaortic
lymph node (C) led to the disease being upstaged, requiring
chemotherapy in addition to radiotherapy of the pelvis. (D) Follow-up
showed resolution of the active tumor.
Musculoskeletal Tumors
Malignant primary bone tumors are usually F-18 FDG avid, as are
many benign conditions. Benign tumors such as giant-cell tumor,
fibrous dysplasia, and eosinophilic granulomas, for example, have
been shown to accumulate F-18 FDG. PET may be useful for the
evaluation of patients who cannot undergo MRI and for monitoring
the effects of therapy. If a nonresponder is identified early by showing
little change in SUV values on PET, the course of therapy can be
altered. F-18 FDG may influence therapy by identifying other sites of
disease, such as in patients with plasmacytoma.
For the evaluation of soft tissue sarcomas, the accuracy of F-18 FDG
PET appears to be related to tumor grade. The increased uptake in
high-grade tumors such as malignant fibrous histiocytoma allows
detection with a high degree of sensitivity. Low-grade tumors, on the
other hand, show minimal or nonexistent uptake, leading to poor
sensitivity. Although MRI remains the main imaging modality of the
primary tumor, the ability of MRI to detect recurrence is limited in the
postoperative patient. PET may help detect recurrent tumors,
although the effects of surgery and radiation therapy lower
sensitivity.
FIG. 12.55  F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT; A) is more sensitive
than radiographs for skeletal survey or computed tomography (CT; B)
for the detection of active disease.
Multiple Myeloma
Several diseases are included in the spectrum of plasma-cell
neoplasms, ranging from benign to highly aggressive tumors. These
diseases originate from a single B cell and secrete monoclonal
proteins. Multiple myeloma accounts for 101,000 deaths per year
worldwide, with an incidence of 4 to 5 per 100,000. Patients may
present with increased protein in the urine, monoclonal protein in
blood or urine, hypercalcemia, anemia, bone pain, and/or renal
failure.
The
patient
workup
consists
of
the
evaluation
of
immunoglobulin levels, 24-hour urine protein evaluation, serum and
urine electrophoresis, a whole-body skeletal survey, and bone marrow
aspiration. Radiographic findings may begin with osteoporosis, but
numerous lytic lesions are eventually seen. Because lesions are lytic
rather than osteoblastic, bone scans are relatively insensitive,
detecting 15% of lesions. The standard evaluation includes a whole-
body skeletal survey. F-18 FDG PET/CT is clearly superior to skeletal
surveys (Fig. 12.55), detecting bone involvement in 25% of newly
diagnosed patients with negative skeletal surveys and extramedullary
involvement in up to 25%. As seen with other cancers that metastasize
to bone, it is also more sensitive than CT. Although F-18 sodium
fluoride (F-18 NaF) PET/CT bone imaging is most sensitive, F-18 FDG
has good sensitivity for lytic lesions and can detect extraosseous
disease. FDG PET/CT is routinely performed when plasmacytoma is
of concern. The ease of whole-body PET imaging frequently results in
added information to that seen on MRI, and hybrid PET/MR is an
excellent option where available. PET/CT scans are often negative in
patients in remission or in patients with monoclonal gammopathy not
related to malignant myeloma. However, in chronically ill patients,
the elevated marrow background may make it difficult to detect
subtle change or differentiate stimulated marrow from low-level
active disease.
Suggested Reading
Protocol
Adams M.C, Turkington T.G, Wilson J.M, Wong T.Z. A systematic review of factors affecting
accuracy of SUV measurements.  AJR . 2010;195:310–320.
Surassi S, Bhambhvani P, Baldwin J.A, Almodovar S.E, O’Malley J.P. 18F-FDG PET and
PETCT patient preparation: a review of the literature.  J Nucl Med Technol . 2014;42:1–
9. doi: 10.2967/jnmt.113.132621.
Tsai L.L, Grant A.K, Mortele K.J, Kung J.W, Smith M.P. A practical guide to MR imaging
safety: what radiologists need to know.  Radiographics . 2015;35:1722–
1737. doi: 10.1148/rg.2015150108.
PET/MR
Galgano S, Viets Z, Fowler K, et al. Practical considerations for clinical PET/MR imaging.
Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am . 2017;25:281–296.
Impact
Coleman R.E, Hillner B.E, Shields A.F, et al. PET and PET/CT reports: observations from the
National Oncologic PET Registry.  J Nucl Med . 2010;51(1):158–163.
Hillner B.E, Siegel B.A, Liu D, et al. Impact of positron emission tomography/computed
tomography and positron emission tomography (PET) alone on expected management of
patients with cancer: initial results from the National Oncologic PET Registry.  J Clin Oncol
. 2008;26.
Lymphoma
Barrington S.F, Qian W, Somer E.J, et al. Concordance between four European centres of PET
reporting criteria for use in multicentre trials in Hodgkin lymphoma.  Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging . 2010;37(10):1824–1833.
Cheson B.D, Fisher R.I, Barrington S.F, et al. Recommendations for initial evaluation, staging,
and response assessment of Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma: the Lugano
classification.  J Clin Oncol . 2014;32:3059–3068.
Cheson B.D, Pfistner B, Juweid M.E, et al. Revised response criteria for malignant lymphoma.
J Clin Oncol . 2007(5):579–586.
Eisenhauer E.A, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, et al. New response evaluation criteria in solid
tumors: Revised RECIST guideline (1.0).  Eur J Cancer . 2009;45:228–247.
Kulkarni N.M, Pinho D.F, Narayanan S, et al. Imaging for oncologic response assessment in
lymphoma.  AJR . 2017;208:18–31.
Moghbel M.C, Mittra E, Gallamini A, et al. Response assessment criteria and their
applications in lymphoma: part 2.  J Nucl Med . 2017;58:13–22.
Melanoma
Wong A.N, McArthur G.A, Hofman M.S, Hicks R.J. The advantages and challenges of using
FDG PET/CT for response assessment in melanoma in the era of targeted agents and
immunotherapy.  Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging . 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-017-
3691-7.
Head and Neck
Denaro N, Russi E.G, Merlano M.C. Pros and cons of the new edition of TNM classification of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.  Oncology . 2018;95:202–
210. doi: 10.1159/000490415.
Gamss C, Gupta A, Chazen L, Philips C. Imaging evaluation of the suprahyoid neck.  Radiol
Clin N Am . 2015;53:133–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcl.2014.09.009.
Goel R, Moore W, Sumer B, Khan S, Sher D, Subramanian R.M. Clinical practice in PET/CT for
the management of head and neck cancer.  AJR . 2017;209:289–
303. doi: 10.2214/AJR.17.18301.
Lydiatt W, O’Sullivan B, Patel S. Major changes in head and neck staging for 2018.  Ca Cancer J
Clin . 2017;67:122–137. Ascopubs.org/doi/full/10.1200/EDBK_199697.
Plaxton N.A, Brandon D.C, Corey A.S, et al. Characteristics and limitations of FDG PET/CT
for imaging of squamous cell cancer of the head and neck: a comprehensive review of
anatomy, metastatic pathways, and findings.  AJR . 2015;205:W519–W531.
Salto N, Nadgir R.N, Nakashira M, et al. Posttreatment CT and MR imaging in head and neck
cancer: what the radiologist needs to know.  Radiographics . 2012;32:1261–
1282. https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.325115160.
Som P.M, Curtin H.D, Mancuso A.A. Imaging-based nodal classification for evaluation of
neck metastatic adenopathy.  AJR . 2000;174:837–844.
Thyroid
Marcus C, Whitworth P.W, Surasi D.S, Pai S.I, Subramanian R.M. PET/CT in the management
of thyroid cancers.  AJR . 2014;2023:1316–1329.
Chest
Lung Nodule Evaluation
Bankier A.A, MacMahon H, Goo J.M, et al. Recommendations for measuring pulmonary
nodules at CT: a statement from the Fleischner Society.  Radiology . 2017;285(2):584–
600. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2017162894.
Bueno J, Landeras L, Chung J.H. Updated Fleischner society guidelines for managing
incidental pulmonary nodules: common questions and challenging scenarios.
Radiographics . 2018;38:1337–1350. https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2018180017.
Detterbeck F.C. The eighth edition TNM stage classification for lung cancer: what does it
mean on the main street?  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018;155:356–
359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2017.08.138.
Evangelista L, Panunzio A, Polverosi R, Pomerri F, Rubello D. Indeterminate lung nodules in
cancer patients: pretest probability of malignancy and the role of 18-F-FDG PET/CT.  AJR
. 2014;202:507–513.
MacMahon H, Naidich D.P, Goo J.M, et al. Guidelines for management of incidental
pulmonary nodules detected on CT images: from the Fleischner Society 2017.  Radiology
. 2017;284:228–243. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2017161659.
Revel M.P, Mannes I, Benzakoun J, et al. Subsolid lung nodule classification: a CT criterion for
improving interobserver agreement.  Radiology . 2018;286:316–
325. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2017170044.
Lung Cancer
Carter B.W, Lichtenberger J.P, Benveniste M.K, et al. Revisions to the TNM staging of lung
cancer: rationale, significance, and clinical application.  Radiographics . 2018;38:374–
391. https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2018170081.
El-Sherief A.H, Lau C.T, Wu C.C, Drake R.L, Abbott G.F, Rice T.W. International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) lymph node map: radiological review with CT
illustration.  Radiographics . 2014;34:1680–1691. doi.org/10.1148/rg.346130097.
Rusch V.W, Asamura H, Watanabe H, et al. The IASLC lung cancer staging project: a
proposal for a new international lymph node map in the forthcoming seventh edition of
the TNM classification for lung cancer.  J Thorac Oncol . 2009;4:568–577.
Sheikhbahaei S, Mena E, Yanamadala A, et al. The value of FDG PET/CT in treatment
response assessment, follow-up, and surveillance of lung cancer.  AJR . 2017;208:420–
433. doi: 10.2214/AJR.16.16532.
Breast Cancer
Koolen B.B, Valdes R.A, Vogel W.V, et al. Pre-chemotherapy 18F-FDG PET/CT upstages nodal
stage II-III breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.  Breast Cancer
Res Treat . 2013;141(2):249–254. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-013-2678-8.
Rosen E.L, Eubank W.B, Mankoff D.A. FDG PET, PET/CT, and breast cancer imaging.
Radiographics . 2007;27:S215–S229. doi: 10.1148/rg.27si075517.
Gastrointestinal and Genitourinary
Gade M, Kubik M, Fisker R.V, Thorlacius-Ussing O, Petersen L.J. Diagnostic value of 18F-
FDG PET/CT as first choice in the detection of recurrent colorectal cancer due to rising
CEA.  Cancer Imaging . 2015;15:11–18. doi: 10.1186/s40644-015-0048-y.
Gayed I, Vu T, Iyer R, et al. The role of 18F-FDG PET in staging and early prediction of
response to therapy of recurrent gastrointestinal stromal tumors.  J Nucl Med . 2004;45:17–
21.
Patel M.D, Ascher S.M, Paspulati R.M, et al. Managing incidental findings on abdominal and
pelvic CT and MRI, part 1: white paper of the ACR incidental findings committee II on
adnexal findings.  J Am Coll Radiol . 2013;10(9):675–681. doi: 10.1016/j.acr.2013.05.023.
Musculoskeletal Tumors
Cavo M, Terpos E, Nanni C, et al. Role of 18F-FDG PET/CT in the diagnosis and management
of multiple myeloma and other plasma cell disorders: a consensus statement by the
international myeloma working group.  Lancet Oncol . 2017;18(4):e206–
e217. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30189-4.
