Prostate Cancer Diagnostic Imaging and
Therapy
Prostate cancer is the most frequent malignant tumor in men and the
second leading cause of death. Routine blood testing showing an
elevated serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) often brings the patient
to medical attention. Examination and biopsy can confirm the
diagnosis. For staging, restaging, diagnosis of recurrence, and
therapeutic monitoring, noninvasive tests such as MRI, contrast-
enhanced CT, and Tc-99m bone scans have been standard. However,
all of these have significant limitations for pretherapy risk
stratification, for staging patients at risk for pelvic lymph node
metastases or systemic disease, and for the detection of biochemical
recurrence at low PSA levels in patients previously treated with
curative intent. The specificity of magnetic resonance (MR) within the
prostate
can
be
compromised
by
postbiopsy
change
and
inflammation, and both CT and MR are limited for the detection of
lymph node metastases by the need to wait until disease causes lymph
node enlargement for diagnosis.
Prostate cancer staging is based on the combination of physical
examination, histopathological Gleason score, and the serum PSA
level. Therapy with radical prostatectomy is not undertaken when
there is nodal involvement or distant spread. The lymph nodes are the
most common site of metastatic disease, usually occurring in a
stepwise fashion from the periprostatic or obturator nodes to internal
or external iliac nodes, and then to the common iliac and periaortic
nodes. However, this sequence is not invariable. Frequent sites of
distant metastases are the skeleton, liver, and lungs.
If the PSA fails to decline after prostatectomy or begins to rise
(biochemical failure), then residual or recurrent tumor is suspected. If
disease is localized to the prostate fossa or pelvis, radiation therapy
offers the potential for effective treatment. However, if recurrence
involves periaortic lymph nodes or other distant sites outside the
therapy field, radiation therapy exposes the patient to significant
morbidity without the potential for cure. Staging has limitations. Bone
scans are most likely to detect metastases if the serum PSA is >20
ng/mL and in patients with a high Gleason score. However, post–
hormonal therapy PSAs are a less useful guide because they are often
low even in the setting of residual tumor. CT and MRI have limited
value because of their low sensitivity for detecting nodal involvement.
F-18 FDG PET has poor sensitivity for detecting prostate cancer. It
plays a limited role in staging or detecting recurrence, only showing
significant sensitivity when recurrent disease has transformed,
escaping hormonal control, and has become more aggressive.
For recurrent prostate cancer therapy planning, it must be
determined whether disease is confined to the prostate/prostate bed or
is extraprostatic. Identification of metastatic pelvic disease requires
modification of the radiation field to cover the pelvic lymph nodes;
extrapelvic disease changes the approach from potential curative
salvage therapy to system hormonal therapy.
Molecular imaging has the potential to better characterize primary
prostate cancer, perform staging before radiotherapy or surgery,
localize the site of recurrence in patients with a rising PSA level after
primary therapy, monitor tumor response to therapy, and select
patients for targeted radionuclide therapy. Approaches have included
C-11 acetate (fatty acid analog), C-11 and F-18 choline (cell membrane
analogs), and F-18 fluorocholine (amino acid analog).
F-18 Fluciclovine (FACBC, Axumin)
F-18 fluciclovine (FACBC, Axumin) was approved by the FDA in 2016
for the diagnosis of suspected recurrent prostate cancer in patients
with elevated PSA after initial therapy. F-18 fluciclovine is an amino
acid analog of leucine (Fig. 13.18). Amino acid transport is
upregulated in carcinomas because of increased amino acid use for
energy requirements and protein synthesis.
Primary tumor characterization is not an approved indication
because there is poor specificity for uptake in primary prostate cancer
and benign prostate tissue as well as low sensitivity for nodal disease.
For identifying disease in the treated prostate bed, fluciclovine
demonstrates high sensitivity but low specificity and moderate
positive predictive value (PPV).
FIG. 13.18  F-18 fluciclovine (Axumin)—molecular structure. Chemical
name, Anti1-amino-3-F-18-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid. (Left to
right) F-18 radiolabel, cyclic side chain, amino terminus, and carboxy
terminus.
The radiopharmaceutical is most useful in patients with
biochemical failure and suspected recurrent locoregional and distant
metastatic disease. F-18 fluciclovine PET/CT has demonstrated
superiority to CT for the detection of local and distant disease in the
clinical setting of biochemical failure. F-18 fluciclovine has uptake in
osteolytic and osteoblastic lesions, and sometimes this may be seen
before morphological changes detected on CT. Limited studies
suggest equivalent or better results than bone scintigraphy. The
radiopharmaceutical has shown superior diagnostic performance
compared with CT, In-111 ProstaScint, and C-11 choline.
Regarding preparation, 4-hour fasting is recommended before
injection. Unlike FDG PET/CT, no prolonged uptake phase is
necessary. Imaging begins approximately 4 minutes after injection of
10 mCi (370 MBq) F-18 fluciclovine. Normal biodistribution includes
marked pancreatic uptake, with somewhat lesser uptake in the liver.
The pituitary, salivary glands, lymphoid tissue of Waldeyer’s ring,
thyroid gland, breast, esophagus, stomach and bowel, adrenal glands,
and renal parenchyma may all have mild to moderate uptake.
Excretion is via the urinary tract (Figs. 13.19 and 13.20). Bone marrow
may show heterogeneous uptake. Inflammation may show varying
degrees of uptake. Preliminary data suggest F-18 fluciclovine may
have a role in other malignancies (e.g., breast cancer, gliomas, and
lung cancer). Guidelines for F-18 fluciclovine image interpretation are
summarized in Box 13.5.
Investigations have shown that preprostatectomy sensitivity
depends on the PSA level, being limited for low PSA values.
However, postprostatectomy, sensitivity improves. The higher the
PSA, the higher the likelihood of detection.
Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is overexpressed in
primary and metastatic adenocarcinomas of the prostate. The level of
PSMA expression rises with increasing tumor dedifferentiation and in
hormone-refractory cancers.
In-111 Capromab Pendetide (ProstaScint)
In-111 capromab pendetide (ProstaScint) is a monoclonal antibody to
PSMA approved by the FDA for clinical use in 1996 as a diagnostic
imaging agent in patients with localized prostate cancer at risk for
tumor spread and in postprostatectomy patients who might relapse.
ProstaScint targets an intracellular epitope of PSMA. In retrospect, this
limited its ability to localize to intact cancer cells. Its sensitivity for the
detection of metastatic prostate cancer has been found suboptimal,
even with SPECT and SPECT/CT, with difficulty differentiating
uptake in lymph nodes from high levels of background blood-pool
activity in adjacent vessels and lower resolution in the prostate bed.
Newer generations of PSMA-targeted radiotracers that interact with
the extracellular domain of the enzyme have subsequently been
developed.
FIG. 13.19  F-18 fluciclovine (FACBC)—patient with history of radical
prostatectomy, now rising PSA, suspected recurrence. Internal
iliac/pelvic sidewall lymph node seen on maximum-intensity projection
(MIP) image (above) and transverse positron emission tomography
(PET) slice (below).
Courtesy of Bital Savir-Baruch.
Ga-68, F-18, and Tc-99m PSMA-Targeted Imaging
Radiopharmaceuticals
PSMA is an enzyme (glutamate carboxypeptidases, GCP, Type II) that is
highly expressed in primary and metastatic prostate cancer. The target
of these small-molecule radiopharmaceuticals is the enzyme active
site within the extracellular domain. This approach has been found to
be much superior to that of ProstaScint because it allows these
radiotracers to target intact prostate cancer cells. After antigen binding
to PSMA in the cell membrane, it is internalized by endocytosis,
leading to concentration and retention in the cells, which can create
very high-contrast-resolution images and allow the detection of even
small-volume disease.
Generator-produced Ga-68 labeled to PSMA-targeted agents
(PSMA-11, PMSA-617, or PSMA I&T) has been extensively studied
and successfully used clinically in Europe. Also, F-18-labeled PSMA
radiopharmaceuticals
(DCFPyL
and
PSMA-1007)
are
under
investigation in Europe and the United States. Ga-68 has
disadvantages, such as the need for a Ge-68/Ga-68 generator and
sufficient patient volume to utilize it cost-effectively. The image
quality of Ga-68 and F-18 PSMA is superior to that of F-18 fluciclovine
and C-11 choline. The F-18 radiolabel for PSMA will likely be
preferable to Ga-68 because of F-18’s superior imaging characteristics
and PET/CT’s wide availability.
The normal distribution of Ga-68, F-18, and Tc-99m PSMA-targeted
agents includes the prominent uptake in the salivary glands, kidney
cortex, and duodenum, with lesser uptake in the spleen, lacrimal
glands, and liver (Fig. 13.21).
These radiolabeled PSMA-targeted radiopharmaceuticals have
reported high accuracy for the detection of local, regional, and distant
metastases. They can detect sites of recurrent disease that were occult
or equivocal by conventional imaging modalities, especially in the
pelvic/periprostatic tissues, in subcentimeter lymph nodes, and bone
metastases (Figs. 13.22–13.24). A higher detection rate and sensitivity
have been reported compared with conventional imaging in hormone-
naïve and castration metastatic prostate cancer and in the setting of
biochemical recurrence, even in patients with low PSA. A prospective
investigation of 431 patients found that Ga-68-targeted PSMA PET/CT
led to a change in planned management in 51% of patients.
Unsuspected disease was found in the prostate bed in 27%,
locoregional positive nodes in 39%, and distant metastatic disease in
16% of patients (see Figs. 22–24).
However, false positives may occur, and uptake may be seen in
ganglia,
granulomatous
disease,
hemangiomas,
healing
bone
fractures, Paget’s disease, and tumors of neurogenic origin. False
negatives may occur in nodal metastases <5 mm in diameter. PSMA is
also expressed in the neovasculature of nonprostate tumors, including
clear-cell renal carcinoma, thyroid cancer, breast cancer, and colon
cancer.
Lutetium-177 (Lu-177) PSMA-Targeted Therapy of Prostate
Cancer (Lutathera)
An important application of radiotargeted PSMA diagnostic imaging
is the selection of patients for radionuclide therapy. Experience with
Lu-177 PSMA-targeted radiotherapy in patients with castration-
resistant prostate cancer has been very positive to date, even in
advanced cases. Retrospective studies have demonstrated significant
benefits
for
overall
survival
and
progression-free
survival,
improvement in clinical symptoms, and excellent pain palliation
compared with other pharmacological therapies. The most common
side effect has been hematologic, a bystander effect with bone
metastases. Prospective studies are needed.
