Sentinel Node Mapping With
Lymphoscintigraphy
Cancers such as melanoma and breast carcinoma metastasize first to
regional lymph nodes. Mapping the lymphatic drainage of a tumor
has improved staging in patients with early cancer (those with no
clinically evident nodal involvement) by identifying the sentinel
lymph node (SLN). The SLN is the first node that drains the region of
the tumor and is the one most likely to reveal occult metastases. Once
identified with scintigraphy, it can be detected at surgery with a
portable gamma probe and excised for pathological evidence of nodal
spread. If there is no sentinel nodal spread of tumor, resection of the
remaining lymph node basin is unnecessary. This process has proved
more accurate for staging than routinely dissecting all nodes in the
clinically perceived drainage basin and has markedly decreased
morbidity from lymphadenectomy, most commonly lymphedema.
This procedure is widely used for melanoma and breast cancer but is
also now being be used for a variety of other tumors, including head
and neck, cervix, vaginal, colon, and thyroid cancer. Some surgeons
also inject blue dye at the time of surgery for a similar purpose,
however, usually in conjunction with scintigraphy.
FIG. 13.20  F-18 fluciclovine (FACBC)—a patient with prostate cancer
who received brachytherapy, now with rising prostate-specific antigen
(PSA). Uptake seen in (A) a left obturator node and (B) seminal
vesicle.
Courtesy of Bital Savir-Baruch.
Box 13.5 Interpretative Guidelines for F-18
Fluciclovine (FACBC, Axumin)
Nonprostatectomy Prostate Bed
Moderate focal asymmetrical uptake ≥ bone marrow is
suspicious for cancer recurrence. Small foci (<1 cm) are
suspicious if uptake is > blood pool. Diffuse heterogeneous or
homogenous uptake > blood pool and bone marrow is
suspicious for cancer.
Prostate Bed Postprostatectomy
Focal uptake ≥ bone marrow in areas suspicious for cancer—
interpret as positive.
Small foci (<1 cm) are suspicious if uptake is > blood pool.
Lymph nodes
Typical sites for recurrence, uptake ≥ bone marrow is
suspicious for cancer.
Small foci should be > bone marrow to call positive.
Atypical nodal sites (inguinal, distal external iliac, hilar,
axillary) should usually be considered physiological.
Focal Bone Uptake
Is suspicious for cancer if seen on MIP images or PET-only
images.
A CT bone abnormality without uptake does not exclude
metastasis.
CT, Computed tomography; MIP, maximum-intensity projection;
PET, positron emission tomography.
Radiopharmaceuticals
A number of radiopharmaceuticals have been investigated and used
for this purpose. In the United States, filtered Tc-99m sulfur colloid
(SC) has been most commonly used. The range of particle size varies.
Small particles migrate quickly and have shorter lymph node
residence times; larger particles may not migrate. Because particle
sizes for Tc-99m SC (Tc-99m SC) tend to be large (0.1–1.0 μm), the
administered dose is commonly first filtered through a 0.22-micron
Millipore filter. In Europe, Tc-99m-labeled nanocolloid of human
serum albumin is most commonly used, and in Australia, Tc-99m
antimony trisulfide.
Tc-99m tilmanocept (Lymphoseek) was approved by the FDA in
2013 for sentinel node lymphoscintigraphy for melanoma, breast, and
oral cavity cancers. This small molecule carries multiple units of
mannose with high affinity for receptor proteins (CD206) found on the
surface of macrophages and dendritic cells. By tightly binding to these
mannose receptors, it accumulates in lymphatic tissue and localizes in
draining nodes. It clears rapidly from the injection site, has high SLN
extraction, and has low distal node accumulation. Detection rates are
said to be similar. Lymphatic channels are more commonly seen with
Tc-99m SC. However, studies directly comparing Tc-99m tilmanocept
with Tc-99m SC are few and small. Lymphoseek has been claimed to
result in less pain to the patient on injection, although pain is usually
caused by the intracutaneous bleb and is very transient with Tc-99m
SC. Because Tc-99m tilmanocept is cleared via the bladder, it is not
ideal for vulvovaginal locations.
FIG. 13.21  Normal distribution—F-18 DCFPyL prostate-specific
membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeted radiopharmaceutical, maximum-
intensity projection (MIP) image. Greatest uptake in the parotids and
salivary glands, kidney, and duodenum and lesser activity in the
lacrimal glands, liver, and spleen, and urinary clearance.
Clinical Indications
Malignant Melanoma
Factors influencing prognosis include the primary lesion’s thickness
(millimeter depth of tumor invasion), lesion ulceration, and mitotic
rate and are useful for staging early tumors and predicting occult
lymph node involvement. Lymph node involvement is the most
important independent predictor of survival. Patients without
clinically detected adenopathy but with intermediate-thickness
tumors (Breslow >1.0 mm and <4.0 mm) benefit most from SLN
biopsy. With tumors <1.0 mm (stage I), the procedure is sometimes
performed if there are other high-risk factors, such as a high mitotic
biopsy rate (≥1 mitosis/mm2) or lesion ulceration.
Methodology
An intradermal injection is performed either the morning of surgery
or in the afternoon before the next-morning surgery. An intradermal
injection that raises a wheal generally results in good dose migration
through
the
lymphatic
vessels.
Filtered
Tc-99m
SC
radiopharmaceutical is typically injected in four divided doses within
1 cm and around the lesion/biopsy scar, and images are acquired for
approximately 30 minutes. Occasionally, delayed images are needed,
for example, to differentiate a lymphatic channel from nodal uptake.
Lymph nodes may be visualized in remote, unexpected locations, so
vigilance is warranted. Various imaging methodologies have been
described. One is summarized in Box 13.6.
For Tc-99m tilmanocept (Lymphoseek), 0.5 mCi is injected
intradermally the morning of surgery or 2 mCi the afternoon before
next-morning surgery. Multiple-view images can be obtained as early
as 15 minutes after injection.
Image Interpretation
The first retained “hot spot” seen is the sentinel node. Subsequent
ones are secondary nodes. It is possible to have two sentinel nodes if
they have separate lymphatic drainage paths (Fig. 13.25). Care must
be taken to differentiate temporary retention in a lymphatic channel
from a node. Further delayed imaging can often clarify the issue. In-
transit nodes, most commonly in the extremities in the antecubital or
popliteal fossa, should be carefully looked for when injecting distally
because they would be considered the sentinel node (Fig. 13.26).
SPECT/CT can be helpful in some cases, particularly in the head and
neck (Fig. 13.27).
FIG. 13.22  F-18 DCFPyL prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA)-targeted positron emission tomography with computed
tomography (PET/CT) in a patient with newly diagnosed Gleason 8
prostate cancer with focal uptake detected in left prostate apex.
Courtesy, Steven P. Rowe, MD, PhD and Michael A. Gorin, MD.
FIG. 13.23  Prostate bed uptake on F-18 DCFPyL prostate-specific
membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeted radiopharmaceutical positron
emission tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) images.
Rising prostate-specific antigen (PSA) postsurgery for prostate cancer.
A recurrence of prostate cancer is detected in the posterolateral left
aspect of the prostate bed. Conventional imaging was negative.
Courtesy, Steven P. Rowe, MD, PhD and Michael A. Gorin, MD.
FIG. 13.24  Metastatic prostate cancer to bone on F-18 DCFPyL
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeted
radiopharmaceutical positron emission tomography with computed
tomography (PET/CT). Patient was on therapy. This is a follow-up
scan. Widely metastatic to bone, seen on maximum-intensity projection
(MIP) and sagittal (left to right) CT, PyL, and fused images.
Courtesy, Steven P. Rowe, MD, PhD and Michael A. Gorin, MD.
SLN biopsy accuracy is much higher than clinical and standard
imaging assessment. False-negative rates (a sentinel node not
detected) for SNL lymphoscintigraphy are quite low, <5%.
Importantly, surgical complication rates are much lower with the SLN
biopsy approach than for complete nodal basin dissection, in two
trials, 10.1% versus 37.2% and 4.6% versus 23.2%. A metanalysis of
nonrandomized studies reported better survival for those who had
SLN biopsy. However, the Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy
Trial showed no definite survival advantage. Quality of life is
improved for those with negative sentinel nodes for metastases
because they do not require a complete axillary node dissection and
its common complications.
Breast Cancer
Axillary lymph node status is a major prognostic factor in early-stage
breast cancer. Even in small, T1 tumors (≤2 cm), axillary nodes are
involved at initial staging 10% to 30% of the time, and this increases to
45% for T2 lesions (2.1–3.0 cm). Some centers limit SLN biopsy to
those with unifocal tumors smaller than 2 to 3 cm; others offer the
procedure to patients with large T2 or T3 lesions (>5 cm) and
multifocal or multicentric lesions. In breast cancer, the use of the
sentinel node biopsy has largely replaced initial axillary lymph node
dissection. Usually, the SLN is identified in the axillary region,
detected at surgery with a miniaturized gamma probe, and removed.
Lymphoscintigraphy detects the SLN in >90% of cases. False-negative
rates of are <10%. Surgeons do not perform confirmatory axillary
dissection if the SLN is free of tumor. The risk for lymphedema is
lower after SLN biopsy than from axillary dissection (5% vs. 13%). At
some centers, imaging is not performed.
Methodology
Various injection methods have been used, including intradermal,
subdermal, subcutaneous, peritumoral, periareolar, and subareolar
injections. Although peritumoral injection with ultrasound guidance
is recommended for deep tumors, subdermal or intradermal injections
are sufficient in most cases, resulting in rapid dose migration.
Periareolar injections can be used if the tumor is in the upper outer
quadrant, to avoid confusion or crosstalk between the injection site
and any nodes. Massage of the injection site promotes dose
movement. The presence of internal mammary nodes may be
demonstrated with greater frequency with periareolar injections.
Disagreement exists on surgical management of these nodes, with
many not including the findings in their assessment at staging.
Because internal mammary nodes are frequently involved in breast
cancer, it would seem that attention to this region is warranted,
particularly in medially located primary tumors, when restaging, such
as with PET/CT.
Box 13.6 Sentinel Node Lymphoscintigraphy
Patient Preparation
None
Procedure Tray
4 syringes with 1 mCi Tc-99m SC or Tc-99m tilmanocept
(Lymphoseek) 0.5 mCi divided into four 0.1-mL-volume
tuberculin syringes
Alcohol wipes, gauze, needle discard basin, blue chuck,
Lidocaine cream, Tegaderm
Procedure
Blue absorbent chuck with center cut out to expose primary
site
Gloves should be worn and injection sites cleaned.
Inject radiopharmaceutical intradermally at four sites within 1
cm of the periphery of lesion or surgical resection.
The needle should be withdrawn with negative pressure to
prevent contamination.
Image Acquisition Protocol
Tc-99m sulfur colloid:
Acquire images for 30 minutes (six sets of five 1-minute
frames) in 128 × 128 matrix
Obtain transmission scan with Co-57 sheet source during
1-minute frame for each 5- minute acquisition.
Additional 5-minute acquisitions as needed
If no drainage is seen, heat and massage may be helpful.
For back or abdominal lesions, image both axillary and
inguinal nodal regions.
In-transit nodes should be looked for in extremities and
marked. Thus, good images of the lower and upper leg or
arm are necessary.
Tc-99m Tilmanocept:
Similar protocol except that only static images 15 minutes
after injection are required.
SPECT/CT can be helpful for localization, particularly for
the head and neck and pelvis.
SPECT/CT, Single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography.
Imaging begins immediately after injection. Protocols vary, but with
Tc-99m SC, sequential images are performed at 5-minute intervals
until the node is detected, usually within 30 to 60 minutes.
Lymphoseek imaging begins at 10 to 15 minutes and requires only
multiple-view static images. SPECT or SPECT/CT may be helpful.
Transmission images using a cobalt-57 sheet source placed between
the patient and the camera for 10 to 15 seconds can provide
anatomical landmarks. Visualized nodes are marked on the skin. An
intraoperative gamma probe is used at surgery for detection. The
sentinel node usually has uptake >2 times background. Although
intraoperative vital blue dye injection and radiolabeled colloids have
been used independently, sensitivity is highest if they are used
together.
Lymphedema—Extremity Lymphoscintigraphy
The lymphatic system removes interstitial fluid from all parts of the
body and returns lymph to the blood circulation. Lymphedema
results from impaired lymphatic transport, which can be caused by
injury, infection, or a congenital abnormality of the lymphatics. Arm
lymphedema is a frequent complication of breast cancer therapy with
axillary node dissection, with an estimated frequency of 5% to 30%.
Lower extremity lymphedema results from treatment of pelvic cancer,
with a reported frequency of ranging from 10% to 49%. The most
common cause worldwide is due to filariasis. However, in developed
countries, postsurgical and postphlebitic lymphedema is most
common. Congenital causes are much less common. Delay in
diagnosis and treatment allows for secondary fibrosis and lipid
deposition, which is much more difficult to treat. Untreated lymphatic
stasis results in inflammation, fibrosis, and a decrease in the number
of functioning lymphatic channels and lipid deposition. In the
extremities, the lymphatic system consists of a superficial system that
collects lymph from the skin and subcutaneous tissue and a deeper
system that drains muscle, bone, and deep vessels. The two drainage
systems merge in the pelvis and in the axilla. There are nonsurgical
and surgical approaches to the treatment of lymphedema, which
include
manual
lymphatic
massage,
pneumatic
compression,
hyperthermia,
pharmacological
interventions,
liposuction,
and
microsurgery.
FIG. 13.25  Sentinel node lymphoscintigraphy in a patient with
melanoma in the midback demonstrates its value for detecting
unpredictable patterns of drainage. Activity moves from the region of
the lesion in the midback to sentinel lymph nodes in the right and left
axilla. L, Left; LLAT, left lateral; R, right; RLAT, right lateral.
FIG. 13.26  In-transit epitrochlear sentinel node. Recently diagnosed
melanoma of the left forearm. Scatter from the injection site can be
seen in the upper left. An in-transit node is seen just below that in the
epitrochlear region. Uptake is also seen in the axilla. The epitrochlear
node is the sentinel node.
FIG. 13.27  Sentinel node, advantage of single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT).
Melanoma neck lesion. (A) Planar image after Tc-99m SC intradermal
injection shows intense uptake at site of injection in right neck. No
definite sentinel node was detected. (B) Fused SPECT/CT image
shows a sentinel lymph node immediately medial to the injection site.
Lymphoscintigraphy has largely replaced the invasive and
technically difficult technique of lymphangiography. Scintigraphy to
determine whether the patient’s edema is lymphatic in origin has a
long history. The protocol has never been standardized, but various
radiopharmaceuticals and methodologies all seem to work well.
Filtered Tc-99m SC is most commonly used in the United States;
however, various other radiocolloids have been used worldwide,
including Tc-99m antimony SC, Tc-99m albumin colloid, and Tc-99m
human serum albumin (HAS). The radiotracer is injected in the webs
of the toes or fingers intracutaneously or subcutaneously. Scans are
obtained at 30 minutes to 2 hours and at 4 to 6 hours after tracer
administration, imaging from the toes to the level of the liver.
The diagnostic criteria for lymphatic dysfunction include delay,
asymmetrical or absent visualization of deep lymphatic channels and
regional lymph nodes, and the presence of a “dermal backflow”
pattern (Fig. 13.28). Other findings that may be seen include collateral
lymphatic channels, interrupted vascular structures, lymphatic leaks,
and lymph nodes deep to the lymphatic system.
