I-123 and I-131 mIBG Adrenergic Tumor
Imaging and Therapy
Radiolabeled metaiodo-benzyl-guanidine (mIBG) adrenal medullary
scintigraphy has been used clinically since the 1980s for diagnosis and
staging
of
neural
crest
tumors
(e.g.,
pheochromocytomas,
paragangliomas, and neuroblastomas). I-131-labeled mIBG was the
original diagnostic agent; however, I-123-labeled mIBG is now widely
available and preferable because of its superior image quality with an
optimal 159-keV gamma-ray energy and lower patient radiation given
a lack of β– emissions and shorter half-life of 13 hours as opposed to I-
131 with a 364-keV gamma-ray energy, β– emissions, and 8-day half-
life (see Appendix 1). I-131 mIBG is reserved for therapy.
I-123 mIBG (AdreView)
I-123 mIBG (AdreView) was approved by the FDA in 2003 for the
detection
of
primary
or
metastatic
pheochromocytoma
and
neuroblastoma, as an adjunct to other diagnostic tests. As an analog of
the drugs bretylium and guanethidine, mIBG shares structural
features and biological behavior with the adrenergic neurotransmitter
hormone norepinephrine. Both norepinephrine and mIBG are taken
up in cells rich in sympathetic neurons by an active process mediated
by the norepinephrine uptake-1 transporter. Once in the cytoplasm, it
is actively transported into the presynaptic nerve terminal and
catecholamine storage granules by the vesicular monoamine
transporter (Fig. 13.11).
Uptake and Distribution
I-123 mIBG avidly localizes in organs with high adrenergic
innervation, including the heart, salivary glands, kidneys, and liver.
(Fig. 13.12). Variable activity is seen in the lungs, gallbladder, salivary
glands, and nasal mucosa. Mild to moderate adrenal uptake often
occurs with planar I-123 mIBG imaging and is nearly always seen
with SPECT. No uptake occurs in the normal skeleton. It is cleared
through the colon and kidneys.
Methodology
Numerous drugs interfere with mIBG uptake. The most common
include tricyclic antidepressants, reserpine, cocaine, and the alpha-
and beta-blocker labetalol (Table 13.3). A detailed imaging protocol is
summarized (Box 13.4). Pretreatment with saturated potassium iodide
(SSKI) or Lugol’s solution is recommended in the package insert and
in procedural guidelines to block thyroid uptake (Table 13.4).
Although the 159-keV photopeak can be imaged with a low-energy
collimator, a fraction of the photons (<3%) are high energy (440–625
keV [2.4%] and 625–784 keV [0.15%]), reducing the image quality.
Although a low-energy collimator is often used, a medium-energy
collimator is preferable. Images are routinely acquired 24 hours after
injection. Whole-body imaging is standard in order to detect an
extraadrenal pheochromocytoma, malignant metastases, or primary
and metastatic neuroblastoma. SPECT/CT is very useful for
anatomical localization.
FIG. 13.11  Uptake mechanism of mIBG. It is actively taken up in the
presynaptic nerve terminal and retained in catecholamine storage
granules, similar to norepinephrine. In the nerve terminal,
norepinephrine is converted from tyrosine to DOPA to dopamine and
then to norepinephrine (noradrenaline) and then secreted in response
to acetylcholine.
With permission, Scott LA, Kench PL. Schematic representation of the
123I-MIBG uptake mechanism. J Nucl Med Technol. 2004;32:66–71.
FIG. 13.12  Pheochromocytoma. Planar I-123 mIBG whole-body scan.
Patient with poorly controlled hypertension and very elevated serum
and urinary catecholamines. Distribution is normal except for focal
markedly increased uptake in the region of the left adrenal, best seen
in posterior view (right), consistent with pheochromocytoma.
Table 13.3
Medications Recommended to Be Held Before I-123 mIBG Study
Drug
Related Drugs
Mechanism
Discontinue
for:
Antihypertensive/cardiac
agents
Bretylium, guanethidine,
reserpine
Calcium channel blockers
Deplete
granules
Deplete
7 days
14 days
21 days
(amlodipine, nifedipine,
nicardipine)
Labetalol
granules
Deplete
granules
and
inhibit
uptake
Beta-
blocker
Antipsychotics
Butyrophenones (droperidol,
haloperidol)
Loxapine
Phenothiazines
(chlorpromazine,
fluphenazine,
promethazine)
Inhibit
uptake
Inhibit
uptake
Inhibit
uptake
21 days
Cocaine/opioids
Inhibit uptake
7 days
Sympathomimetics
Amphetamine, dopamine,
ephedrine, isoproterenol,
fenoterol, phenylephrine,
phenylpropanolamine,
pseudoephedrine, salbutamol,
terbutaline, xylometazoline
Deplete
granules
7 days
Tramadol
Inhibits uptake
14 days
Tricyclic antidepressants
Amitriptyline (and derivatives),
amoxapine, doxepin
Inhibit uptake
21 days
mIBG, Metaiodobenzylguanidine.
Table 13.4
Daily Doses of Thyroid Blockade Compounds
Drug
Adults
Child (15–50 kg)
Child (5–15 kg)
Child (<5 kg)
Capsules a
Potassium iodate
Potassium iodide
Potassium perchlorate
Solution
Lugol solution 1%
1 drop/kg to max 40 (20 drops twice daily)
a  Dose in milligrams per day.
Data from Giammarile F, Chiti A, Lassmann M, et al. EANM
procedure guidelines for I-131 MIBG therapy. Eur J Nucl Mol Imaging.
2008;35:1039–1047.
Box 13.4 Iodine-123 mIBG: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Discontinue interfering medications (Table 13.3).
Potassium iodide or Lugol’s solution to prevent thyroid
uptake (Table 13.4)
Radiopharmaceutical
Intravenous injection over 30 seconds
I-123 MIBG
Children: 0.14 mCi/kg (5.2 MBq/kg); minimum 1.0 mCi
(20 MBq) and maximum 10 mCi (400 MBq)
Adults: 10 mCi (400 MBq)
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view for planar images
Planar imaging and SPECT/CT as indicated
Collimator: Medium energy, parallel hole; low energy can be
used.
Acquisition
I-123: Image at 24 hours.
Whole-body planar images (8 cm/sec)
SPECT: 3-degree steps, 35 sec/step, 180 projections, 128 × 128
matrix
mIBG,
Metaiodo-benzyl-guanidine;
SPECT,
single-photon
emission
computed
tomography;
SPECT/CT,
single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography.
Clinical Applications of I-123 mIBG
Pheochromocytoma
This catecholamine-secreting tumor is derived from chromaffin cells.
It can precipitate life-threatening hypertension or cardiac arrhythmias
secondary to its excessive catecholamine secretion. When these
tumors arise outside of the adrenal gland, they are called
paragangliomas and can be found anywhere from the bladder up to the
base of the skull. Ten percent of pheochromocytomas are bilateral,
10% are extraadrenal, and 10% are malignant. They may be associated
with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types IIA and IIB, von
Hippel–Lindau disease, neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, and
Carney syndrome. Adrenomedullary hyperplasia occurs in patients
with MEN type IIA.
Pheochromocytomas often present with elevated blood or urinary
catecholamines and metanephrines, usually three times or greater
than normal. If an adrenal mass is demonstrated with morphological
imaging in patients with evidence for the disease, the diagnosis is
often inferred, and further workup before surgery is not always
necessary. However, I-123 mIBG can confirm the adrenergic etiology
of a detected adrenal mass on anatomical imaging, detect extraadrenal
paragangliomas, and diagnose medullary hyperplasia and metastatic
pheochromocytoma.
The characteristic I-123 mIBG scintigraphic appearance of a
pheochromocytoma, extraadrenal paraganglioma, or metastatic
disease is intense focal uptake with a high tumor-to-background ratio
(Fig. 13.12). The sensitivity and specificity for detection are 90% and
95%, respectively. Planar imaging is often diagnostic, although
SPECT/CT can be helpful (Figs. 13.13 and 13.14). F-18 FDG has only a
limited role but can be useful with high-grade adrenal cancers or
malignant pheochromocytoma.
Neuroblastoma
This embryonal malignancy of the sympathetic nervous system most
commonly occurs in children younger than 4 years of age. Over 70%
of tumors originate in the retroperitoneal region, either from the
adrenal or the abdominal sympathetic chain, whereas approximately
20% occur in the chest, derived from the thoracic sympathetic chain.
Patients with localized tumors can have a good prognosis and
outcome; those with metastatic disease fare poorly. At the time of
diagnosis, more than 50% of patients present with metastatic disease,
25% have localized disease, and 15% have regional extension.
Metastatic disease involves the lymph nodes, liver, bone marrow, and
bone. I-123 mIBG is valuable for staging, detecting metastatic disease,
restaging, and determining patient response to therapy. The
sensitivity for detection of neuroblastoma is reported to be >90%, and
the specificity is about 95%. Whole-body scanning is routine (Figs.
13.15 and 13.16). SPECT and SPECT/CT aid in detection and
localization (Fig. 13.17 ). NETs and medullary carcinoma of the
thyroid also take up mIBG, however, with lower sensitivity than for
neuroblastoma or pheochromocytoma.
Bone scans have long been used to detect osseous metastases in
neuroblastoma. A common location for metastases is in the bilateral
metaphyses of long bones. This could be overlooked because of their
symmetrical appearance and high normal growth-plate uptake in
children. However, I-123 mIBG has superior sensitivity for the
detection of metastases compared with bone scans because the tumors
initially involve the bone marrow.
Therapy With High-Dose I-131 mIBG
Conventional therapies for metastatic pheochromocytoma and
neuroblastoma include surgery, chemotherapy, and tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. The 5-year survival rate has been <50%. The high uptake of
mIBG in neuroectodermal tumors has led to therapy with high-dose I-
131 mIBG in patients who have failed conventional therapies and
have progressive or symptomatic disease, utilizing its 606-keV I-131
beta emissions. The 5-year survival rate has been reported to be
increased; however, complete response rates are not high. This
therapy, although performed for many years at selected centers in the
United States and Europe, has been considered investigational.
However, in 2018 the FDA approved iobenguane I-131 (Azedra) for
adult and pediatric patients aged ≥12 years with a positive I-123 MIBG
scan
and
unresectable,
locally
advanced,
or
metastatic
pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. Toxicity includes nausea,
myelosuppression, and fatigue but less than that seen with more
traditional chemotherapy.
FIG. 13.13  Metastatic pheochromocytoma—I-123 mIBG single-
photon emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT). (A) A 70-year-old man with extensive metastases. CT
(above) and fused images (below), transverse (left), sagittal (middle),
and coronal (right) selected images. Metastases noted in the ischium,
sacrum, and lumbar spine. (B) Conglomeration of retroperitoneal nodes
with metastases.
FIG. 13.14  Mediastinal paraganglioma—I-123 mIBG single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT). A 68-year-old woman found to have anterior mediastinal
mass and elevated metanephrines. On fused images, intense uptake is
seen in large superior anterior mediastinal mass along the lateral
border of the aortic arch. On CT, the tumor is seen to extend superiorly
and encase the left subclavian and common carotid arteries. No
metastases were seen.
FIG. 13.15  Primary neuroblastoma with metastases. Coronal
computed tomography (CT) image (top) reveals a large left abdominal
mass (arrows) that had arisen from the retroperitoneum. I-131 mIBG
images (bottom left) show increased uptake in the mass as well as
throughout the skeleton, with diffuse metastases. Tc-99m methyl
diphosphonate (MDP) bone scan (bottom right) shows abnormal soft
tissue uptake in the mass. Skeletal metastases are also seen.
FIG. 13.16  Metastatic neuroblastoma on I-123 mIBG whole-body
scan. A 7-year-old boy with stage IV tumor after two bone marrow
transplants. Extensive metastases are seen throughout the skeleton.
For therapy with I-131 mIBG, patients must be pretreated with
potassium iodide or other thyroid-blocking medications beginning 24
to 48 hours before injection to minimize uptake of free radioiodine by
the thyroid (Table 13.4). It should be continued for 10 to 15 days
posttreatment. In spite of doing this, hypothyroidism occurs in 11% to
20% of patients. Before initiating therapy, excess catecholamines
should be managed with alpha blockade and atenolol. Drugs that
interfere with mIBG uptake must be discontinued, including labetalol,
reserpine, tricyclic antidepressants, sympathomimetics, and cocaine
(Table 13.3). The most significant toxicity is hematologic.
FIG. 13.17  Primary thoracic neuroblastoma on I-123 mIBG scan in a
9-year-old girl with posterior mediastinal mass. (A) Planar anterior and
posterior whole-body images. The posterior planar image shows focal
uptake in the chest just above the liver. (B) Single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) clearly
localizes the paraspinal mass.
