Radionuclide Monoclonal Antibody Therapy—
B-Cell Lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is the most common hematological cancer.
Whereas high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma is often curable, low-
grade disease is generally incurable. Patients ultimately relapse after
initial
positive
responses,
tumors
become
refractory,
and
transformations to high-grade tumors are common. The mean
survival is 8 to 10 years with conventional radiation and
chemotherapy. Numerous treatment options are available, including
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, vaccines, interleukin-2, stem cell
transplants,
surgical
intervention,
immunotherapy,
and
radioimmunotherapy. The standard first-line therapy of non-
Hodgkins lymphoma is usually CHOP-R (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) in combination with
rituximab, a monoclonal antibody.
FIG. 13.29  Gamma camera scintimammography. A palpable right
breast mass shows obvious accumulation of Tc-99m sestamibi in the
upper outer breast on lateral (A) and anterior (B) images on a routine
gamma camera scan.
FIG. 13.30  Dedicated scintimammography. Tc-99m sestamibi scan of
7-mm invasive ductal carcinoma using only 8 mCi (296 MBq).
With permission, Even-Sapir E, Golan O, Menes T, et al. Breast
imaging utilizing dedicated gamma camera and 99mTc-MIBI:
experience at the Tel Aviv Medical Center and review of the literature
breast imaging. Semin Nucl Med. 2016;46[4]:286–293.
Box 13.7 Tc-99m Scintimammography With Tc-99m
Sestamibi: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Nil per os (NPO) 4 to 6 hours, except water
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m sestamibi intravenously—8 mCi (296 MBq)
Consider lower doses (4 mCi [74–148 MBq]) for dual-head
cadmium zinc telluride detector small-field-of-view dedicated
breast cameras.
Instrumentation and Acquisition
Small-field-of-view dedicated single-head or dual-head breast
camera:
Begin imaging 5 to 10 minutes after injection.
Immobilize breast with light compression.
Image 7 to 10 min/view (craniocaudal [CC] and
mediolateral oblique [MLO]).
Image injection site.
Additional views optional: True (90-degrees) lateral,
axillary tail, cleavage view, exaggerated CC, implant
displacement
Standard gamma camera (not preferred):
Begin imaging 5 to 10 minutes after injection.
Place patient prone on table with breasts hanging
dependent, preferably in holder through cutouts.
Image 10 min/view for prone lateral and supine
anteroposterior chest, including axilla.
Image injection site.
Obtain marker view of any palpable nodule.
Antibodies are immune proteins produced by lymphocytes and
plasma B cells in response to exposure to foreign antigens. IgG
antibodies have two identical heavy (H) and two light (L) chains
linked by a disulfide bridge (Fig. 13.31). Each chain is made up of a
variable region (Fab′’), responsible for binding to a cell-surface antigen
and the constant region (Fc), involved with cell destruction by
complement fixation and antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity.
FIG. 13.31  IgG antibody. The molecule can be digested enzymatically
by papain, resulting in three parts, two Fab′ fragments and one Fc
fragment, or by pepsin to produce one F(ab′)2 and one Fc subfragment.
Fab′ may be produced by splitting the disulfide bond of F(ab′)2 SS.
A specific monoclonal antibody can be produced by fusing
myeloma cancer cells with lymphocytes from the spleen of a mouse
immunized with a particular antigen. These “hybridoma” cells have
the specific antibody-production capacity of the lymphocytes and the
immortality of cancer cells. However, the human immune system
recognizes these murine monoclonal antibodies as foreign and may
mount an immunological response with a human antimouse antibody
(HAMA). This may be mild, with fever and hives, or severe, with
shortness of breath, hypotension, or even fatal anaphylaxis. Antibody
fragments formed from smaller active regions contribute less to the
HAMA response; however, the potential for serious reactions remains.
Chimera monoclonal antibodies that replace the murine Fc portion of
the antibody with a human component and fully human monoclonal
antibodies can potentially lessen this problem. The therapeutic
radiolabeled monoclonal antibody currently available clinically, Y-90
ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin), is derived from whole murine
antibodies.
CD20 is an antigen expressed on the surface of mature and
malignant B cells and is widely expressed in many B-cell
malignancies, including lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
and some forms of Hodgkin disease. Because of its high expression,
several antibodies targeting CD20 expressing lymphoma have been
developed. Rituximab was the first monoclonal antibody drug
approved by the FDA for the treatment of CD20-expressing
lymphoma.
Similar antibodies labeled with beta-emitters such as Y-90 and I-131
can directly kill the tumor cell (Table 13.5). Because beta radiation
travels only a short distance, only nearby cells are irradiated. This
limits damage to normal cells, but it still produces a crossfire effect,
killing adjacent tumor cells not bound by the antibody. Thus,
radiolabeled monoclonal antibody therapies can result in a better
tumor response than nonradiolabeled monoclonal antibody therapies.
Table 13.5
Lymphoma Therapy Radiopharmaceuticals—Y-90 Rituximab and I-131 Tositumomab
Therapeutic Radiopharmaceutical
Y-90 Rituximab (Zevalin)
I-131 Tositumomab (Bexxar) a
Radionuclide half-life
64 hr
8 days
Beta particle
2.293 MeV 5-mm path
0.606 MeV 8-mm path
Gamma emission
No
Yes, 364 keV
Pretreatment dosimetry
No
Yes
Pretreatment unlabeled antibody
Rituximab chimeric
Tositumomab murine
HAMA
1–2%
60%
Outpatient therapy
+
+/−
HAMA, Human antimouse antibody.
a  Bexxar is no longer commercially available.
Yttrium-90 Ibritumomab Tiuxetan (Zevalin)
Y-90 Zevalin was the first radiolabeled antibody therapeutic agent
approved by the FDA, in 2002. The murine immunoglobulin IgG1
kappa monoclonal CD20 antibody uses the chelator molecule tiuxetan
to form a stable link to Y-90, a pure beta emitter. Y-90 has a high-
energy (2.29 MeV) beta-particle that travels only 5 mm, depositing an
effective dose of radiation close to the binding site. Zevalin was
initially approved for the treatment of relapsed, refractory, or
transformed CD20 + non-Hodgkin lymphoma but is now also
approved as a first-line therapy. It is contraindicated in patients with a
known hypersensitivity reaction to murine proteins (HAMA), >25%
tumor involvement of marrow, or impaired marrow reserves. Patients
must not have had myelotoxic therapies with autologous bone
marrow transplant or stem-cell rescue. External-beam radiation
should not have involved >25% of the marrow. The neutrophil count
must be >1500 cells/mm3, and the platelet count must be >100,000.
Zevalin has an average physical half-life in the blood of 27 hours
and a biological half-life of 48 hours, resulting in a dose to the tumor
of 15 to17 Gray. There is some urinary excretion (7%), although most
of the agent remains in the body. No special shielding is needed with
this pure beta-emitter, and treatment can be performed as an
outpatient. Few radiation safety precautions are required.
Methodology
Unlabeled rituximab (Rituxan) is administered before therapy to block
CD20 antigens on cells circulating in the blood and spleen, thus
limiting potential off-target toxicity. Patients should be closely
monitored during the infusion because serious potentially fatal
reactions can occur. Hydration and frequent voiding are important.
Even though radiation exposure to others is low, patients should limit
prolonged close contact, sleep apart, and restrict time in public places
for the first 4 to 7 days. Exchange of bodily fluids in the first week
should be discouraged, and careful bathroom hygiene should be
encouraged.
Toxicity
Within 7 to 9 weeks, blood counts reach a nadir, with a 30% to 70%
reduction in platelets and neutrophils, which may last 7 to 35 days.
Approximately 7% of neutropenic patients are prone to fever and
infections. Thrombocytopenia can result in hemorrhage. Only 1% to
2% of patients treated with Zevalin experience an HAMA response.
Myelodysplasia or acute myelogenous leukemia occurs in 1.4% of
patients. Seventy-five percent of patients experience some response,
with 15% to 37% showing complete remission. This is significantly
better than the results of nonlabeled Rituxan monoclonal antibody
therapy alone. The duration of response ranges from 0.5 to 24.9
months.
I-131-labeled tositumomab (Bexxar) is a murine IgG2a therapeutic
monoclonal antibody developed to target CD20, the same target as for
Zevalin. It was also approved by the FDA in 2002. It has shown
excellent efficacy and safety profiles in clinical trials; however, a more
recent large clinical trial showed no significant improvement in
response rate or survival between patients receiving Bexxar and
CHOP and those receiving rituximab and CHOP. This resulted in
declining sales that led to the discontinuation of the product by the
manufacturer in 2014.
