Molecular Breast Imaging—
Scintimammography
Radiography mammography has long been the primary breast cancer
screening method, with a sensitivity of approximately 85% but that
decreases to 68% in women with dense breasts. Specificity is a major
problem. Many patients undergo biopsy for lesions detected by
mammography that are ultimately diagnosed as benign. The positive
predictive value of mammography for breast cancer ranges from 20%
in women under age 50 to 60% to 80% in women age 50 to 69.
Ultrasonography similarly has a low positive predictive value.
Contrast-enhanced MRI is sensitive for breast cancer detection and
advocated for screening high-risk groups with BRCA1 and BRCA2
genetic mutations. However, it has a quite variable reported
sensitivity and specificity. Patients cannot undergo the examination if
they have renal failure, claustrophobia, implanted devices, or large
body habitus.
F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose PET Mammography
Whole-body F-18 FDG PET/CT is useful for the staging and restaging
of locally advanced breast carcinoma. However, the sensitivity of the
standard FDG PET study is more limited in breast cancer than in
many other tumors, especially in low-grade breast tumors. The
reported sensitivity is 85%, and the specificity is 76%. The sensitivity
is less than 50% for small (≤1 cm) low-grade invasive cancers and
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
Dedicated F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose PET
Breast Mammography
Dedicated F-18 FDG PET breast mammography (PEM) has a high
intrinsic resolution of 1 to 2 mm and is superior to whole-body
scanners for the detection of primary tumors. However, PEM still has
the disadvantages of whole-body FDG PET imaging, including the
same preparation (fasting, controlled serum glucose levels), a 50- to
60-minute delay after injection, and the need for significant dosing-
room shielding. The sensitivity is 87%, and the specificity is 85%, but
the specificity is 73% for subcentimeter cancers and DCIS. Direct
comparison studies of dedicated FDG PET with whole-body FDG PET
have found higher sensitivity for dedicated breast PET (92–95%)
versus whole-body PET (56–58%) and PET/CT (87%). False positives
occur with fibrocystic changes and fibroadenomas. Dedicated FDG
PET/CT can be valuable to follow the effects of therapy, identify
tumor recurrence, and visualize multifocal or synchronous lesions in
the ipsilateral and contralateral breast.
FIG. 13.28  Lymphedema. (A) Lymphoscintigraphy of the lower
extremities. A 60-year-old male with history of malignant melanoma
and nodal excisions of the left knee over 20 years ago presented with
left lower extremity edema. Scan at 4 hours after injection of Tc-99m
SC in webs of feet. Normal nodal drainage is seen on the right. The
enlarged left lower extremity has an obstructive dermal pattern of
distribution, and no nodal drainage is seen. (B) Patient with past history
of breast cancer. Anterior and posterior images, upper extremities. The
left arm has a dermal pattern, and no transit to nodes is seen on that
side.
Tc-99m Sestamibi Scintimammography
Tc-99m sestamibi (methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile, Cardiolite) is most
commonly used for cardiac perfusion imaging and parathyroid
scintigraphy. For breast imaging, the same radiopharmaceutical is
marketed as Miraluma. This Tc-99m sestamibi–labeled lipophilic
cation passively diffuses into the cell. The positively charged
lipophilic
molecule
is
attracted
to
the
negatively
charged
mitochondria, where it is retained. Cell clearance is slow, allowing
time for imaging. Uptake occurs in various other benign and
malignant tumors.
Standard breast gamma camera imaging with Tc-99m sestamibi can
detect breast cancers, even in dense breasts (Fig. 13.29). Patients are
positioned prone, with the breast hanging off the table or through a
special holder cutout. The sensitivity and specificity are about 83%,
but they are lower for lesions less than 2 cm. Dedicated breast gamma
camera imaging is now commercially available, which provides high-
resolution images with a reported sensitivity of >92% and a specificity
of 71% to 80% (Fig. 13.30). These solid-state detector cameras are
available with single- and dual-head configurations and optional
biopsy device attachments. Detection is not affected by breast density,
but sensitivity is decreased for cancers <1 cm, DCIS, and nonpalpable
lesions. Additional foci of mammographically occult (<1 cm) breast
cancers are detected in 9% of women with newly diagnosed breast
cancer. Standard mammographic positioning (craniocaudal and
mediolateral oblique) is used, with the breast in direct contact with the
gamma camera.
The breast is highly radiation sensitive. The risk for radiation-
induced cancers from imaging studies such as mammography has
been of concern. Originally, 20 mCi Tc-99m sestamibi was used for
Scintimammography; however, the dose has been reduced to as low
as 8 mCi without loss of sensitivity (see Fig. 13.30), and even lower
doses are being investigated. The presently recommended dose is 10
mCi, which results in a breast radiation dose approximately 10 times
the effective dose of digital mammography (see Appendix 1).
A protocol summary for scintimammography is described (Box
13.7). Normal breast parenchyma shows low-level activity. Small focal
areas of uptake are suggestive of malignancy (Fig. 13.30); patchy
uptake is likely benign. However, the intensity of the uptake may not
parallel the aggressiveness of the lesion. Uptake in the axilla may
represent nodal metastasis if there is no dose infiltration, but the
sensitivity for nodal disease is not high.
