Oncology—Beyond
Fluorodeoxyglucose
This chapter reviews tumor scintigraphy using radiopharmaceuticals
other than F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), as well as therapeutic
radiopharmaceuticals for specific malignancies (Box 13.1). Theranostics
is a topic of increasing importance as it relates to nuclear oncology.
The term refers to a pharmaceutical that is labeled with one
radionuclide for diagnostic imaging and another radionuclide for
therapy, for example, Ga-68 dotatate and Lu-177 dotatate for
neuroendocrine tumors and Ga-68 PSMA or F-18 prostate-specific
membrane antigen (PSMA) and Lu-111 PSMA for prostate cancer.
Although this approach is not really new, with radioiodine being the
first theranostic agent used for diagnosis and treatment, the field is
rapidly growing thanks to the many new agents entering the clinical
arena.
Box 13.1 Radiopharmaceuticals for Oncology
Applications—Mechanisms of Uptake
Tumor-Type Specific
Iodine-131: Thyroid iodine uptake (papillary and follicular
thyroid cancer)
Iodine-131 mIBG: Adrenal medullary uptake in neural crest
tumors
Radiolabeled Antibodies, Tumor Antigens
In-111 capromab pendetide (ProstaScint): Monoclonal antibody to
intracellular epitope of PSMA (prostate cancer)
F-18 fluciclovine (Axumin): Amino acid upregulated in
carcinomas (prostate cancer)
Ga-67-, F-18-, Tc-99m-, and Lu-177-labeled small antibody to
extracellular PSMA antigen (prostate cancer)
In-111 ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin): Monoclonal C-20
antibody (lymphoma)
Radiolabeled Peptides: Somatostatin Receptors
In-111 pentetreotide (OctreoScan): Targets somatostatin
receptors in neuroendocrine tumors
Ga-68 dotatate (NetSpot): Targets somatostatin receptors in
neuroendocrine tumors for diagnosis
Lu-177 dotatate (Lutathera): targets somatostatin receptors in
neuroendocrine tumors for therapy
Nonspecific Mechanisms of Tumor Uptake
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose: Glucose metabolism
Ga-67 citrate: Iron binding
Tc-99m sestamibi: Mitochondrial attraction (breast cancer,
renal oncocytomas)
PSMA, Prostate-specific membrane antigen.
Neuroendocrine Tumor Imaging and Peptide
Receptor Radiotherapy
Gastroenteropancreatic and Lung
Neuroendocrine Tumors
Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are a diverse group of epithelial
neoplasms that may occur in almost any organ but most commonly
arise in the gastroenteropancreatic region (70%) and lung (20%). Well-
differentiated
neuroendocrine
tumors
in
these
regions
were
previously called carcinoids (Fig. 13.1). Although they often produce
specific clinical syndromes due to their unique secretory products
(“carcinoid
syndrome”),
the
majority
of
the
tumors
are
nonfunctioning. Many NET tumors are well differentiated, and these
patients have prolonged survival; however, some grow more
aggressively and become metastatic. The initial clinical diagnosis can
be difficult because of their nonspecific clinical manifestations,
depending on the specific amines/peptides secreted, and their small
size (Table 13.1). Gastroenteropancreatic NETs are classified on the
basis of the Ki-67 proliferation index or the mitotic count (Table 13.2).
Resection of NETs can potentially cure the patient of the
malignancy and amine/peptide production; however, this is often not
possible due to the extent of disease. Management guidelines
emphasize that resection should be the first-line treatment for patients
with advanced tumors if 90% of the disease burden is resectable.
However, only 5% to 20% of patients meet this criterion. Liver-
directed
therapies
(embolization,
radiofrequency
ablation,
chemoembolization, and radioembolization) are used in appropriate
cases. Chemotherapy has not been very effective, but somatostatin
(Sandostatin), mTOR inhibitors (everolimus), and tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (sunitinib) can extend survival. With metastatic disease, 5-
year survival rates are less than 50%.
Computed tomography (CT), ultrasonography, and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) are used for initial evaluation, but detection
rates are not high due to the small size of the tumors and variable
location. Because well-differentiated NETs express high levels of
somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), SSTR-targeted radionuclide imaging
(e.g., In-111 pentetreotide or Ga-68 dotatate) can detect and
functionally characterize these tumors. The primary tumor and
regional or distant metastases can also often be detected. Expression
of SSTRs is associated with a good prognosis, whereas lack of
expression of SSTRs and overexpression of GLUT (FDG uptake) is
predictive of poor prognosis and survival.
FIG. 13.1  Primary sites of neuroendocrine tumors.
Redrawn from Oronsky B, Ma PC, Morgensztern D, et al: Nothing But
NET: A Review of Neuroendocrine Tumors and Carcinomas. Neoplasia
19, Issue 12, 2017, pp. 991-1002. Source: An Elsevier journal.
Table 13.1
Secretory Products of Neuroendocrine Tumors
Site
Tumor
Peptide/Amine
Clinical Features
Foregut
Carcinoids: Bronchi,
thymus, stomach,
first part of
duodenum,
pancreas
Histamine, ACTH,
CRH, GH,
gastric, 5
HIAA, 5 HTP
Pulmonary
obstruction,
flush, hormone
syndrome
Midgut
Carcinoids: Second
part of duodenum,
jejunum, ileum,
right colon
5-HT, tachykinins,
prostaglandins,
bradykinins, 5-
HIAA
Bowel obstruction,
flush, wheeze,
diarrhea
Hindgut (distal third of
transverse colon and
splenic flexure,
descending colon,
sigmoid colon, and
rectum)
Insulinoma
Gastrinoma
VIPoma
Glucagonoma
Somatostatinoma
GRFoma
ACTHoma
Insulin,
proinsulin
Gastrin
VIP
Glucagon
SS
GRF
ACTH
Whipple’ triad
Zollinger,
Ellison
Watery
diarrhea,
hypokalemia
DM, cachexia
Gallstones, DM,
steatorrhea
Acromegaly
Cushing’
syndrome
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropin; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; DM, diabetes mellitus;
GH,: growth hormone; GRH, growth hormone–releasing hormone; 5-HIAA, 5
hydroxyindoleacetic acid; HTP, hydroxytryptamine; SS, somatostatin; VIP,: vasointestinal
peptide.
Table 13.2
Histopathology of Neuroendocrine Tumors
Histological
Classification
Well Differentiated
(Low Grade)
Moderately Differentiated
(Intermediate Grade)
Poorly Differentiated
(High Grade)
Prognosis
Prolonged survival
Intermediate
Poor
Mitotic rate
<2
2–20
>20
Ki-67 index
<3%
3–20%
>20%
Necrosis
Absent
Not well defined
Present
The normal human hormone somatostatin is a 14-amino-acid peptide
produced
in
the
hypothalamus,
pituitary
gland,
brainstem,
gastrointestinal tract, and pancreas. Somatostatin receptors are found
on many normal cells as well as tumors of neuroendocrine origin. In
the central nervous system, somatostatin acts as a neurotransmitter.
Outside of the brain, it inhibits the release of growth hormone, insulin,
glucagon, gastrin, serotonin, and calcitonin. It also inhibits
angiogenesis, is involved in the immune function of leukocytes, and
has an antiproliferative effect on tumors.
Five different subtypes of human SSTRs have been identified,
expressed to varying degrees on different tumors. Therapeutic drugs
have been developed that readily bind to these receptors. Octreotide
(Sandostatin) and lanreotide (Somatuline) are somatostatin analogs
used clinically to inhibit growth in acromegaly and to control
symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. Radiopharmaceuticals have also
been developed that bind to SSTRs.
Diagnostic SSTR Radiopharmaceuticals
Indium-111 Pentetreotide (OctreoScan)
OctreoScan was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in 1994 for imaging of NETs. This radiolabeled SSTR binding
agent has high affinity for subtypes 2 and 5 (Fig. 13.2). It has high-
energy emissions (171, 245 keV), relatively slow pharmacokinetics,
and thus unfavorable dosimetry (see Appendix 1), which limits the
administered dose to 6 mCi (222 MBq) and adversely affects image
quality.
FIG. 13.2  Comparison of somatostatin analogs.
FIG. 13.3  Normal In-111 pentetreotide (OctreoScan) whole-body
scans: 4 hours (A) and 24 hours (B). There is no intestinal activity at 4
hours, but it is present at 24 hours. Normal prominent renal and spleen
uptake are both more intense than the liver uptake. Ant, Anterior; Post,
posterior.
Normal Distribution
Splenic and renal uptake is quite high. Lesser uptake is seen in the
liver. Low-level hepatobiliary excretion increases intestinal clearance
over
time
(Fig.
13.3).
The
kidneys
rapidly
excrete
the
radiopharmaceutical, with 85% of the dose cleared from the body by
24 hours after injection. Uptake may be seen in the pancreas in the
region of the uncinate process; this must not be confused with tumor.
Radiotracer uptake is also be seen with benign inflammatory
conditions (e.g., thyroiditis, granulomatous disease, inflammatory
bowel disease, postradiation therapy, and at sites of recent surgery)
due to the SSTRs present on human immune cells (e.g., mononuclear
leukocytes, peripheral blood lymphocytes, and macrophages).
Methodology
An imaging protocol is described in Box 13.2. Early planar imaging at
4 hours after injection permits visualization of tumor uptake before
bowel excretion; however, 24-hour imaging has a higher tumor-to-
background ratio and is more sensitive for tumor detection (Fig. 13.4).
Delayed imaging at 48 hours can further confirm tumor uptake versus
bowel activity. With single-photon emission computed tomography
with computed tomography (SPECT/CT), imaging only at 24 hours is
routine, and it improves tumor identification and localization (Fig.
13.5).
FIG. 13.4  In-111 pentetreotide whole-body study in a patient with
metastatic carcinoid, at 24 hours after injection. Metastases are seen in
left supraclavicular region and liver, nodal disease in the abdomen and
pelvis, and skull metastasis. Ant, Anterior; Post, posterior.
Box 13.2 Indium-111 Pentetreotide (OctreoScan):
Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
None
Radiopharmaceutical
Children: 0.14 mCi/kg (5 MBq/kg)
Adults: 6 mCi (222 MBq) In-111 octreotide, intravenously
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Collimator: Medium energy
Windows: 20% centered at 173 keV and 247 keV
Acquisition
Imaging: Planar whole body and SPECT or SPECT/CT of
abdomen and or other indicated site at 24 hours
If only planar imaging: 4 and 24 hours; 48-hour images
may occasionally be useful
Whole-Body Images
Dual-head camera 6 cm/min (approximately 40 minutes head
to below hips)
1024 × 512 word matrix
SPECT
128 × 128 matrix, 3-degree angular sampling, 360-degree
rotation, 35 sec/stop
Fusion to CT or SPECT/CT preferable
CT, Computed tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission
computed
tomography;
SPECT/CT,
single-photon
emission
computed tomography with computed tomography.
Accuracy
The sensitivity of In-111 pentetreotide for tumor detection is reported
to be high for carcinoid tumors (85%–95%; Box 13.3). However, a
lower sensitivity of approximately 75% occurs with pancreatic NETs
(e.g., gastrinomas, glucagonomas, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-
secreting tumors [VIPomas], and nonfunctioning islet cell tumors).
Because of high normal liver uptake, liver metastases are not always
detected. Detection may be reduced in patients on octreotide therapy;
thus, the study should be performed immediately before the patient’s
monthly therapeutic injection.
Gallium-68 (Ga-68) Dotatate (DOTA-0-Tyr3-Octreotate)
Several Ga-68-labeled somatostatin receptor positron emission
tomography (PET) imaging agents have been investigated, including
Ga-68 dotatoc, dotanoc, and dotatate (see Fig. 13.2). These short amino
acid–chelator
conjugates
demonstrate
superior
affinity
for
somatostatin receptors compared with In-111 pentetreotide. The three
dota agents are similar in imaging accuracy. Ga-68 dotatate (NetSpot)
was approved by the FDA in 2016 for imaging of neuroendocrine
tumors. The radionuclide, Ga-68, is produced in a Germanium 68/Ga-
68 generator, similar to a Molybdenum-99/Tc-99m generator. The
parent Ge-68 has a half-life of 271 days; thus, the generator can be
used for at least a year. The Ga-68 daughter has a half-life of 68
minutes. In a high-volume clinic, a generator can make sense.
Alternatively,
some
commercial
radiopharmacies
maintain
a
generator and distribute individual radiopharmaceutical doses on a
regional basis. The recommended dose is 0.054 mCi/kg (2 MBq/kg) up
to 5.4 mCi (200 MBq).
Normal Distribution
Ga-68 dotatate binds with high affinity to SSTR-2 receptors. Uptake is
seen in the pituitary, thyroid, and salivary glands; spleen; adrenals;
kidney; prostate; and liver (Fig. 13.6). Normal uptake may also be seen
in the uncinate process, similar to that seen with In-111 pentetreotide.
There is no brain uptake, but focal activity in the nonenlarged
pituitary is normal. Cardiac uptake is absent, and lung uptake is low.
Twelve percent of the administered dose is excreted in the urine by 4
hours postinjection.
Methodology
A Ga-68 dotatate PET/CT study requires considerably less patient
time than SPECT/CT In-111 pentetreotide. PET/CT imaging begins
approximately 1 hour after injection of the radiopharmaceutical. The
total time from injection to the completion of imaging is about 2
hours, similar to routine F-18 FDG oncologic imaging. The radiation
dose to the patient is less with Ga-68 dotatate compared with In-111
pentetreotide (see the Appendix).
Accuracy
In a large retrospective study of 728 patients with NETs, Ga-68
dotatate had a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 92%. The highest
accuracy was for primary midgut tumors. In a comparison study of
131 patients with NETs and unknown primaries, Ga-68 dotatate
PET/CT had a higher detection rate (95%) compared with In-111
pentetreotide SPECT/CT (31%) or CT or MRI (46%) (Fig. 13.7).
Additional clinical information is found in 70% to 80% of Ga-68
dotatate cases compared with pentetreotide (OctreoScan), and a
change in clinical management is reported to occur in greater than
40% of patients (Figs. 13.8 and 13.9). Patients with poorly
differentiated tumors may not have uptake and may benefit from F-18
FDG PET, although these patients have a poorer prognosis. The use of
intravenous contrast with SSTR PET/CT increases the detection rate
for liver metastases and small bowel primaries. SSTR PET/MRI is also
reported to provide improved detection of liver metastases.
FIG. 13.5  In-111 pentetreotide SPECT/CT. (A) Fused images localize
a small focus of activity to a peripancreatic retroperitoneal lymph node,
which was difficult to see on planar images (not shown), and (B) shows
marked uptake in a precarinal nodal metastasis, which would likely be
falsely called normal by computed tomography (CT) size criteria.
Box 13.3 Sensitivity of Indium-111 Pentetreotide
(OctreoScan) for Various Applications
High
Carcinoid (86–95%)
Islet cell tumors (75–100%)
Gastrinoma, glucagonoma, VIPoma
Adrenal medullary tumors (>85%)
Pheochromocytoma, neuroblastoma, paragangliomas
Small-cell lung cancer (80–100%)
Moderate
Medullary thyroid (50–75%)
Insulinoma (25–70%)
Medulloblastoma (61–93%)
Meningioma (50% and 100% reported)
Low
Pituitary adenoma
Astrocytoma grade IV (higher in grades I and II)
Breast cancer
Melanoma
Renal cell carcinoma
VIPoma, Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumor.
Other Neuroendocrine Tumors
Because neuroendocrine cells are spread throughout the body, NETs
can develop in many different places, including in endocrine glands.
Other NETs include medullary carcinoma that starts in the C cells of
the thyroid, parathyroid carcinoma or parathyroid adenoma, thymic
neuroendocrine cancer, pheochromocytoma that starts in the
chromaffin
cells
of
the
adrenal
glands,
paraganglioma,
neuroblastoma, pituitary gland tumors, neuroendocrine tumors of the
ovaries and testicles, Merkel cell carcinoma, a type of nonmelanoma
skin cancer, and small-cell lung cancer.
Therapeutic Radionuclides Bound to SSTRs
High doses of In-111 pentetreotide have been investigated for peptide
receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) of NETs, taking advantage of
the radionuclide’s Auger and conversion electron emissions.
Although showing effectiveness, more promising results were found
using a pure beta emitter, Yttrium-90 (Y-90), bound to other SSTRs,
dotatoc and dotatate. In spite of increased survival, bone marrow and
renal toxicity were a significant problem.
FIG. 13.6  Ga-68 dotatate normal distribution. (Left) Maximum-
intensity projection (MIP) image. (Right) Fused SPECT/CT coronal
(left) and selected transverse images (right). Note normal uptake in
pituitary and adrenals.
With permission, Kuyumcu S, Özkan ZG, Sanli Y, et al. Physiological
and tumoral uptake of (68)Ga-DOTATATE: standardized uptake values
and challenges in interpretation. Ann Nucl Med. 2013;27[6]:538–545.
FIG. 13.7  Comparison of maximum-intensity projection (MIP) whole-
body image of Ga-68 dotatate (left) and In-111 pentetreotide
(OctreoScan) anterior and posterior whole-body scans in the same
patient (right), illustrating the clear superiority of Ga-68 dotatate
compared with the In-111 OctreoScan. Although a liver metastasis is
seen on OctreoScan, many more are seen on the Ga-68 dotatate
study, as well as multiple other intraabdominal nodal disease
locations.
Courtesy of Corina Millo, MD.
Lutecium-177 (Lu-177) Dotatate (Lutathera) Therapy for
Neuroendocrine Tumors
As an alternative to Y-90, Lu-177 labeled to dotatate, a beta and
gamma emitter, was investigated. Retrospective studies had shown
similar effectiveness without the side effects of Y-90. In 2017 a phase 3
multicenter randomized prospective controlled trial of Lu-177
dotatate (Fig. 13.10) was published that studied therapeutic
effectiveness in patients with advanced midgut (jejunum, ileum,
proximal colon) NETs who had disease progression while on standard
first-line octreotide therapy. The investigation reported that compared
with octreotide therapy, Lu-177 dotatate resulted in longer
progression-free survival (65% vs.11% at 20 months), a significantly
higher response rate (18% vs. 3%), and a lower risk of progression,
79% lower than high-dose octreotide therapy. Clinically significant
myelosuppression occurred in <10% of patients. Risk of death was
60% lower. Renal toxicity was not a problem with amino acid
infusion. Lutathera was approved for clinical use by the FDA in early
2018.
Methodology
Lu-177 dotatate, 200 mCi (7.4 MBq), is infused intravenously over 30
minutes. Patients receive at least four infusions at 8-week intervals.
The amino acid solution is infused simultaneously for renal
protection. However, significant nausea accompanies the amino acid
solution and requires simultaneous antinausea therapy. Reports
suggest that the combination of lysine and arginine has far fewer side
effects than the amino acid solution.
FIG. 13.8  Ga-68 dotatate positron emission tomography with
computed tomography (PET/CT) scan in a 65-year-old male patient
with abdominal pain. Ultrasonography showed liver lesions, and biopsy
diagnosed well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (NET). The primary
tumor was not detected. The Ga-dotatate PET/CT scan shows the
primary lesion in the terminal ileum and additional metastases in the
abdomen and liver.
Courtesy of Corina Millo, MD.
FIG. 13.9  Bronchopulmonary carcinoid with Ga-67 dotatate positron
emission tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT). Image
shows radiotracer avid mass in the superior segment of the left lower
lobe and extensive osseous metastases throughout the axial skeleton,
worst in the thoracic spine.
FIG. 13.10  Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT). Primary
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (NET) with extensive metastases.
Serial Ga-68 dotatate maximum-intensity projection (MIP) images
(above) and F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET; below). Baseline study (a1, b1), after three cycles of
chemotherapy (a2, b2), after one cycle of Y-90 dotatate and three
cycles of Lu-177 dotatate (Lutathera; a3, b3). At this time point,
complete response is seen on F-18 FDG and near-complete response
on Ga-68 dotatate (arrow shows small area of residual disease) and on
similar images 6 months posttherapy (a4, b4).
With permission, Kong G, Callahan J, Hofman MS, et al. High clinical
and morphological response using 90Y-DOTA-octreotate sequenced
with 177Lu-DOTA-octreotate induction peptide receptor
chemoradionuclide therapy [PRCRT] for bulky neuroendocrine tumors.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2017;44[3]:476–489.
F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT
The sensitivity of F-18 FDG PET/CT for tumor detection is low in well-
differentiated NETs. However, FDG PET has an important role in the
imaging of aggressive, poorly differentiated tumors. If Ga-68 dotatate
is negative, FDG imaging should be performed. Some advocate using
