extremely difficult. Blood flow through the external carotid system
that drains via intracranial veins can be confused with internal artery
flow to the cortex because of the lack of anatomic landmarks (Fig.
14.33).
Tc-99m HMPAO and Tc-99m ECD studies are easier to interpret
and are now preferred because they rely only on delayed images,
which are not as dependent on adequate bolus technique (Fig. 14.34).
Delivery of these agents requires blood flow to be present, and
because uptake only occurs in living brain cells, delayed images
showing the fixed presence or absence of brain uptake require flow to
the brain. If no CBF is present, no cerebral uptake will occur.
Tc-99m
DTPA
requires
diagnostic-quality
imaging
of
the
arteriographic phase following injection, done as dynamic planar
images after injection. Tc-99m HMPAO, on the other hand, is injected
intravenously, and although flow images can be obtained, they are
unnecessary. Delayed planar images can be obtained at the bedside,
and SPECT is unnecessary. Images of the injection site can be
performed to ensure the dose was adequate and not infiltrated. A
radionuclide protocol used in brain death is outlined in Box 14.12.
With brain death, flow to both common carotid arteries is seen
extending up only to the level of the base of the skull. No visualization
of the brain is seen with Tc-99m HMPAO, making it the easiest test to
interpret.
A secondary finding of the “hot-nose” sign is sometimes seen. This
has been reported as being a result of the diversion of intracranial
blood flow into external carotid circulation because of the increased
pressure, resulting in relatively increased flow to the face and nose.
However, lateral views have shown the activity lies far posteriorly,
along the brainstem and posterior fossa region.
PET
Although enhanced MR is the best imaging exam for the diagnosis of
primary brain tumors, F-18 FDG PET has long been used as a
problem-solving tool in their assessment, with F-18 FDG uptake being
related to metabolic activity and therefore to tumor grade. Although
low-grade gliomas (World Health Organization [WHO] grades I and
II) typically show uptake similar to that of white matter, and high-
grade tumors (WHO grade III) may be difficult to separate from the
high background activity of gray matter, grade IV tumors
(glioblastoma multiforme) should show uptake increased above gray-
matter background (Fig. 14.35).
F-18 FDG PET can be used to help direct biopsy to the most
aggressive areas in a lesion. Additionally, because the evolution of
radiation changes in a tumor often leads to increasing enhancement
and even nodularity on MR after a few months, PET can help
differentiate recurrent tumor from post-therapy change. Direct, side-
by-side comparison with the MRI is critical for image interpretation,
and actual fusion of PET images to the MRI is even better. In the case
of high-dose radiation therapy, increased F-18 FDG activity can be
seen and may persist. Although this activity is generally mild and not
greater than normal cortical uptake, serial images to look for any areas
of increasing activity may be necessary to exclude early recurrence.
Recurrent gliomas are typically highly aggressive and therefore likely
to show more intense radiotracer accumulation. Interestingly,
important exceptions to the rule that uptake is directly related to
tumor grade are seen in low-grade pilocytic astrocytomas and benign
pituitary tumors, which both can show significantly increased F-18
FDG accumulation.
Protocols for F-18 FDG imaging in the brain usually involve a
shorter delay after injection (30-45 minutes) compared with whole-
body oncology cases (55-65 minutes). However, in primary brain
tumor assessment, longer delays (e.g., 2-4 hours) have been reported
to improve sensitivity. Lengthy delays such as this are often not
practical in a busy clinic.
Although F-18 FDG PET is a valuable clinical tool in the workup of
many types of malignancy outside of the CNS, nearly two-thirds of
intracranial metastatic lesions are not seen on PET because of the high
background activity (Fig. 14.36). Therefore, MRI remains the standard
for metastatic lesion detection.
Other experimental PET radiopharmaceuticals have been used in
research protocols to assess aspects of tumor cellular activity other
than glucose metabolism. The evaluation of DNA synthesis with F-18
fluorothymidine (FLT) can be used in aggressive, enhancing tumors,
where the BBB has been broken down. However, thymidine
metabolism is complex, and amino acid agents have shown
potentially high specificity and sensitivity, even in lower-grade
tumors and in lesions where the BBB remains intact. These agents
include
C-11
methionine,
F-18
fluorodopa,
and
F-18
fluoroethyltyrosine (F-18 FET).
FIG. 14.34  Brain death evaluation. (A) Computed tomography (CT)
images of a head trauma victim show a right frontal parenchymal
hemorrhage extending into the ventricles. (B) In the evaluation for brain
death, initial technetium-99m (Tc-99m) hexamethylpropyleneamine
oxime (HMPAO) images show that perfusion is delayed but present,
and cortical uptake is seen (C), although with a defect from the
hemorrhage. (D) A follow-up study 72 hours later shows internal carotid
arterial flow terminating below the head from brain death. (E) This is
confirmed with absent delayed cortical uptake. Any peripheral activity is
a result of external carotid flow. ANT, Anterior; R LAT, right lateral.
The SPECT agents Tc-99m HMPAO and Tc-99m ECD are generally
not useful for the detection of intracranial malignancies. Although
increased uptake might be seen in tumors, slightly more commonly
with Tc-99m ECD, both agents often show normal or decreased
activity.
SPECT evaluation of recurrent gliomas and differentiation of
intracranial lymphoma can be done with the cardiac imaging agents
thallium-201 and Tc-99m sestamibi (Fig. 14.37), which have both
shown accumulation in several tumor types. The potassium analog Tl-
201 depends on blood flow and BBB breakdown for distribution and
on metabolic activity with uptake through the Na+/K+ pump. Tc-99m
sestamibi is transported by the endothelial cell and localizes in active
mitochondria. Some accumulation of Tc-99m sestamibi occurs in the
choroid plexus, which may make it less than ideal in some tumors.
FIG. 14.35  Recurrent gliomas may be difficult to detect on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). T2-weighted MRI shows posttherapy signal
changes (left). The recurrent tumor is seen as an intense focus on the
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) (right).
Box 14.12 Brain Death Scintigraphy: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
None
Radiopharmaceutical
Technetium-99m hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (Tc-99m
HMPAO) or Tc-99m ethyl cysteinate diethylester (ECD) 20
mCi (740 MBq) intravenous (IV)
Note: Tc-99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) can
be used, but interpretation relies on visualizing arterial
perfusion and differentiating it from external carotid arterial
and venous circulation.
Instrumentation
Gamma camera setup: Large field of view
Collimator: High resolution, low energy
Window: 15% over 140-keV photopeak
Camera formatter setup: 2- to 3-second flow images for 30
seconds, followed by immediate and delayed static images in
multiple views
Computer setup: 1-second flow images for 60 seconds (64- ×
64-byte mode), and then static images (128 × 128 frame mode)
Imaging Procedure
1. Inject radiopharmaceutical as an IV bolus.
2. Acquire dynamic flow study.
3. Immediate 750k static images in the anterior, posterior, right
lateral, and left lateral views (optional). Image injection site.
The procedure for SPECT tumor imaging involves imaging
approximately 20 to 30 minutes after injection of 2 to 4 mCi (74-148
MBq) of Tl-201 or 20 mCi (740 MBq) Tc-99m sestamibi. Occasionally, a
2-hour delayed Tl-201 acquisition may be helpful because the
abnormal tumor tissue would be expected to wash out more slowly
than normal brain or areas of BBB disruption. Visual analysis typically
shows uptake equal to or greater than the scalp or the contralateral
side in tumors. There is some overlap in the appearance of malignant
and infectious processes. An intracranial abscess, for example, often
has increased activity. Because infections usually have lower uptake
than malignancies, quantitative analysis may help improve specificity.
A region of interest is drawn around the abnormal uptake and
compared with the contralateral normal. Delayed images may
improve sensitivity because the tumor retains activity and the
background clears.
MR and CT are the main imaging modalities for visualizing issues
concerning CSF leakage, ventricular CSF shunt patency, and
hydrocephalus. However, for many years, dynamic radionuclide CSF
studies have been employed as problem-solving tools in complex
cases or when patients cannot have MR.
CSF is secreted by the ventricular choroid plexus and, to a lesser
extent, from extraventricular sites. Normally, CSF drains from the
lateral ventricles through the interventricular foramen of Monro into
the third ventricle (Fig. 14.38). Along with the additional CSF
produced by the choroid plexus of the third ventricle, it then passes
through the cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius into the fourth ventricle and
then leaves the ventricular system through the median foramen of
Magendie and the two lateral foramina of Luschka. Subsequently, the
CSF enters the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal
cord. Along the base of the brain, the subarachnoid space expands
into lakes called cisterns. The subarachnoid space extends over the
surface of the brain. The CSF is absorbed through the pacchionian
granulations of the pia arachnoid villi into the superior sagittal sinus.
The flow of CSF can be evaluated by injecting a radiotracer
intrathecally in the spine or into the port reservoir of a CSF shunt
catheter.
Radiotracers that are injected into the CSF space must be produced
so that they are suitable for intrathecal administration, absolutely
aseptic and pyrogen-free. The use of the carrier molecule
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) is highly suitable because
it is not quickly metabolized, will tightly bind the radiotracer, and is
nonlipophilic and so is not readily absorbed from the CSF space until
it reaches the arachnoid villi. In situations where imaging will be
conducted over more than a few hours, indium-111 (In-111) is the
more suitable radiolabel because of its 2.8-day half-life. However,
compared with Tc-99m, it has poorer imaging characteristics, with
two relatively high photopeaks of 245 keV (94% abundance) and 171
keV (90%). Because of the longer half-life and higher photon energy,
the amount of the radiopharmaceutical that can be administered is
lower when using In-111 compared with a similar compound labeled
with Tc-99m, and this differential can also affect sensitivity.
Therefore, for shorter CSF shunt studies, Tc-99m DTPA is preferred,
but for cisternography, In-111 DTPA is generally used. If a study is
performed to detect a CSF leak, it will be more readily visualized
during imaging with Tc-99m DTPA. However, if pledgets are placed
in the nose to detect leaks that are not readily seen, it may be
beneficial to use In-111 so that extra time is available for the exam to
deal with the more complicated procedures for assessing the pledgets
for evidence of the leak.
Normal-Pressure Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is an abnormal enlargement of the cerebral ventricles
caused by excessive buildup of CSF that can result from abnormal CSF
production, circulation, or absorption. This should be differentiated
from hydrocephalus ex vacuo, which occurs after a stroke or
traumatic brain injury causes the volume of brain tissue to shrink or
atrophy because no surgical treatment will or is needed to decrease
the ventricles. Hydrocephalus can present at birth from congenital
causes or can be acquired later in life. The processes causing the
disorder can be either noncommunicating or communicating. In
noncommunicating hydrocephalus, flow from the ventricular system into
the basal cisterns and subarachnoid space is obstructed. This is
commonly the result of a mass or congenital abnormality at or above
the fourth ventricle, and the diagnosis is usually made by MRI. In
communicating hydrocephalus, CSF is free to flow from the
intraventricular region into the subarachnoid space. The obstruction
to CSF flow is extraventricular, in the basal cisterns, cerebral
convexities, or arachnoid villi. Common causes include previous
subarachnoid
hemorrhage,
chronic
subdural
hematoma,
leptomeningitis,
and
meningeal
carcinomatosis.
Although
an
identifiable cause is often found, roughly half the cases are idiopathic,
with the etiology unknown.
FIG. 14.36  F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) images from a patient with
metastatic lung cancer show (A) avid uptake in disease within the chest
on the maximal-intensity projection image, but positron emission
tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) images of the brain (B)
show a left cerebral metastasis with surrounding edema on CT (left),
with little FDG accumulation on PET (center) or fused (right) images.
FIG. 14.37  Intracranial lymphoma. A mass is seen in a patient with
acquired immune deficiency syndrome on the T2-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) (left, arrow), with the Tl-201 single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) showing intense tumor
uptake (right).
FIG. 14.38  Flow dynamics of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Originating in
lateral ventricle choroid plexus, CSF flows through the third and fourth
ventricles into the basal cisterns, moves over the convexities, and
finally is reabsorbed in the superior sagittal sinus.
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a form of communicating
hydrocephalus in which the opening CSF pressure on lumbar
puncture is normal. It can occur at any age but is most common in the
elderly. NPH manifests clinically with progressive dementia, ataxia,
and incontinence. On anatomical imaging, the ventricular system is
dilated out of proportion to the prominence of cortical sulci and the
basal cisterns. Shunting the CSF away through surgical placement of a
drain can reduce intracranial pressure and help relieve symptoms.
Box 14.13 Cisternography: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Stop nonsteroidal medications and medications that increase
bleeding risks.
Radiopharmaceutical
500 μCi [AU5](19 MBq) In-111 DTPA (pyrogen-free for
intrathecal use); inject slowly into lumbar subarachnoid space
using a 22-gauge needle with the bevel positioned vertically.
• The CSF opening pressure may be measured and a CSF sample
may be withdrawn.
• The patient should be instructed to remain recumbent for 60
minutes after injection. Patient activity should be restricted for
24 hours.
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Collimator: Medium energy
Computer setup: 256 × 256 matrix; 50,000 to 100,000 counts
per image or 10 min/image
SPECT/CT (optional):
SPECT computer setup: 128 × 128 matrix; noncircular
orbit, 35 sec/stop
Iterative reconstruction, 3 iterations, Butterworth filter
(cutoff 0.5, order 5)
CT: 120 kV, 50 mAs, pitch 0.813 rotation 0.75 seconds,
FOV 50 cm; matrix 512 × 512
Image Acquisition
Planar: 1 hour: thoracic-lumbar spine for evaluation of
injection adequacy then image the head AP.
3 hours, 24 hours, 48 hours: anterior, posterior, and both
lateral views of the head
SPECT/CT if planar images equivocal at 24 hours
AP, Anteroposterior; CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed
tomography; DTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; FOV, field
of view; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
It is important to determine who will likely benefit from shunt
placement because morbidity and mortality are high as a result of
complications (approximately one-third or more of cases). In addition,
not all patients will improve with shunting. Often, the patients who
do not improve are subsequently found to have an underlying
neurodegenerative disease that can explain the dementia. In
algorithms used to assess the benefit of shunting, patients are
evaluated for the presence of neurodegenerative disorders, and the
MR is examined for signs that ventriculomegaly is likely the result of
NPH. The opening pressure is measured at lumbar puncture, and a
test removal of a large volume of CSF can be done to look for
improvement. In the past, CSF patterns of flow on radionuclide
cisternography were thought to be predictive of which patients would
improve (with up to 88% sensitivity) from CSF shunting. However, it
has since been shown that the patterns are not specific. Additionally,
the lumbar puncture required for dose administration can result in
complications such as headache (>25%-30%), infection, and chronic
CSF fluid leak requiring intervention. Currently, cisternography is
infrequently performed but may be helpful in specific cases, including
patients who cannot tolerate MR.
A sample protocol for radionuclide cisternography is listed in Box
14.13. The radiotracer for intrathecal injection must be sterile and
pyrogen-free. Injection may be performed by the neurologist or
surgeon, and the patient should be kept supine for at least 30 to 60
minutes. Anteroposterior (AP) planar images are obtained of the spine
at 1 hour, and AP and lateral images of the skull are done at 2 to 3 and
24 hours. In abnormal cases, SPECT/CT at 24 hours and planar
imaging with or without SPECT/CT may be needed at 48 hours.
Cisternography Image Interpretation
Activity normally reaches the basal cisterns by 1 hour, the frontal
poles and sylvian fissure area by 2 to 6 hours, the cerebral convexities
by 12 hours, and the arachnoid villi in the sagittal sinus by 24 hours
(Fig. 14.39). The radiotracer does not normally enter the ventricular
system because physiological flow is in the opposite direction. The
radiotracer is eventually absorbed and undergoes renal excretion.
Early visualization of the bladder in the first couple of hours can
result if the radiopharmaceutical injection is initially extravasated
because it is absorbed into the bloodstream and quickly cleared into
the urine.
Several patterns of flow can be observed after the introduction of
the radiopharmaceutical into the intrathecal space, with the key
variables being whether or not activity reaches the convexities or if
reflux into the ventricles occurs (Table 14.9).
In patients with noncommunicating (obstructive) hydrocephalus,
cisternography usually shows a normal pattern of flow up to the basal
cisterns and over the convexities, with no ventricular reflux. However,
if activity is injected into the ventricles through a ventriculostomy
rather than via lumbar puncture in these patients, serial images show
minimal activity in the basal cisterns.
In communicating hydrocephalus, including patients with NPH,
cisternography can show a spectrum of CSF flow patterns. However,
flow over the convexities of the brain will be abnormally delayed (>24
hours) or absent. Abnormal reflux of activity into the ventricles may
occur transiently (pattern IIIB) or persist (pattern IV). It was
previously suggested that those with NPH who were most likely to
benefit from surgical shunting were those with the type IV
cisternographic pattern, persistent ventricular activity and no activity
over the convexities. However, false positives and false negatives
occur.
Various diversionary CSF shunts (e.g., ventriculoperitoneal,
ventriculoatrial, ventriculopleural, lumboperitoneal) have been used
to treat obstructive hydrocephalus. Complications may include
catheter blockage, infection, thromboembolism, subdural or epidural
hematomas, disconnection of catheters, CSF pseudocyst, bowel
obstruction, and bowel perforation.
The diagnosis of shunt patency and adequacy of CSF flow often can
be made by examination of the patient and inspection of the
subcutaneous CSF reservoir. When this assessment is uncertain,
radionuclide studies with Tc-99m DTPA can help identify abnormal
function. Familiarity with the specific shunt type and its configuration
is helpful. For example, the valves may allow bidirectional or only
unidirectional flow. A proximal shunt limb consists of tubing running
from the ventricles into the reservoir, and the distal limb carries CSF
away from the reservoir into the body.
Shunt injection should be performed with aseptic technique by a
physician familiar with the type of shunt in place (Box 14.14). The Tc-
99m DTPA is generally preferred over In-111 DTPA because of the
superior imaging characteristics of Tc-99m and the lack of a need to
do extended delayed imaging as may be required in the assessment of
hydrocephalus. The patency of the proximal shunt limb can
sometimes be evaluated before checking distal patency. In patients
with certain types of variable or low-pressure two-way valves, the
distal catheter is initially occluded by manually pressing on the neck.
The pressure may cause injected tracer to flow into the proximal limb.
FIG. 14.39  Normal cisternogram. Anterior and lateral images 4 and 24
hours after intrathecal radiotracer injection show normal transit up over
the convexities, with no ventricular reflux. ANT, Anterior; LL, left lateral;
POST, posterior; RL, right lateral.
Table 14.9
Patterns of Flow in Cisternography for Evaluation of Hydrocephalus
Type Pattern
Cause
I
Tracer over convexities 24 hr
• Normal
• Noncommunicating hydrocephalus
II
Delayed migration over convexities but
no ventricular reflux
• Cerebral atrophy
• Old age
IIIA
Transient ventricular reflux with tracer at
convexities 24 hr
Indeterminate: Evolving or resolving
communicating hydrocephalus
IIIB
No tracer over convexities with transient
ventricular reflux
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
IV
No tracer over convexities with persistent
ventricular reflux
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
Images should show prompt flow into the ventricles, followed by
spontaneous distal flow through the shunt catheter (Fig. 14.40). The
shunt tubing is usually seen. Catheters draining into the peritoneum
show accumulation of radiotracer freely within the abdominal cavity
(Fig. 14.41). In cases of obstruction, activity does not move through the
distal limb on delayed images or may pool close to the tip of the
catheter in a loculated collection (Fig. 14.42).
Box 14.14 Shunt Patency: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
None
Radiopharmaceutical
Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
(DTPA) 0.5 to 1 mCi (18.5-37 MBq)
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Wide field of view; low-energy, all-purpose
collimator
Computer and camera setup: 1-minute images for 30 minutes
Procedure
Using aseptic technique, clean the shaved scalp with
povidone-iodine.
• Penetrate the shunt reservoir with a 25- to 35-gauge needle.
• Once the needle is in place, position the patient’s head under
the camera with the reservoir in the middle of the field of view.
• Inject the radiopharmaceutical.
• Take serial images for 30 minutes.
• If no flow is seen, place the patient in an upright position and
continue imaging for 10 minutes.
• If still no flow is seen, obtain static images of 50k after 1 and 2
hours.
• If flow is demonstrated at any point, obtain 50k images of the
shunt and tubing every 15 minutes until flow to the distal tip of
the shunt tubing is identified or for 2 hours, whichever is first.
• To determine proximal patency of the reservoir, the distal
catheter can be manually occluded during the procedure so that
the radiotracer will reflux into the ventricular system.
• Image activity through the length of shunt and adjacent tissues
at the terminal end.
FIG. 14.40  Communicating normal-pressure hydrocephalus at 24
hours (top row), 48 hours (middle row), and 72 hours (bottom row) in
anterior (left), right lateral (middle), and left lateral (right) projections.
Ventricular reflux (closed arrowhead) is present, as is very delayed flow
over the convexities (open arrowhead). The intracerebral activity at 72
hours was caused by transependymal uptake.
Trauma and surgery (transsphenoidal and nasal) are the most
common causes of CSF rhinorrhea. Nontraumatic causes include
hydrocephalus and congenital defects. CSF rhinorrhea may occur at
any site, from the frontal sinuses to the temporal bone (Fig. 14.43). The
cribriform plate is most susceptible to fracture, which can result in
rhinorrhea. Otorrhea is much less common. Accurate localization of
CSF leaks can be clinically difficult.
Radionuclide studies are sensitive and accurate methods of CSF
leak detection. To maximize the sensitivity of the test, nasal pledgets
are placed in the anterior and posterior portion of each nasal region by
an otolaryngologist and then removed and counted 4 hours later (Fig.
14.44). A ratio of nasal-to-plasma radioactivity greater than 2:1 or 3:1
is considered positive. The radiotracer is injected intrathecally via
aseptic lumbar puncture (Box 14.15).
The site is most likely to be identified during a time when heavy
leakage is occurring. Often, the patient position associated with the
greatest leakage is reproduced during imaging. Imaging in the
appropriate projection is important for identifying the site of leak;
lateral and anterior imaging are used for rhinorrhea and posterior
imaging for otorrhea. In cases in which no reason is known for low
CSF pressure or when a leak around the lumbar region is suspected,
additional views should be made of the lumbar region.
Scintigraphic studies show CSF leaks as an increasing accumulation
of activity at the leak site. (Fig. 14.45). However, counting the pledgets
is more sensitive than imaging for detecting CSF leaks. Pledgets are
also helpful in determining the origin of the leak (anterior vs.
posterior).
FIG. 14.41  Cerebrospinal shunt patency evaluation. (A)
Ventriculoperitoneal shunt at 10 minutes (left) shows activity in the
reservoir port and distal limb of the shunt moving down the neck and
chest. Intraventricular activity is also seen. By 30 minutes (middle),
activity is in the abdomen, with free flow in the peritoneum (right). (B)
Ventriculopleural shunt with normal radiotracer flow through the shunt
into the pleural space that decreases over time. ANT, Anterior.
FIG. 14.42  Obstructed cerebrospinal shunt. After injection of
technetium-99m (Tc-99m) diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA)
into the reservoir, refluxing into the ventricles, consistent with patency
of the proximal limb of the shunt, occurs. However, no distal drainage
occurs over 60 minutes from obstruction.
FIG. 14.43  Common sites of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
FIG. 14.44  Placement of pledgets for cerebrospinal fluid leak study.
The labeled cotton pledgets are placed by an otolaryngologist at
various levels within the anterior and posterior nares to detect leakage
from the frontal, ethmoidal, and sphenoidal sinuses.
FIG. 14.45  Positive radionuclide cerebrospinal fluid leak study. In-111
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) left lateral views show
increasing radioactivity over time originating from the nares and leaking
into the nose and mouth (arrowheads).
Box 14.15 Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak Detection: Sample
Protocol
Patient Preparation
No food or drink for 6 hours before lumbar puncture. Nasal
pledgets are placed and labeled as to location (usually by
ears, nose, and throat [ENT] physician). Pledgets should be
weighed before placement. If cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
samples are taken, it should be done before radiotracer
injection.
Radiopharmaceutical
In-111 diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA; pyrogen-
free for intrathecal use) 500 μCi (19 MBq)[AU6] in 5 mL
dextrose 10% in water: intrathecal injection with patient
adjacent to imaging table using aseptic technique. After
injection, place patient in Trendelenburg position to pool the
radiotracer in the basal regions until imaging begins.
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view; medium-energy
collimator
Computer setup: 256 × 256 matrix, static images 50,000 to
100,000 or 10 min/image; zoom as needed (e.g., in children)
Imaging Procedure
Positioning
• Patient is positioned supine and image activity is tracked
periodically until activity reaches the basal cisterns (1-4 hours).
• Once radiotracer reaches basal cisterns, position patient in a
position that increases CSF leakage:
• Rhinorrhea: Incline patient’s head forward and against
camera face with the camera positioned in the lateral
position.
• Otorrhea: Obtain posterior images instead of lateral views.
Image Acquisition
• Acquire 5 minutes per frame for 1 hour in the selected view,
and then acquire anterior, left lateral, right lateral, and posterior
views.
• Obtain 50k images every 10 minutes for 1 hour in the original
view.
• Remove pledgets and place in separate tubes. Draw a 5-mL
blood sample.
• Count pledgets and 0.5-mL aliquots of plasma.
• Repeat views may be indicated at 6 and 24 hours.
• Calculate the ratio of pledgets-to-plasma activity: pledget
counts/pledget capacity divided by serum counts/0.5 mL.
Interpretation
Positive for CSF leakage if the pledget-to-plasma activity ratio
is greater than 2 to 3:1.
Suggested Reading
Chaudhry A. Pearls and pitfalls of I-123 ioflupane (DaTscan) SPECT imaging.  J Nucl Med
. 2013;54:1284.
Cummings J.L, Dubois B, Molinuevo J.L, Scheltens P. International work group criteria for the
diagnosis of Alzheimer disease.  Med Clin N Am . 2013;97:363–
368. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2013.01.001.
Donaghy P, McKeith I. The clinical characteristics of dementia with Lewy bodies and a
consideration of the prodromal diagnosis.  Alzheimers Res Ther
. 2014;6(4):46. doi: 10.1186/alzrt274. http://alzres.com/content/6/4/46.
Dubois B, Feldman H.H, Jacova C, et al. Research criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease: revising the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria.  Lancet Neurol . 2007;6:734–746.
Frey K.A. Molecular imaging of extrapyramidal movement disorders.  Semin Nucl Med
. 2017;47:18–30. doi: 10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2016.09.007.
Friedman E. Epilepsy imaging in adults: getting it right.  AJR . 2014;203:1093–
1103. doi: 10.2214/AJR.13.12035.
Johnson K.A, Minoshima S, Bohnen N.I, et al. Appropriate use criteria for amyloid PET: a
report of the amyloid imaging task force, the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging, and the Alzheimer’s Association.  J Nucl Med . 2013;54:476–
490. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.120618.
Johnson K.A, Minoshima S, Bohnen N.I, et al. Update on appropriate use criteria for amyloid
PET imaging; Dementia experts, mild cognitive impairment, and education.  J Nucl Med
. 2013;54(7):1011–1013. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.12706.
Mathis CA, Lopresti BJ, Ikonomovic MD, Klunk WE. Small-molecule PET tracers for imaging
proteinopathies. Semin Nucl Med. 47:553–575.
McKhann G.M, Knopman D.S, Chertkow H, et al. The diagnosis of dementia due to
Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s
Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease.  Alzheimer’s &
Dementia . 2011;7:263–269. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005.
Mountz J.M, Patterson C.M, Tamber M.S. Pediatric epilepsy: neurology, functional imaging,
and neurosurgery.  Semin Nucl Med . 2017;47:170–
187. doi: 10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2016.10.003.
Nobili F, Bouwman F, Drzezga A, et al. European Association of Nuclear Medicine and
European Academy of Neurology recommendations for the use of brain 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in neurodegenerative cognitive
impairment and dementia: Delphi consensus.  Eur J Neurol . 2019;26(2):205–
e15. doi: 10.1111/ene.13818.
Rabinovici G.D, Gatsonis C, Aggar C, et al. Association of amyloid positron emission
tomography with subsequent change in clinical management among Medicare
beneficiaries with mild cognitive impairment or dementia.  JAMA . 2019;321(13):1286–
1294. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.2000.
Shivamurthy V, Tahari A, Marcus C, Subramanian R. Brain PET and the diagnosis of
dementia.  AJR . 2015;204(1):W76–W85. doi: 10.2214/AJR.13.12363.
Sperling R.A, Aisen P.S, Beckett L.A, et al. Toward defining the preclinical stages of
Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s
Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease.  Alzheimer’s &
Dementia . 2011;7:280–292. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.003.
Weiner MW, Veitch DP, Aisen PS, et al. 2014 Update of the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging
initiative: a review of papers published since its inception. Alzheimers Dement .
2015;11(6):e1–e20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2014.11.001.
Zukotynski K, Kuo P.H, Mikulis D, et al. PET/CT of Dementia.  AJR . 2018;211(2):246–
259. doi: 10.2214/AJR.18.19822.
