Central Nervous System
Molecular imaging examinations using positron emission tomography
(PET) and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) are
frequently used in the brain because they can complement the
anatomical information from magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and
computed tomography (CT). By examining cellular function, disease
is often detected at an earlier stage, or the extent of disease may be
more accurately demonstrated with nuclear medicine techniques.
Hybrid cameras combining PET and SPECT with CT or MR (PET/CT,
SPECT/CT, and PET/MR) allow optimal image acquisition so that
structural and physiological data can be accurately correlated. Some
indications for nuclear medicine imaging in the central nervous
system (CNS) include the following: characterization of dementia,
diagnosis of parkinsonian syndromes, presurgical seizure focus
localization,
confirmation
of
tumor
recurrence,
brain
death
identification, stroke risk evaluation in vascular disorders (e.g.,
following carotid occlusion or in Moya Moya), and assessment of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow or ventricular shunt function. The most
common indications are listed in Box 14.1.
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) makes imaging the CNS more
complicated. When diseases such as glioblastoma disrupt the BBB,
traditional agents, such as thalium-201 (Tl-201) and technetium-99m
(Tc-99m) sestamibi, can be used. The intact BBB, however, prevents
most radiopharmaceuticals from entering the brain (Fig. 14.1). There
are two lipophilic SPECT agents currently available clinically, Tc-99m
hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (Tc-99m HMPAO) and Tc-99m
ethyl cysteinate diethylester (Tc-99m ECD), that are able to traverse
the barrier and are taken up in viable neurons. The most commonly
used PET agent, F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG), is a glucose
analog and is actively taken up by the brain using the same pathways
as the glucose that the brain requires for fuel. Other radiotracers have
been created that are able to exploit other uptake mechanisms, such as
those for key amino acids. For example, imaging nigrostriatal function
in Parkinson’s disease can be performed with F-18 F-DOPA PET or
with the SPECT dopamine transporter (DAT) analog iodine-123
ioflupane (I-123 DaTscan).
Box 14.1 Indications for Molecular Imaging of the
Brain With Nuclear Medicine Techniques
Epileptic seizure focus identification
Dementia diagnosis
Parkinson’s disease/parkinsonian syndrome differentiation
from essential tremor
Recurrent glioma
Differentiate tumor from opportunistic infection in ring-
enhancing lesions
Vascular reserve assessment in patients at high stroke risk
Acute stroke: select candidates for thrombolytic therapy
Brain death diagnosis
Ventricular shunt function
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
Cerebrospinal fluid leak
Investigational
Psychiatric diseases
Head trauma
Neuroinflammation
Tau and other proteinopathies in various types of
dementia
PET
imaging
has
made
significant
contributions
to
our
understanding of dementia. The impact of PET radiopharmaceuticals
approved for the detection of abnormal beta-amyloid protein deposits
(F-18 florbetapir, F-18 flutemetamol, F-18 florbetaben) is being
investigated in multicenter trials looking at Alzheimer’s and mild
cognitive impairment (MCI). Other proteins that accumulate in the
brain in other dementia subtypes, such as the protein Tau, are also
being explored with targeting radiotracers. Additional imaging
biomarkers are being sought for neuroinflammation and other
processes that contribute to neurodegenerative diseases.
FIG. 14.1  Normal delayed technetium-99m (Tc-99m)
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) planar images. Anterior (A),
right lateral (RL), left lateral (LL), and posterior (P) projections. The
superior sagittal sinus (1) is seen on anterior and posterior views. The
floor of the frontal sinus (2) , confluence of sinuses (3) , transverse
sinuses (4), and sphenoid sinus (5) are faintly seen.
Table 14.1
Clinically Approved Radiopharmaceuticals for Functional Brain Imaging Able to Cross Intact
Blood–Brain Barrier
Agent
Localizing Mechanism
Use
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18
FDG[ED2])
Glucose metabolism:
Cellular activity and
viability
• Neurodegenerative
disease diagnosis
• Assess viability and
ischemia
• Tumor (recurrent)
diagnosis
• Interictal seizure focus
identification
Technetium-99m (Tc-99m)
hexamethylpropyleneamine
(Tc-99m HMPAO, Ceretec)
Tc-99m ethyl cysteinate dimer
(Tc-99m ECD, Neurolite)
Perfusion and
metabolism mirror
cellular activity and
viability
• Neurodegenerative
disease diagnosis
• Assess viability and
ischemia
• Ictal/interictal seizure
focus identification
I-123 Ioflupane (DaTscan)
Presynaptic dopamine
transporter (DAT)
binding
Diagnose parkinsonian
syndromes/Parkinson’s
disease
F-18 florbetapir (F-18 AV-45)
F-18 florbetaben (F-18 AV-1)
F-18 flutemetamol (F-18-3′-F-
PIB)
Beta-amyloid (Aβ)
deposition
Excluding or identifying
potential Alzheimer’s
disease
Thallium-201 (Tl-201)
Tc-99m sestamibi (MIBI)
Nonspecific uptake
relates perfusion and
activity
• Tl-201 Na+/K+ pump
• MIBI mitochondrial
activity
Differentiating recurrent brain
tumor from MRI-enhancing
posttreatment scar
MRI, Magnetic resonance imaging.
This chapter reviews commonly performed scintigraphic brain-
imaging procedures. Radiopharmaceuticals able to cross the intact
BBB for clinical use in PET and SPECT are listed in Table 14.1. Several
experimental PET agents are listed in Table 14.2.
Knowledge of brain anatomy is critical in understanding patterns of
disease and image interpretation. The brain consists of two
hemispheres, further segmented into lobes, above the tentorium and
the cerebellum below in the posterior fossa. The lobes of the brain are
illustrated in Fig. 14.2. Within these lobes, key functional centers, or
regions, have been identified that are important when trying to
assimilate clinical changes with anatomical and functional images
(Fig. 14.3). Studies such as dynamic radionuclide brain flow and brain
death examination allow visualization of the vascular supply of the
brain to a limited degree, so understanding the arterial and venous
anatomy is important (Figs. 14.4 and 14.5). Even more important for
image interpretation is familiarity with the cerebral regions these
vessels supply (Fig. 14.6).
Radiopharmaceuticals
The brain is an obligate glucose user, and it is possible to determine
the level of activity in different areas of the brain when imaging with
the glucose analog F-18 FDG. The level of regional cerebral glucose
metabolism (rCGM) usually closely correlates with regional cerebral
blood flow (rCBF), and both parameters reflect activity in the neuron.
F-18 FDG is able to cross the BBB using glucose transporter systems.
After entering the neuron, rapid phosphorylation by hexokinase-1
occurs. F-18 FDG cannot proceed further along the glucose
metabolism pathway, and once phosphorylated, it cannot cross back
through the cell membrane. Approximately 4% of the administered
dose is localized to the brain. By 35 minutes after injection, 95% of
peak uptake is achieved. Urinary excretion is rapid, with 10% to 40%
of the dose cleared in 2 hours. F-18 FDG can be shipped from regional
cyclotron production facilities due to its 110-minute half-life. As with
all PET emitters, its decay results in two high-energy 511-keV gamma
photons traveling at 180 degrees, which are best detected by a
dedicated PET/CT or PET/MR camera.
Table 14.2
Brain Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Radiopharmaceuticals for Experimental Use
Agent
Imaging Target
C-11 PIB
Beta-amyloid (A[ED3]β) deposition
F-18 FDDNP
Aβ, tau, other proteins (e.g., Huntingtin)
F-18 flortaucipir (F-18 AV-1451)
Tau deposition
F-18 MISO
Tumor hypoxia
Cu-64 ATSM
F-18 fluorothymidine (F-18 FLT)
DNA synthesis/tumor diagnosis
F-18 fluoroethyl L-tyrosine thymidine
(18F-FET)
Amino acid metabolism/peptide synthesis/tumor
diagnosis
C-11 methionine
F-18 fluoro-L-dopa
Peptide synthesis (tumor) and Neurotransmitter (clinical
use at limited sites)
C-11 dihydrotetrabenazine (C-11
DTBZ)
Vesicular monoamine transporter 2
F-18
fluoropropyldihydrotetrabenazine
(F-18 DTBZ)
C-11 raclopride
F-18 fallypride
D2/D3 dopamine receptor activity
C-11 carfentanil
Mu opiate receptor activity
F-18 FDPN
Opiate receptor (nonspecific) activity
C-11 flunitrazepam
Benzodiazepine receptor activity
C-11 scopolamine
Muscarinic cholinergic receptor activity
C-11 ephedrine
Adrenergic terminals
O-15 H2O
Blood flow
O-15 O2
Oxygen metabolism and flow
O-15 or C-11 carboxyhemoglobin
Blood volume
F-18 FDDPN, 2-(-(6-((2-[18F]fluoroethyl)(methyl)-amino)-2-napthyl)ethylideine) malonitrile;
FDPN, fluoroethyl-6-O-diphrenorphine; F-18 MISO, fluoromisonidazole; PIB, Pittsburgh B
compound.
FIG. 14.2  Cerebral cortex lobar anatomy.
FIG. 14.3  Motor, sensory, visual, speech, and auditory functional and
associative centers of the brain.
FIG. 14.4  Cerebral arterial anatomy on (A) coronal and (B) midline
sagittal sections. Vertebral arteries join to form the basilar artery
posteriorly. The basilar artery and the two anterior internal carotid
arteries then form the circle of Willis in the base of the brain. From
there, two anterior cerebral arteries anteromedially, the middle cerebral
arteries laterally, and two posterior cerebral arteries posteromedially
are seen. The anterior cerebral artery supplies the anterior cerebrum
along its medial margin above the corpus callosum and extends
posteriorly to the parietal fissure and to anterior portions of the basal
ganglia centrally. The posterior cerebral arteries also lie medially and
supply the occipital lobe and cerebellum. The middle cerebral arteries
run laterally in the sylvian fissure, then backward and upward on the
surface of the insula, where they divide into branches to the lateral
cerebral hemispheres. (C) Left lateral view shows its superficial course
over the cortex.
FIG. 14.5  Cerebral venous anatomy. The superior sagittal sinus runs
along the falx within the superior margin of the interhemispheric fissure.
The inferior sagittal sinus is smaller, courses over the corpus callosum,
and joins with the great vein of Galen to form the straight sinus, which
drains into the superior sagittal sinus at the confluence of sinuses
(torcular herophili) at the occipital protuberance. Transverse sinuses
drain the sagittal and occipital sinuses into the internal jugular vein.
FIG. 14.6  Regional cerebral cortical perfusion of the anterior, middle,
and posterior cerebral arteries.
The two SPECT agents currently used to assess regional cerebral
blood flow are Tc-99m HMPAO and Tc-99m ECD. Favorable
characteristics of these two neutral, lipophilic agents include high
first-pass extraction across the BBB, distribution corresponding to
rCBF, and desirable 140-keV gamma photons. However, both slightly
underestimate true rCBF, especially at high-flow states. The Tc-99m
perfusion agents are relatively fixed once inside in the neuron.
Therefore images can be delayed and still show what the perfusion
pattern looked like at the time of injection. For example, if the agent is
injected during an epileptic seizure, images can be performed after the
seizures are brought under control (within a few hours).
Tc-99m HMPAO (Tc-99m exametazime [Ceretec]) was first
introduced in the mid-1980s. It was originally available as a kit
requiring use within 30 minutes of radiolabeling; however, stabilizers
have since been added, allowing a 4-hour shelf life after addition of
the radiolabel. Doses from the radiopharmacy should be labeled with
fresh generator eluate (<2 hours old) just before delivery. Tc-99m
HMPAO has an approximately 80% first-pass extraction; 3.5% to 7%
of the injected dose localizes in the brain within 1 minute of injection.
Once across the BBB, it enters the neuron and becomes a polar
hydrophilic molecule trapped inside the cell. However, some of the
radiopharmaceutical may be present in different isomeric forms that
are not trapped. Although up to 15% of the dose washes out in the
first 2 minutes, little loss occurs over the next 24 hours. SPECT images
can be acquired from 20 minutes to 2 hours after injection. Excretion is
largely renal (40%) and gastrointestinal (15%).
Tc-99m ECD (Tc-99m bicisate, Neurolite) is a neutral lipophilic
agent that passively diffuses across the BBB like Tc-99m HMPAO.
Once prepared, the Tc-99m ECD dose is stable for 6 to 8 hours. It has a
first-pass extraction of 60% to 70%, with peak brain activity reaching
5% to 6% of the injected dose. The blood clearance is more rapid than
Tc-99m HMPAO, resulting in better brain-to-background ratios. At 1
hour, less than 5% of the dose remains in the blood, compared with
more than 12% of a Tc-99m HMPAO dose.
Once
inside
the
cell,
Tc-99m
ECD
undergoes
enzymatic
deesterification, forming polar metabolites unable to cross the cell
membrane. However, slow (roughly 6% per hour) washout of some
labeled metabolites occurs, with almost 25% of the brain activity
cleared by 4 hours. Although images may be superior to those with
Tc-99m HMPAO at 15 to 30 minutes after injection, they may be
suboptimal if imaging is delayed.
PET Image Acquisition
Patient preparation for F-18 FDG brain imaging is similar to that for
oncology applications. Patients should fast for 4 to 6 hours before
injection, have serum glucose less than 200 mg/dL, have had insulin
withheld for 2 hours (short-acting insulin) to 8 to 12 hours (long-
acting insulin), and avoid strenuous exercise for a few days before the
test. Exercise and insulin cause radiotracer to be shunted into muscle,
decreasing activity in the brain.
F-18 FDG should be injected in a quiet, dimly lit room with the
patient remaining still and undisturbed during the uptake period (at
least 30-35 minutes). CT images are limited, particularly in the
posterior fossa, because low-dose protocols are used and the fixed
camera gantry angle contributes to noise and streak artifact,
respectively. The posterior fossa also poses a problem when PET/MR
is used if calculated attenuation correction is not performed properly.
Without the CT for attenuation correction, mathematical or atlas-
based attenuation-correction methods are used that could result in
substantial artifacts on the PET. Although time-of-flight technology is
commonly used on the latest generation of scanners, this technique is
less helpful than in the body, where scatter and attenuation are
generally greater. A sample protocol is listed in Box 14.2.
Box 14.2 Example Protocol for F-18 FDG Brain PET/CT
Imaging
Patient Preparation
• Patient should fast 4 to 6 hours, avoid carbohydrates, and
maintain normal blood glucose.
• Encourage oral hydration.
• If patient takes insulin, delay injection until effects have worn
off (e.g., 2 hours after short-acting insulin, 8-12 hours for long
acting).
• Check blood glucose. If less than 180 to 200 mg/dL, continue.
• Elevated glucose: Consider rescheduling, administer insulin,
recheck, and delay 2 hours.
• If patient experiences seizures, an interictal scan is
recommended. EEG may be used to avoid erroneous
interpretation in postictal or occult ictal periods.
• If conscious sedation is required, administer short-acting
benzodiazepine >20 minutes after injection, as close to scan
acquisition as possible.
Radiopharmaceutical
• F-18 FDG 8 mCi (296 MBq) intravenous (IV) (range 5-12 mCi
[185-444 MBq])
• Inject in a quiet, dimly lit room, with the patient’s eyes open.
• Wait 35 to 60 minutes (adhere to this same delay on any
subsequent scan).
Image Acquisition
• Low-dose CT scan for attenuation correction/anatomical
localization (contrast optional)
• Acquisition: 7 to 12 minutes per bed position for one bed
position
• Serial dynamic scans can be acquired if significant motion
artifact is anticipated (e.g., five 2-minute frames).
Processing
• Orient brain along the anterior commissure–posterior
commissure plane.
• Iterative (or analytic) reconstruction, automated software
• Pixel size < 2 mm
CT, Computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; FDG,
fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography.
For perfusion brain SPECT exams, no particular preparation is
needed. As with PET, patients are injected in a quiet, dimly lit room.
For the best-quality image, a delay of 30 to 60 minutes for Tc-99m
ECD and 30 to 90 minutes for Tc-99m HMPAO should be used to
improve the signal-to-noise ratio. A gamma camera with multiple
heads creates images superior to single-headed systems. Patient
positioning is just as important as the equipment used. The heads of
the camera must come as close to the patient as possible, or resolution
is reduced. A head-holder attachment extending from the end of the
table allows the camera heads to come in closer than the width of a
table or the patient’s shoulders. In heavy patients and those whose
shoulders obstruct the view, the posterior fossa may not be seen. The
SPECT images can be processed with either iterative reconstruction or
filtered back-projection. A filter is applied to smooth the image. In
general, filters can be sampled and modified for each patient in the
postprocessing stage to achieve an optimal image. A protocol for Tc-
99m SPECT imaging is given in Box 14.3.
Box 14.3 Single-Photon Emission Computed
Tomography (SPECT) Cerebral Perfusion Imaging
Protocol
Patient Preparation
None; start intravenous (IV) line in advance.
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m HMPAO (Ceretec) or Tc-99m ECD (Neurolite)
Adults: 20 to 30 mCi (740-1100 MBq) IV
Pediatric dose: 0.2 to 0.3 mCi/kg (7.4-11.1 MBq[AU3]);
minimum dose 3 to 5 mCi (111-185 MBq) IV
Make sure dose falls within recommended 6-hour shelf-life
parameter.
Inject in a quiet, dimly lit room, with the patient’s eyes open.
Positioning
Maintain the minimum distance possible between camera
heads and patient. A head-holder extension beyond the table
end allows closer positioning of the camera heads.
Camera Setup
Orbit: Circular
Collimator: High resolution, parallel hole
Acquisition: Angle 3 degrees/step, 40 stops/head, 40
seconds/stop (total time, 27 minutes)
Computer: Matrix size: 128 × 128, zoom: 1.5 to 2 (for pixel size ≤
3.5 mm)
Processing: Filtered back-projection or iterative reconstruction
Filter: Hamming, 1.2 high-frequency cutoff, or other low-pass
(e.g., Butterworth) filter
Attenuation correction: Can be used
Tc-99m HMPAO SPECT images generally reflect cortical rCBF
because it is determined by the oxygen demands of the brain. In
addition, the blood-flow distribution is usually similar to the
metabolism seen with F-18 FDG. Areas with more synaptic activity
require greater blood flow. Activational studies can therefore target
areas of the brain showing increased flow when stimulated by a
certain task. Although findings on both SPECT and PET scans will
closely correlate with neuronal activity, many studies have shown that
the superior PET images are significantly more sensitive. Given this
superiority, PET has largely replaced SPECT for several applications.
There is a 2:1 to 4:1 differential in uptake in gray matter compared
with white matter. Lesions in the white matter are often undetectable
or cannot be differentiated from adjacent CSF spaces, so magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) or CT correlation is necessary for identifying
white-matter changes and enlarged ventricles. Although anatomy
seen on CT and MRI is much more detailed, many structures are
clearly visualized with scintigraphy (Fig. 14.7, A , D). Typically,
activity is fairly evenly distributed between the lobes of the brain.
However, this is dependent on the conditions at the time of injection.
For example, bright lights will increase occipital lobe activity, falsely
causing the frontal lobes to appear decreased.
The distribution of Tc-99m HMPAO differs only slightly from that
of Tc-99m ECD. Tc-99m HMPAO accumulates more in the frontal
lobes, thalamus, and cerebellum, whereas Tc-99m ECD shows a
higher affinity for the parietal and occipital lobes. Although the
differences are not usually noticeable, it would be best to use the same
agent for serial examinations, and most clinicians use the agent with
which they are most familiar.
FIG. 14.7  Normal distribution of F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
High-resolution (A) transverse positron emission tomography (PET)
images with corresponding levels on T1-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (B). Coronal PET(C) and comparable T1-weighted MRI
(D). ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; C, Cerebellum; Ca, caudate; F,
frontal lobe; O, occipital lobe; P, parietal lobe; PA, putamen; PCC,
posterior cingulate cortex; T, temporal lobe; Th, thalamus.
The normal distribution of SPECT and PET agents also changes
with age. In infants, a relative decrease is seen in frontal lobe
perfusion. This frontal activity increases over time, reaching an adult
level by about 2 years of age. In adults, global activity decreases with
age, and this decrease is more prominent in the frontal regions. Given
these changes, using comparison age-matched normal databases and
computer programs that quantitate rCBF may help improve
interpretation accuracy.
Although dementia can be the result of many conditions (Box 14.4),
it is usually caused by a neurodegenerative disease (Box 14.5).
Neurodegenerative disorders, also referred to as proteinopathies, are a
varied group of disorders caused by the buildup of neurotoxic,
misfolded proteins over time. These disorders can be grouped not
only on the basis of the symptoms (Box 14.6) that they cause but also
by the key proteins underlying each disorder as well (Fig. 14.8, A , B).
Box 14.4 Common Causes of Dementia
Degenerative dementias/neurodegenerative proteinopathies
Vascular dementia: stroke or multiinfarct dementia
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Medication (drug abuse, overdose, or from side effects)
Alcohol abuse
Depression
Thyroid disorder
Infection (e.g., HIV/AIDS, Lyme disease)
Subdural hematoma
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
Brain tumor
Multiple sclerosis
Renal failure, heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, dehydration
Box 14.5 Neurodegenerative Diseases
• Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
• Classic, late-onset “amnestic” AD
• AD variants: Posterior cortical atrophy, corticobasal
syndrome/corticobasal degeneration, frontal variant AD,
logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia
• Frontotemporal dementia (FTD)/frontotemporal lobar
degeneration (FTLD)
• Behavioral variant FTLD (e.g., Pick’s disease)
• Primary progressive aphasia (PPA): Semantic variant PPA,
nonfluent variant PPA
• Parkinsonian syndrome
• Parkinson’s disease (PD)
• Atypical parkinsonian syndromes: Progressive
supranuclear palsy, multisystem atrophy, corticobasal
syndrome
• Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
• Others:
• Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)
• Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)
• Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21)
• Huntington’s chorea
• Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (prion diseases not always
included)
Abnormal Proteins in Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is associated with two abnormal proteins
that make up the extracellular “senile” plaques and intracellular neural
fibrillary tangles (NFTs) found histopathologically. NFTs are composed
of a protein called tau, whereas the plaques are largely made up of
abnormally folded amyloid protein, beta-amyloid (also referred to as
amyloid-β or Aβ). The abnormal configuration of Aβ causes
fragments to autoaggregate, forming pleated sheets and insoluble
fibrils.
The amyloid cascade hypothesis proposes that Aβ deposition is the
central event that incites the neuroinflammation, NFT formation,
vascular damage, and synaptic loss that ultimately lead to neuronal
death in AD. This theory is supported by studies showing that the Aβ
fibrils are neurotoxic. Additionally, the genetic defects found in
familial forms of AD cause an increase in abnormal Aβ by altering
amounts of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) or by changing the way
APP is cleaved during posttranslational processing. The abnormal Aβ
(i.e., Aβ42) fragments have a different configuration that leads to the
auto-aggregation and formation of insoluble fibrils and pleated sheets
found in Alzheimer’s.
Box 14.6 Primary or Key Early Features of Common
Neurodegenerative Disorders
Dementia
Episodic memory loss, becoming lost in familiar places, difficulty
performing multistep tasks
• Alzheimer’s disease (AD):
• Classic Alzheimer’s (amnestic AD): Memory loss—presents
early in disease
• Typical late-onset form (≥65), sporadic (familial forms
uncommon)
• Early-onset form (<60-65), may be familial, rapid
progression compared with late-onset form
• AD variants: Amyloid-positive disorders, commonly early
onset, with memory usually intact initially, instead
presenting with other key features (see following points)
• Posterior cortical atrophy (visual variant), logopenic variant
primary progressive aphasia (verbal variant), corticobasal
syndrome (motor variant), behavioral or frontal variant AD
• Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
• Fluctuating decreased cognition, visual hallucinations,
rapid eye movement sleep disorder
• Parkinsonism: Bradykinesia, rigidity, and/or rest tremor
• Supporting signs: Autonomic dysfunction, severe reactions
to antipsychotics, falls/postural instability
• Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD): Frequent development in
Parkinson’s disease (PD)
• PD, PDD, and DLB may represent a spectrum of disease
and can overlap with AD.
Personality and Behavior
Personality change, disinhibition, loss of judgment, apathy
• Behavioral variant frontotemporal lobar degeneration
(bvFTLD)
• Frontal variant AD: Clinical presentation like FTLD, with
underlying histopathology similar to AD (e.g., tau
neurofibrillary tangles, amyloid)
Speech and Language
• FTLD primary progressive aphasia (PPA)
• Semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA)
• Inability to understand/remember meaning of words,
understand sentences
• Nonfluent variant progressive aphasia (NFPA) or
progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA)
• Ungrammatical and/or hesitant (nonfluent) speech,
difficulty pronouncing/getting words out, speech may slur
or voice may change
• Alzheimer’s variant (verbal variant AD):
• Logopenic variant PPA (lvPPA) or logopenic variant
progressive aphasia (LVPA)
• Deficits in naming objects and repetition, with sparing of
semantic, motor, syntactic abilities
• Speech slows as patient searches for words, but word
meanings are preserved, and speech is not physically
effortful.
Motor Abnormalities: Parkinsonism and Motor
Neuron Pathology
• Parkinsonism: Resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, falls,
postural instability/balance issues
• PD
• Parkinsonism, olfactory loss, or cardiac sympathetic
denervation
• Responds to dopaminergic medication
• Dementia frequent (PDD)
• Differentiating PD from atypical parkinsonian syndromes
(APSs) may be clinically difficult.
• DLB
• Dementia, visual hallucinations, parkinsonism
• Multisystem atrophy (MSA)
• Atypical parkinsonian syndrome: Ataxia, long tract signs
• MSA-P: Parkinsonism symptoms dominate
• MSA-C: Cerebellar ataxia, autonomic nervous system
dysfunction
• Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)
• Most common of the APSs
• Oculomotor abnormalities and deficits in vertical gaze
• Rigidity, falls, gait disorder, bulbar symptoms
• Corticobasal degeneration (see following points)
• Motor neuron/motor cortex
• Corticobasal syndrome (CBS): Term used for a constellation of
symptoms, multiple potential etiologies
• Corticobasal degeneration (CBD): CBS with tauopathy at
autopsy (causes 50% of CBS)
• Asymmetric, usually begins with one limb
• Motor cortex/premotor affected: Progressive rigidity and
apraxia, alien limb phenomena
• Striatal (basal ganglia)/extrapyramidal dysfunction:
Parkinsonism
• May also show: Myoclonus, dysphagia, visuospatial
disorientation, acalculia, dementia
• Symptoms may overlap other neurodegenerative diseases
with motor deficits (PSP, PD, and MSA)
• Others:
• Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): upper and lower
motor neurons
• Huntington’s chorea
Visual Abnormalities
• Visual field deficits
• Posterior cortical atrophy (PCA): Visual variant AD
• Presenting abnormalities from asymmetric, lateral occipital
involvement; memory initially relatively preserved
• Asymmetric atrophy in the occipital lobe may be seen on
magnetic resonance imaging
• Visual hallucinations
• DLB
• AD: Later finding in up to 20%
• Sometimes seen in posterior cortical atrophy (PCA)
FIG. 14.8  (A) Degenerative brain disease (proteinopathies) can be
categorized by the presence of abnormal proteins produced. Beta-
amyloid (Aβ) was first characterized in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
plaques. Perivascular amyloid is present in cerebral amyloid
angiopathy (CAA) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). The
tauopathies result from abnormal tau protein deposition and include the
tau subtype of frontotemporal lobar dementia (FTLD-t), corticobasal
degeneration (CBD), and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). Alpha-
synuclein is the primary component of Lewy bodies found in DLB and
Parkinson’s disease (PD) and is present in the abnormal neurites of
multisystem atrophy (MSA). (B) The proteins in FTLD, in addition to
tau, commonly include either TDP-43 or fused in sarcoma (FUS)
proteins in tau-negative cases. These two entities might be labeled “U”
for unknown or “UPS” for ubiquitin protease system markers in older
literature because they have been characterized more recently.
In the search for a cure for AD, attention has focused on the
extracellular fibrillar plaques in accordance with the amyloid cascade
hypothesis. However, clinical trials with new therapies that correct
amyloid buildup have so far failed to correct cognitive decline or alter
the course of disease. Several other facts are difficult to explain if the
amyloid cascade hypothesis is entirely correct. First, significant Aβ
deposition is seen in 15% to 30% of cognitively normal elderly
patients. Also, amyloid volume and distribution fail to reflect the
stage or severity of symptoms. For example, anteromedial temporal
lobe dysfunction develops very early in the course of AD, but plaques
are not detected there until later (first occurring in the basal temporal
lobe, anterior cingulate, and parietal operculum). Also, Aβ plaque
appears decades before the disease is clinically manifest and plateaus
many years before the symptoms peak.
Despite the conflicting information as to the importance of amyloid,
detecting its presence with PET or measuring changes in CSF amyloid
concentration can help with the diagnosis of dementia, particularly in
differentiating AD from frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD).
Other contributing factors that could play a role in dementia include
inflammation from overactive microglial cells, decreased phagocytosis
of toxic debris, and toxicity related to the combination of abnormal
proteins present. In AD, the relationship between abnormal Aβ and
tau proteins is increasingly attracting interest.
The protein tau is normally involved in the regulation of
intracellular transport by the cellular microtubules and is encoded for
by the MAPT gene located on chromosome 17. NFTs are largely
composed
of
an
insoluble,
abnormally
phosphorylated
(hyperphosphorylated) form of the microtubule-associated protein tau
(MAPT or tau).
In AD, tau accumulates in a pattern that mirrors the progression of
functional changes. Filaments are first found in the anteromesial
temporal lobe and hippocampus, then spread to involve the lateral
temporal and temporoparietal cortex. The posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) and superior posterior parietal lobe are next involved. Unlike
amyloid, the amount of tau present appears to correlate with the
severity of disease, and evidence increasingly points to tau as a critical
factor in the development of the AD.
Different forms of tau accumulate have been found to be
characteristic in several other neurodegenerative disorders. These
disorders are cumulatively referred to as “tauopathies” and include
the behavioral variant frontotemporal lobar dementia (bvFTLD),
corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and progressive supranuclear palsy
(PSP). In the past, FTLD was referred to as Pick’s disease, but that
term is now used to refer to the subset of frontotemporal dementia
(FTD) cases where Pick bodies, intracellular inclusions containing tau,
are seen in tissue specimens.
Lewy bodies are another type of intracellular inclusion, composed
largely of abnormal α-synuclein protein. Lewy bodies were originally
described in Parkinson’s disease (PD), but they are also found in
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson’s disease dementia
(PDD). It is likely that DLB and PDD are related on a spectrum of
disease. Neuronal involvement in each disease progresses in a
predictable pattern marked by the spread of the abnormal protein. For
example, Lewy bodies in DLB are found in the brainstem and
substantia nigra before moving rostrally to dopaminergic neurons in
the striatum. This is followed by the cingulate region, insula, and
finally widely through the cortex. Lewy bodies are not specific to
diseases of striatal or motor neurons and are found in other
conditions, including 50% of patients with AD. In fact, the overlap
between AD and DLB is significant in other ways, with patients with
DLB frequently showing AD cellular pathology (i.e., amyloid), and the
F-18 FDG PET patterns of the two disorders are sometimes difficult to
differentiate in clinical cases. Abnormal α-synuclein can be found in
forms other than as Lewy bodies. For example, glial intracellular
inclusions, primarily in oligodendrocytes, are the hallmark of the
atypical parkinsonian syndrome, multisystem atrophy (MSA).
Roughly 50% of FTLD cases are tau negative. The abnormal
proteins related to these cases have been characterized recently, with
two proteins being involved in almost all cases: TAR-DNA binding
protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) and fused in sarcoma (FUS) protein. These
two proteins also often occur in a subset of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), and accumulations of FUS are found in some patients
with essential tremor. The two proteins can also be seen as secondary
proteins in other degenerative diseases when more than one protein is
present.
Abnormal protein accumulation characterizes several other
diseases. In Huntington’s chorea, an abnormal protein, Huntingtin, is
found. Prion disease, such as in Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, will also
result in abnormally folded protein deposition. The dementia of
Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21) is associated with AD pathology
because of the presence of the amyloid precursor protein gene on
chromosome 21. In addition, traumatic brain injury that leads to
chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is strongly associated with
NFT deposition. Understanding the different abnormal proteins found
in the dementias may help uncover new diagnostic tests and
therapies.
AD typically occurs after age 60 to 65 and is characterized primarily
by progressive cognitive decline with episodic memory loss, difficulty
navigating familiar places, and organizational problems (i.e., amnestic
AD). AD is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for 60%
to 80% of cases diagnosed in the United States and affecting 10% of
the population over 65 years of age and nearly 50% in those over 85
years of age. In those under 65, dementia is rare (comprising roughly
5% of diagnosed cases), but when it occurs, early-onset dementia is
most commonly caused by AD. Roughly half the cases are caused by
AD, and most of the remainder are a result of FTLD/FTD. Early-onset
AD is more frequently associated with familial inherited patterns of
disease and demonstrates a more aggressive clinical course than the
classic late-onset form.
More than 80% of AD cases are sporadic, but in those cases of
inherited forms of disease, three important autosomal-dominant
genetic defects have been found (Table 14.3). In nonfamilial and late-
onset disease, a strong correlation has been found with abnormalities
in the genes for apolipoprotein (ApoE). Specifically, an increased
incidence of AD is seen in those who carry the ApoE ε4 allele, and the
risk increases when more than one copy of the ApoE ε4 is present. In
both early- and late-onset disease, defects result in the buildup of
abnormal forms of Aβ related to these genes. Other factors that have
been linked to Alzheimer’s are diabetes mellitus, elevated serum
glucose/hyperinsulinemia, hypertension, and head injury.
Occasionally, AD will present clinically in an atypical fashion with
symptoms other than memory loss dominating early in the course of
disease. These disorders include aphasia in logopenic primary
progressive aphasia (verbal variant AD), visual deficits in posterior
cortical atrophy (visual variant), corticobasal degeneration (motor
variant), and personality or behavioral changes (frontal lobe variant).
Although clinical findings and corresponding F-18 FDG PET (or Tc-
99m HMPAO/ECD SPECT) imaging findings vary widely in cases of
atypical AD, the AD variants demonstrate the same underlying
histopathological findings typical of amnestic AD (i.e., increased Aβ
and NFT buildup and decreased CSF Aβ or tau).
Different phases of disease are now recognized in AD: preclinical,
prodromal
mild
cognitive
impairment,
and
dementia
from
Alzheimer’s (Table 14.4). Preclinical amyloid deposition begins years
before patients demonstrate symptoms. Such patients may be
identified by genetic markers or abnormal imaging or CSF biomarker
findings. In the early stages of disease progression, memory and
cognitive issues are usually not serious enough to affect daily living
activities. These patients are said to have MCI. MCI is present in 15%
to 20% of the population over 65 years of age and can be caused by
multiple etiologies. Patients may not develop dementia in 35% to 40%
of cases. However, patients with MCI are at high risk for the
development of AD, with 15% of patients with MCI converting to AD
in 2 years and more than a third in 5 years (up to perhaps half of the
cases). When MCI is caused by the early stages of AD, F-18 FDG PET
(or sometimes SPECT) will often reveal abnormal patterns similar to
AD. Additionally, amyloid PET scans will usually be positive in these
cases. Thus, these scans can help predict which MCI cases will
progress to actual AD. Once neurologic deficits have worsened to a
level that affects daily living activities, the clinical diagnosis of
dementia is made.
Table 14.3
Genetic Mutations in Familial Alzheimer Dementia
Chromosome Gene
Notes
Early-Onset Dementia (<60-65 years of age)
Amyloid precursor protein
(APP[ED4]) gene
mutations
Improper APP cleavage: ↑Aβ42 fragment (↑Aβ42 to
↑Aβ420 ratio).
Trisomy 21: Triplicate genes and ↑ APP expression
related to early-onset AD in Down’s syndrome
Presenilin 1 (PSEN1)
Both part of the γ-secretase complex that cleaves
APP
Presenilin 2 (PSEN2)
Majority of early-onset familial AD mapped to
chromosome 14
Late-/Senile-Onset Dementia (>65 years of age)
Apolipoprotein E
(ApoE):
3 isoforms (ε2, ε2, ε2)
ApoE4 is the major risk for late-onset AD
Found in 65%-80% of sporadic and familial cases
Multiple copies E4 ↑↑ risk
2 copies by age 85, 12%; 4 copies, 91% by age 85
E3 neutral risk
E2 protective ↓ risk 50%
Triggering receptor on
myeloid cells 2 (TREM2)
Less common; expression limited to microglia;
critical for response to injury/Aβ
Others (very rare)
Aβ, Beta-amyloid; AD, Alzheimer’s disease
In the 2011 revision of the National Institute on Aging and the
Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) workgroup criteria for the
diagnosis of AD, the importance of the underlying histopathology is
recognized as opposed to only relying on clinical findings. Patients are
classified as either possible or probable AD based on clinical factors,
and the degree of certainty can be increased by obtaining evidence of
abnormal biomarkers for Aβ deposition (positive amyloid PET scan or
low concentrations of CSF Aβ42), disproportionate atrophy of the
entorhinal cortex on MR, or other signs of typical neuronal injury
(elevated CSF tau [both total and phosphorylated tau], decreased F-18
FDG in the temporoparietal cortex). When patients meet the core
clinical criteria for AD, biomarker evidence can increase the certainty
of the diagnosis (Table 14.5). F-18 FDG PET/CT detection of AD (Fig.
14.9) has a reported sensitivity of up to 94% and a specificity of 83%.
The accuracy of SPECT is also high, but it is less than PET, with a
sensitivity of 65% to 85% and a specificity of 72% to 87% (Table 14.6).
Imaging tests have been shown to be more accurate in the diagnosis of
dementia than clinical exam alone. In some cases, the etiology of
dementia may not be clear clinically or based on biomarker findings.
Postmortem tissue biopsy remains the gold standard for the diagnosis
of AD.
Table 14.4
Stages in Alzheimer’s Dementia Diagnosis
Clinical
Biomarkers
Category
Stage
Cognitive
Change
Aβ
PET
or
CSF
Neuronal
Injury (Tau,
MR, FDG)
Normal
AD biomarkers
normal
–
–
–
Preclinical AD
Amyloidosis
–
+
–
Amyloidosis and
neurodegeneration
–
+
+
Plus early cognitive
change
+ (subtle—
doesn’t
meet MCI
criteria)
+
+
SNAP
Neurodegeneration
without amyloid
–
–
+
MCI
Symptomatic predementia—daily living
activities not affected
+ (mild)
+
+
Alzheimer’s
Dementia
Symptomatic
dementia
Affects daily living
activities
+
+
+
Aβ, Beta-amyloid; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MCI, mild cognitive
impairment; MR, atrophy hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala; PET, positron emission
tomography; SNAP, suspected non-Alzheimer pathophysiology; tau, tau-total and tau-P
(phosphorylated tau).
B[AU2]ased on National Institute on Aging Criteria 2011 with
subsequent modifications.
FIG. 14.9  F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) in Alzheimer’s disease
shows typical parietal hypometabolism and sparing (arrowheads) of the
sensorimotor cortex and occipital lobes. Symmetrical frontal lobe
involvement is consistent with fairly advanced disease.
Table 14.5
National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) Criteria for Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD) as the Cause for Dementia
Is Dementia
related to
AD?
Biomarker Evidence of AD
Pathophysiological Process
Add “↑ level of clinical certainty”
with any of the following:
• Documented cognitive decline
• Carrier AD genetic mutation
Aβ PET (+) or
CSF Aβ↓
Tau ↑ or (+) MR
atrophy or FDG
PET
Uncertain
No (+) biomarker or conflicting
biomarkers
Intermediate
probability
(+) Aβ
OR (+): tau or MR or
FDG
High
probability
(+) Aβ
AND (+): tau or MR or
FDG
Prodromal AD
Clinically (-) but shows (+) Aβ or
tau/Aβ
Aβ, Beta-amyloid; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FDG, F-18 FDG PET/CT ↓ posterior
cingulate/precuneus and anteromesial temporal; MR, magnetic resonance; MR atrophy,
hippocampal/anteromesial temporal atrophy; PET, positron emission tomography.
Table 14.6
Accuracy of Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s Disease Diagnosis a
Examination
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
MR
83 (79-87)
85 (80-89)
CT
80 (68-88)
87 (78-93)
SPECT
79 (72-85)
84 (78-88)
PET/CT
91 (86-94)
85 (79-91)
CSF-Aβ
76 (72-80)
77 (72-82)
CSF-tau (total/phosphorylated)
78 (73-83)
85 (76-89)
Aβ, Beta-amyloid; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; MR, magnetic
resonance; PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed
tomography.
a  95% Confidence interval.
Adapted from Shivamurthy V, Tahari A, Marcus C, Subramanian R.
Brain PET and the diagnosis of dementia. AJR. 2015;204(1):W76-W85.
DOI: 10.2214/AJR.13.12363.[ED5]
The first steps in the complex process of PET image analysis are as
follows:
1. Exclude significant vascular disease (usually evident on MR),
or confirm that vascular disease is present; clinical
determination is needed if a secondary process may be present
in addition.
2. Determine if cortical uptake is sufficient to categorize disease;
when cortical disease becomes severe, decreased uptake
becomes more generalized with atrophy, and changes progress
beyond the point where they can be categorized.
3. Attempt to categorize the scan into the posterior (parietal or
occipital) or frontal (Fig. 14.10), or temporal (Fig. 14.11)
categories.
Table 14.7 outlines typical F-18 FDG PET imaging findings of AD
and other neurodegenerative disorders. In Fig. 14.12, a systematic
approach to the interpretation of these scans is diagramed. As shown,
it is generally best to first determine if the disease pattern can be
placed into a primarily posterior category. Even if the anterior regions
are involved, when deficits are greater posteriorly than those
anteriorly, processes such as AD or DLB are more likely than FTLD.
Image Analysis in AD
Gliosis and neuronal loss begin in the anteromesial temporal lobe
entorhinal cortex (Fig. 14.13). Although these earliest findings may be
difficult to visualize, increasing the angle of the patient’s head 30 to 40
degrees, with the nose up from the canthomeatal line during
scanning, can make hippocampal and anteromesial temporal deficits
more apparent.
AD is most often evident after involvement of the temporoparietal
association cortices, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and precuneus
regions (Fig. 14.14). As disease progresses, changes spread to the
frontal lobes, sparing the sensory-motor cortex and occipital lobes
(Fig. 14.15) until the disease is very advanced. Changes in classic
amnestic AD may begin with moderate asymmetry in each area
involved, but findings then usually become symmetric (Fig. 14.16).
Persistent or significant asymmetries can be caused by the presence of
mixed pathologies or when disease is the result of an atypical or
variant form of AD. Changes on F-18 FDG PET may be apparent
before atrophy is seen on MR.
Recognizing the location of PCC and precuneus is important (Fig.
14.17) because their involvement is not only the most easily visualized
abnormality in early AD, but it is also the most specific finding when
attempting to differentiate AD from FTLD. The position of these
structures may be difficult to identify in the different planes on the
MR. As noted previously, posterior cingulate and temporoparietal
cortex hypometabolism on PET has also been shown predictive of
which MCI cases will convert to AD. Although the reported accuracy
varies from 58% to 100%, there is a high negative predictive value,
and accuracy is reportedly greater than MR.
FIG. 14.10  Axial F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) in dementia. Even when advanced, degenerative
disease usually fits in a major category: anterior, posterior, temporal.
On axial F-18 FDG PET, a sharp front-to-back demarcation (yellow
arrows) will differentiate (A) frontotemporal lobar degeneration from a
posterior (posterior parietal or occipital) dementia. (B) The superior
parietal lobe is most commonly affected in Alzheimer’s disease (AD),
which spares the occiput until very late (orange arrows). Prominent
bilateral occipital involvement is expected in dementia with Lewy
bodies (DLB). In another severely abnormal case(C), greater posterior
involvement is seen than frontal, and because the frontal involvement
would typically be more severe than the occipital/cerebellar
abnormalities in AD, the likely etiology is DLB. Posterior cortical
atrophy, an AD variant that also frequently involves the occipital region,
is usually more asymmetrical and lateral than DLB.
Dementia With Lewy Bodies
DLB is the second-most-common cause of neurodegenerative
dementia, causing 15% to 25% of cases. Patients classically
demonstrate a fluctuating dementia, visual hallucinations, and rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder. Consensus criteria
include these symptoms under the “core features” category of disease.
Additional “suggestive features” are postural instability, neuroleptic
sensitivity, significant autonomic dysfunction, parkinsonism, and
other psychiatric symptoms (delusions, depression, other types of
hallucinations). Supportive features also include abnormal functional
imaging exams with decreased activity in the basal ganglia uptake on
the dopamine transporter (DAT) I-123 ioflupane SPECT (DaTscan), in
the occipital lobes on F-18 FDG PET, and/or in myocardium with I-123
metaiodobenzylguanidine (I-123 MIBG) SPECT.
DLB scan findings are typically bilateral and may be extensive. In
many ways, the pattern on F-18 FDG PET is usually similar to AD,
with symmetric involvement of the posterior temporoparietal cortices
bilaterally, increasingly abnormal-appearing frontal lobe as disease
progresses, and sparing of the sensorimotor cortex. The primary
difference between AD and DLB is that DLB usually shows early
occipital lobe involvement (Fig. 14.18). In addition, the activity in the
underlying PCC may be relatively preserved in DLB (i.e., the
“cingulate island sign”). Other variations between DLB and AD
include cerebellar involvement in some cases of DLB and frontal lobe
involvement that is often earlier than is seen in AD. However, the
occipital hypometabolism is the most specific abnormality.
In some cases, it is not possible to differentiate AD and DLB because
clinical, F-18 FDG PET imaging, amyloid PET findings, and even
histopathologic findings (e.g., Lewy bodies and amyloid) can overlap.
However, differentiating the cause of dementia when DLB is present
is important—not only to ensure correct treatment but to also prevent
serious side effects from improper treatment (Table 14.8). In cases
where the etiology is unclear, an abnormal I-123 ioflupane brain
SPECT can usually differentiate DLB from AD and FTLD, showing
decreased basal ganglia uptake with DLB. The accuracy of imaging is
much greater than clinical assessment (sensitivity of 78%-88% and
specificity of 90%-100% compared with a clinical sensitivity of 75%
and specificity of 42%). In some cases, a cardiac I-123 MIBG may also
be of benefit because uptake will also be decreased in DLB.
FIG. 14.11  The temporal lobes are frequently involved in
frontotemporal dementias and some Alzheimer’s disease variants.
When asymmetrical temporal lobe involvement is the main or only
finding, the semantic variant primary progressive aphasia, one type of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), is a likely cause. As seen
here, the left side is more commonly affected: (A) axial, (B) coronal,
and (C) left lateral F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography (PET) images.
FIG. 14.12  A system for F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) interpretation in neurodegenerative
disease. Image interpretation in neurodegenerative disease requires a
systematic approach. If the posterior parietal or occipital regions are
most heavily involved, the etiology is most likely not a frontotemporal
dementia, even when the frontal lobes are involved. bvFTLD,
Behavioral variant FTLD; FTLD, frontotemporal lobar degeneration;
lvPPA, logopenic variant PPA; nfPPA, nonfluent PPA; PPA, primary
progressive aphasia; svPPA, semantic variant PPA (“semantic
dementia”).
Table 14.7
F-18 FDG PET Findings in Dementia and Neurodegenerative Diseases
Area
AD
DLB
PCA
bvFTLD
PPA
PCC
↓
↓
↓
Initially no
Δ
Varies—↓ if
related AD
and no Δ i
FTLD
Posterior/Superior
parietal
(precuneus)
↓
↓
↓ (may be
asymmetrical)
No Δ (may
↓ later)
Varies-↓ if rela
AD and N
if FTLD
Posterior temporal
↓
↓
↓
No Δ
↓ (varies and m
be
asymmetri
Occipital
No Δ
↓ especially
medial
↓ lateral (often
asymmetrical)
No Δ
No Δ
Frontal
Midlate ↓
↓ (often)
No Δ (varies)
↓
May be↓ often
asymmetri
ACC
No Δ
varies
No Δ
↓
May
Anterior temporal
No Δ
varies
No Δ
↓
↓ (often
asymmetri
Sensorimotor cortex
No Δ
No Δ
No Δ
No Δ
No Δ
Basal ganglia or
Thalamus
No Δ
No Δ
No Δ
Varies
No Δ
ACC, Anterior cingulate cortex; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; bvFTLD, behavioral variant
frontotemporal lobar degeneration; CBD, corticobasal degeneration; DLB, dementia with Lewy
bodies; No Δ, unchanged; PCA, posterior cortical atrophy; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex;
PPA, primary progressive aphasia (as a result of AD or FTLD).[ED6]
The occipital lobe can be involved in other disorders besides DLB.
Although rare, posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), which is most often an
AD variant, classically affects the occipital lobes. (Fig. 14.19, A, B).
PCA often presents in younger patients (50-65 years), with
asymmetric signs typically involving visual field or visual processing
but with preservation of memory and cognitive processes (at least
initially). PCA will usually present with at least mildly asymmetric
hypometabolism that tends to involve the more lateral occipital lobe
(see Fig. 14.19, C, D). DLB, on the other hand, will affect the midline
region (and may affect the lateral occipital lobe as well). PCA may also
affect the parietal and temporoparietal regions more asymmetrically
than is typical of DLB or classic AD. Patients may present with
findings of severe focal atrophy on MR in the parietooccipital region.
Although the frontal lobe is abnormal in some cases, it is likely less
severely affected than with DLB or FTLD. The severity is also usually
less severe in the frontal portions of the temporal lobe and anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) compared with various types of FTLD.
Frontotemporal Dementia/Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration
The frontotemporal dementias are a diverse group of diseases in
which memory issues are generally less significant initially as
compared with other symptoms, unlike AD. FTLD is the cause of
almost half of dementia cases occurring in younger patients (<60-65
years). Frontal lobe involvement results in personality changes,
including loss of judgment, apathy, and inappropriate behavior with
loss of inhibitions. These are the predominant findings in behavioral
variant FTLD (bvFTLD) (Fig. 14.20).
When speech difficulties are the predominant presenting symptom,
the temporal lobes and speech areas of the brain are involved,
although frontal and other areas may also be abnormal. Three types of
degenerative aphasias, often referred to as primary progress aphasia
(PPA), are generally now recognized. Two of these are associated with
FTLD pathology: semantic variant FTLD (svFTLD or semantic
dementia) and nonfluent progressive aphasia (NFPA) or progressive
nonfluent aphasia (PNFA). The third condition, logopenic progressive
aphasia (or logopenic variant progressive aphasia [LVPA]), is usually
an AD variant.
FIG. 14.13  (A) Axial F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) demonstrates mild decreased activity in
the mesial temporal lobes in a patient with early Alzheimer’s disease.
(B) A topographical representation of the comparison of this case to a
normal database confirms the temporal lobe is statistically significantly
decreased and also highlights early involvement posteriorly and
medially in the posterior cingulate gyrus (posterior cingulate cortex
[PCC]).
FIG. 14.14  Axial positron emission tomography (PET) images in
Alzheimer’s disease demonstrate decreased uptake (yellow arrows) in
the parietal, temporoparietal, and anteromesial temporal cortex.
Preserved activity (blue arrows) is noted in the sensorimotor cortex,
occiput, and basal ganglia.
FIG. 14.15  Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Transaxial positron emission
tomography (PET) images reveal expected hypometabolism in the
temporoparietal cortex, especially high in the posterior parietal region
(arrows), and sparing of the sensorimotor cortex. Frontal lobe
involvement is consistent with fairly advanced disease.
FIG. 14.16  Alzheimer’s disease can begin asymmetrically in a region,
but change becomes more symmetrical over time. In this case,
decreased activity is seen bilaterally in the posterior parietal cortex, but
the left is slightly worse than the right. If the asymmetry is marked, it
may be secondary to an Alzheimer’s variant or vascular disease
superimposed on a degenerative process.
FIG. 14.17  The precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) in the
medial posterior parietal lobe may be difficult to recognize, especially
when only a single image from an example is shown. T1-weighted
magnetic resonance (MR) from top to bottom (axial images, left) and
from back to front (coronal right) with a fixed sagittal reference (middle),
just to the left of the longitudinal fissure. The precuneus (pink, left
hemisphere; yellow, right hemisphere) is almost all hidden from the
brain surface in the longitudinal fissure; it is bordered anteriorly by the
cingulate sulcus marginal ramus (yellow arrow) and parieto-occipital
sulcus posteriorly (red arrow); the cingulate sulcus separates it from the
underlying cingulate gyrus (blue). The posterior cingulate cortex is
above the corpus callosum (white arrow), with the sulcus of the corpus
callosum between them. The PCC extends anteriorly to the level of the
marginal ramus of the cingulate sulcus and posteriorly to the parieto-
occipital sulcus. The PCC contains Brodman’s areas 23, 29, and 31
(anteriorly) and the retrosplenial cortex (posteriorly).
FIG. 14.18  Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). (A) Decreased activity
is seen in the parietal and temporal cortices (blue arrows). Classic
Alzheimer’s is unlikely given mild decreases in the occipital lobe (mildly
asymmetrical; right > left) and cerebellum (green arrows), and frontal
regions and the posterior cingulate cortex (yellow arrow) are still
preserved. The pattern suggests early DLB. Although an atypical
Alzheimer’s was a possible explanation, the developing clinical findings
supported the diagnosis of DLB. (B) Marked deficits posteriorly involve
the occiput but also the temporoparietal and superior frontal regions,
with sparing of the sensorimotor and inferior frontal cortices. These
changes could be from advanced DLB, but the severe parietooccipital
atrophy on CT is suggestive of the Alzheimer variant posterior cortical
atrophy.
Table 14.8
Potential Side Effects of Incorrect Therapies in Neurodegenerative Diseases
Disease
Treatment
Result
Dementia with
Lewy bodies
Neuroleptics—
contraindicated
• Irreversible parkinsonism or autonomic
dysfunction
• Impaired consciousness
Antipsychotics—use
with caution
• Anticholinergic effects could exacerbate
extrapyramidal symptoms and worsen
cognitive status
Frontotemporal
dementia
Acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors
(Donepezil)—avoid
use
• Activating/alerting properties can ↑
psychiatric symptoms/worsen behavioral
symptoms
• No benefits
Multisystem
atrophy
Deep-brain stimulators
Clinical worsening
Corticobasal
degeneration
Thalamotomy
Clinical deterioration
General use
Alzheimer’s
disease
Anticholinesterase
inhibitor (approved
for use)
Typical side effects: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
sleep disturbance, urinary incontinence,
cramps, bradycardia
Three main patterns of hypometabolism are seen on F-18 FDG in
FTLD: (1) bilateral frontal lobe, with anterior temporal lobes and
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC); (2) frontal involvement with temporal
lobe sparing; and (3) temporal lobe predominant, with bilateral but
often asymmetric or unilateral findings. It should be noted that
svFTLD is often more asymmetric than the other forms of PPA. Also,
in bilateral frontal/anterior temporal lobe involvement, Pick body
inclusions may be found at biopsy (i.e., FTLD was formerly known as
Pick’s disease). When changes in the frontal lobes are significant or
affect motor/premotor cortical areas, the contralateral cerebellum may
show neuronal loss as crossed-cerebellar diaschisis (Fig. 14.21).
When marked asymmetry is seen, without change from ischemic
infarct, the two processes that should be considered first are semantic
dementia and corticobasal degeneration (CBD). These patients have
very different clinical presentations, with speech issues central to
semantic dementia and unilateral motor abnormalities (and/or
unilateral phantom limb) typical of CBD. On F-18 FDG PET, CBD will
classically affect the primary sensorimotor strip, ipsilateral basal
ganglia, or thalamus. CBD is often the result of atypical AD but can
also be a result of FTLD processes. Additionally, semantic variant PPA
and PCA may also be considered in situations where findings are
fairly asymmetric.
Scan interpretation is complex when the pattern is not consistent
with classic AD or FTLD. In many situations, the etiology of scan
findings can only be narrowed down. For example, it might be
possible to exclude classic AD or DLB while suggesting findings may
be related to an AD variant or combination of an FTLD with an AD
variant (Fig. 14.22). In some instances, other imaging tests may be
helpful. For example, amyloid PET is negative in cases related to
FTLD and positive with underlying AD. Other AD variants, in
addition to logopenic PPA and posterior cortical atrophy, can occur.
Both classic and variant forms of AD are typically amyloid positive,
and both may show decreases in perfusion or metabolism in the
posterior parietal/temporoparietal cortices. Variant forms of AD,
however, more often demonstrate asymmetric decreases on F-18 FDG
PET. The specific areas will usually reflect symptoms: occipital lobe
for visual changes, frontal lobes for behavioral and executive
symptoms, temporal for language, and basal ganglia or motor cortex
for motor symptoms.
FIG. 14.19  (A) Posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) is also known as
visual variant Alzheimer’s disease (AD) because occipital involvement
causes visual field changes. It is often very asymmetrical and involves
the occipital lobe, usually more laterally. There is asymmetrical
involvement of structures typically affected in classic AD, such as the
temporal lobe. Compared with a normal database (B), statistically
significant abnormalities appear as blue to purple on a brain map,
which can help confirm the presence of subtle changes.(C, D)
Dementia with Lewy bodies tends to be more symmetrical and tends to
affect the central/midline occiput.
Images courtesy Dr. Kirk Frey, MD, PhD, University of Michigan.
FIG. 14.20  Frontotemporal dementia/frontotemporal lobar
degeneration (FTLD). Behavioral frontotemporal lobar degeneration is
the most common FTLD type and includes most cases previously
referred to as Pick’s disease. F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) demonstrates bilateral decreased activity
in the frontal lobes, including the anterior cingulate, and the anterior
temporal lobes.
If metabolic changes occur in Parkinson’s disease or an atypical
parkinsonian syndrome, they are often subtle, and their diagnosis is
not a currently approved indication for F-18 FDG PET. The use of
dopamine transporter imaging (e.g., I-123 ioflupane) will be more
sensitive and specific when differentiating such cases from AD or
FTLD.
In some patients with known vascular abnormalities, there may be
clinical concern for a superimposed degenerative dementia. In such
cases, imaging is appropriate but must be closely compared with MR
findings and clinical signs. Vascular disease may cause a greater
impact in the frontal and frontoparietal cortex because of the large
area the middle cerebral artery affects (Fig. 14.23).
Several PET radiopharmaceuticals have been developed that bind to
Aβ. The first and most studied of these is C-11 Pittsburgh B
compound (PIB), developed from thioflavin T, a fluorescent dye used
to evaluate amyloid. C-11 PIB binding is seen in more than 90% of
patients with AD. In normal volunteers, background cortical uptake is
identified, similar to that in the cerebellum, which is used as the usual
normal reference. Clinical use, however, is limited by the short, 20-
minute half-life of C-11.
An initial significant development in amyloid imaging was the
formulation of the F-18 labeled radiopharmaceutical F-18 FDDNP (an
F-18 6-dialkylamino-2-naphthyethylidene derivative). This lipophilic
agent crosses the BBB and binds to Aβ. However, many studies have
shown that F-18 FDDNP has less specific binding than C-11 PIB, with
uptake also seen in NFTs and other proteins in addition to Aβ.
Three F-18–labeled amyloid binding agents have since been
approved for use in the United States: F-18 florbetapir (Amyvid, AV-
45), F-18 florbetaben (Neuraceq, AV-1), and F-18 flutemetamol
(Vizamyl, F-18-3′-F-PIB). Protocol modifications compared with the
standard F-18 FDG PET protocol are listed in Box 14.7. Each agent is
able to cross the BBB and shows specific high-affinity binding for Aβ.
Patterns of uptake will vary somewhat between the agents, but each
of these agents functions with similar accuracy in the clinical setting.
As noted previously, the distribution of amyloid does not necessarily
equate with F-18 FDG PET abnormalities, the presence of amyloid is
seen long before symptoms begin, and activity peaks long before
clinical signs and symptoms.
FIG. 14.21  Distal effects of neuronal loss on F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) positron emission tomography (PET). (Top) Frontotemporal
lobar degeneration (FTLD) with marked hypometabolism (wide yellow
arrow) in the frontal and temporal lobes (left > right) with characteristic
involvement of the anterior cingulate (thin yellow arrow). Diaschisis is
seen with decreased activity (orange arrows) in the left (opposite)
cerebellum (i.e., crossed cerebellar diaschisis). (Bottom)
Corresponding axial T1-weighted MR slices show only minimal atrophy
in the affected frontal cortex and left cerebellum (orange arrow),
disproportionate to metabolic change, and no underlying major infarct
as a cause.
Interpretation guidelines specify that abnormal activity must be
seen in more than one cortical area in order for a study to be read as
positive. They also recommend the use of the following phrases:
equates with “no to sparse amyloid plaque” in negative exams (Fig.
14.24) or “moderate to severe amyloid plaques” when positive (Box
14.8). Because early deposition of amyloid occurs in the deeper
cortical levels, the amount of white-matter binding seen in these
radiopharmaceuticals may cause diagnostic difficulties. Interpretation
may be difficult in cases where severe atrophy is seen. Due to the
complexities of interpretation, physicians are required to undergo
additional training prior to interpretation of clinical exams.
A positive amyloid exam (Fig. 14.25) helps confirm the diagnosis of
AD and differentiate AD from FTLD. The negative predictive value of
these exams is high. Amyloid PET scans are reportedly 96% sensitive
and 100% specific for the presence of amyloid plaque. However, a
positive study is not diagnostic of AD because Aβ accumulation can
occur in asymptomatic patients: increasing from 10% in those younger
than 70 to up to 30% to 40% by age 80. Appropriate use criteria have
been developed by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging and the Alzheimer’s Association, with concerns in mind that
referring physicians may not fully understand the limitations of the
exam or how to interpret results (Box 14.9).
Amyloid PET imaging has been widely accepted in Europe as a
suitable biomarker for assessing disease in research trials and in
diagnostic criteria. Use in the United States continues to evolve, with
long-standing difficulties obtaining payment from insurers. In April
2019, results from over 11,400 patients with dementia or MCI in the
multicenter Imaging Dementia-Evidence for Amyloid Scanning
(IDEAS) trial were published (Rabinovici GD, et al. JAMA, 2019). The
results of the trial showed that amyloid PET exams resulted in a
diagnosis change from non-AD to AD in 10.5% and from AD to non-
AD in 25.1%. In addition, the composite endpoint changed in 63.5% of
patients with dementia and in 60.2% of patients with MCI. It was
noted that further work needed to be done to see if these exams would
result in a change in clinical outcomes.
FIG. 14.22  A patient with symptoms including speech and memory
difficulties for several months. Striking asymmetrical activity in the left
temporal lobe favors primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Although this
could be the result of the semantic variant frontotemporal dementia,
involvement of the left occiput and bilateral posterior parietal regions is
suggestive of an Alzheimer’s variant (logopenic PPA). Beta-amyloid
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging may be helpful because it
is expected to be positive in AD variants and not in FTLD (although this
is not definitive because roughly 15%-20% of asymptomatic patients
are also positive).
FIG. 14.23  Vascular dementia often shows a frontal predisposition
similar to other frontotemporal dementias. (A) Vascular dementia may
be more diffuse, as seen in this patient, and difficult to differentiate from
other causes, including severe Alzheimer’s disease. (B) Slow
progression was seen in this patient clinically and on a repeat scan 5
years later.
Box 14.7 PET/CT Imaging Protocol Modifications for
Amyloid PET Scan
Preparation
No fasting, glucose control, or change in insulin scheduling
Radiopharmaceutical
5 to 12 mCi (185-444 MBq) intravenous (IV), flush 10 mL 0.9%
sterile sodium chloride
Delay scan for 30 to 50 minutes.
F-18 florbetapir (Amyvid) 10 mCi (370 MBq) IV, delay 10
minutes; acquisition 10 minutes.
F-18 florbetaben (Neuraceq) 8 mCi (300 MBq) IV, delay 45 to
130 minutes; scan 10 to 20 minutes.
F-18 flutemetamol (Vizamyl) 5 mCi (185 MBq) IV injected
over 40 seconds, 5 to 15 mL 0.9% NaCl flush. Delay 90
minutes; acquisition 10 to 20 minutes.
Note: Clearance is 37% renal, 52% hepatobiliary; plasma levels
decrease 75% in first 20 minutes, 90% in 180 minutes.
Patient Positioning
After voiding bladder, patient is placed supine with head
immobilized and in center field of view, neck relaxed, nose
pointed upward.
PET Image Acquisition
Three-dimensional (3-D) data acquisition, 1 bed position for
10 minutes; pixel size 2 to 3 mm, slice thickness 2 to 4 mm;
matrix 256 ×256, zoom 2.
Note: Patient should be encouraged to void bladder postscan
to decrease exposure.
CT, Computed tomography; PET, positron emission tomography.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the most common of the movement
disorders, affecting approximately 1.5% of people over 65 years and
2.5% of those over the age of 80. As the dopaminergic neurons in the
substantia nigra degenerate, patients classically experience a triad of
symptoms: resting tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia. However,
diagnosis may be difficult, especially earlier in the course of disease
when all signs are not always present. The three groups of
parkinsonian syndromes are idiopathic PD, secondary PD (caused by
etiologies such as Wilson’s disease or other extrinsic agents such as
carbon
monoxide
poisoning
and
neuroleptic
drugs),
and
neurodegenerative syndromes (atypical Parkinson’s or AP) such as
multisystem atrophy (MSA) and progressive supranuclear palsy
(PSP). In many cases, clinically differentiating idiopathic PD from AP
may be especially difficult when patients do not respond to L-dopa
therapy. In addition, it may be helpful to have a noninvasive test to
help better differentiate PD and parkinsonian syndromes from
essential tremor.
PET has been a research tool in movement disorders for decades,
using the classic agent F-18 6-fluorodopa (F-18 dopa). F-18 dopa enters
the dopamine metabolism pathway early as an analog of L-dopa.
Imaging assesses uptake in the corpus striatum, made up by the
posterior lentiform nucleus (putamen and globus pallidus) and
anterior caudate nucleus. It is estimated that there is a 2% to 10%
decrease in striatal activity per year in PD. However, the use of F-18
dopa is complex, with challenges including its tendency to
underestimate loss.
FIG. 14.24  Negative F-18 florbetapir positron emission tomography
(PET) images in a control patient show the expected nonspecific white-
matter binding but no significant cortical accumulation in gray matter.
Box 14.8 Amyloid PET Imaging Findings
Interpretation
No cortical uptake
Equates with no to sparse Aβ
Interpreted as negative scan
Cortical gray-matter uptake in at least two brain regions
Correlates with moderate to severe Aβ plaques
Interpreted as positive scan
Amount of activity: AD > MCI > normal subjects
Normal patients: 22% to 30% show positive scans
Aβ burden increases with aging.
AD patients: Higher amounts of amyloid and typically higher
uptake rates than MCI
MCI patients: Greater uptake volume and higher rates than
cognitively normal patients
Positive scans are associated with poorer memory than
MCI patients with lower amounts, but levels do not
directly correlate with cognitive test results.
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PET,
positron emission tomography.
Newer PET and SPECT agents have been developed to image
different components of the dopamine neurotransmitter system (Fig.
14.26). These radiopharmaceuticals are grouped based on the location
or mechanism of dopamine metabolism they image and measure
dopamine neuron integrity and loss. Other agents target the vesicular
monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT2), presynaptic membrane
dopamine transporter (DAT), and postsynaptic dopamine receptors
(D2 and D1). Tropane agents derived from cocaine have been
developed to image DAT activity. These include F-18/C-11 β-CIT and
SPECT agents such as I-123 FP-CIT (I-123 ioflupane, I-123 DaTscan).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for I-123
ioflupane was initially complicated by the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Agency (DEA) requirement that it be treated as a Schedule II
controlled substance. I-123 ioflupane was initially approved in the
United States for the differentiation of essential tremor from
parkinsonian syndromes.
After injection, uptake in the brain is 7% at 10 minutes but decreases
slightly to 3% after 5 hours. Activity accumulates in the striata,
remaining fairly stable for 3 to 6 hours. The main route of excretion is
through the urine, with 60% of the injected dose excreted by 48 hours.
Fecal excretion accounts for roughly 14% of the dose. Dosimetry of I-
123 ioflupane is listed in Appendix[AU7] 1.
A protocol for I-123 ioflupane is presented in Box 14.10. Patient
medications should be reviewed for any drug that might interfere
with the examination (Box 14.11). Patient preparation consists of
blocking thyroid uptake with potassium iodide (400 mg) or Lugol
solution (equivalent 100 mg iodide) at least 1 hour before injection.
The patient should be well hydrated and void frequently in the first 48
hours after the examination. After radiotracer injection, a 3- to 6-hour
delay is needed before SPECT imaging.
FIG. 14.25  Positive amyloid positron emission tomography (PET)
scan in Alzheimer’s dementia. Marked cortical gray-matter activity is
seen diffusely in addition to nonspecific white-matter binding on axial F-
18 florbetapir images.
Box 14.9 Appropriate Uses of Amyloid PET Imaging
Patient Selection
• Cognitive complaint: Impairment objectively confirmed
• After comprehensive evaluation, AD a possible but uncertain
diagnosis
• Knowledge of amyloid status will affect management.
Most Useful Indications
• Persistent or progressive unexplained MCI
• Possible AD but atypical or mixed course
• Early onset but progressive dementia
Possible Useful
• Identification of patients who would benefit from experimental
therapy
Inappropriate Situations for Use (No Likely
Benefit)
• Cases where AD is highly certain: Typical age of onset and
meet core criteria
• Asymptomatic patients
• Screening based on family history or presence of apolipoprotein
E4 allele
• Evaluation of cases with conditions not characterized by
amyloid accumulation (e.g., FTLD)
• Nonmedical use: Insurance carriers, employment screening
Impact of Amyloid Imaging
• Change in diagnosis: 23% to 30%
• Change in patient management: 60%
• Change in medication therapy: 40%
• Increased clinical confidence in diagnosis: 60%
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; FTLD, frontotemporal lobar dementia;
MCI,
mild
cognitive
impairment;
PET,
positron
emission
tomography.
Based on Amyloid Imaging Task Force of the Alzheimer’s
Association and the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging Appropriate Use Criteria 2013 (see additional
recommended readings at end of chapter).[AU4]
As
the
dopaminergic
striatal
neurons
degenerate,
effects
downstream in the globus pallidus occur.
I-123 ioflupane normally shows significant uptake in the basal
ganglia with very low background in the surrounding brain (Fig.
14.27, A). Generally, it is not possible to separate the components of
the lentiform nucleus into the putamen and globus pallidus by PET or
SPECT. Over the course of the disease, decreased uptake occurs in the
posterior striatum initially that then moves anteriorly—posterior
putamen first, then anterior putamen, and then finally the caudate
nucleus (see Fig. 14.27, B). The abnormality is often asymmetric,
especially in patients with early disease. Although it is not possible to
use the I-123 ioflupane findings to differentiate PD from atypical
parkinsonian
syndromes
(progressive
supranuclear
palsy,
multisystem atrophy, corticobasal degeneration), because the patterns
of decreased uptake in the substantia nigra overlap significantly,
atypical parkinsonian cases tend to involve the caudate earlier and
may be more symmetric. In PD, abnormalities can be greater on the
side contralateral to the side of the most severe symptoms (Fig. 14.28).
Abnormal decreased radiotracer binding can often detect preclinical
disease.
Interobserver variability is good for positive and negative
examinations. Although only 78% of patients with PD had a positive
scan, a negative scan (NPV) effectively excludes the diagnosis of PD,
with 97% of patients with a non-PD, such as essential tremor, showing
a normal examination. In addition, following I-123 ioflupane imaging,
clinicians report changing diagnosis in up to 30% of patients and
significantly altering clinical management in 50% to 60% of cases. I-
123 ioflupane can also help differentiate DLB from AD, with
decreased uptake in DLB.
FIG. 14.26  Striatal dopamine production and metabolism. The sites of
positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) agent uptake are shown. AAAD,
Aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; DAT, dopamine reuptake
transporter; VMAT 2 , vesicular monoamine transporter type 2.
Box 14.10 I-123 Ioflupane (I-123 DaTscan) SPECT
Imaging Protocol
Patient Preparation
Stop interfering medications.
Thyroid blocking: Potassium iodide Lugol solution
(equivalent to 100 mg iodide) or potassium perchlorate 400
mg, at least 1 hour before injection
Radiopharmaceutical
I-123 ioflupane 3 to 5 mCi (111-185 MBq) slow intravenous
(IV[ED1]) infusion
Delay to scan: 3 to 6 hours
Instrumentation
Multiple-head gamma camera; attenuation correction
recommended (e.g., CT in SPECT/CT)
Collimators: Low energy, high resolution
Energy window: Peak 159 keV ± 10%
Matrix and zoom to a pixel size of 3.5 to 4.5 mm and 1 pixel
thick
Positioning
Supine with head in center of the field of view in a head
holder extending beyond bed to allow tight camera head orbit
(11-15 cm)
Acquisition
Step-and-shoot: 3-degree steps, 30 to 40 seconds/step, 180
degrees/head (360-degree rotation); continuous acquisition
also acceptable
Minimum 1.5 million counts for optimal image
Processing
Iterative or filtered back-projection reconstruction,
Butterworth or other low-pass filter; motion-correction
software can be used as needed; alignment of the anterior
commissure–posterior commissure (AC/PC) line parallel to
the transverse slice axis
Quantification software can be implemented or the striatal
binding ratio can be calculated after placing a region of
interest (ROI) around each basal ganglia and a background
ROI in occipital cortex or other area of low DAT
concentration.
Striatal binding ratio = (mean striatal counts – mean
background counts)/(mean background counts)
CT, Computed tomography; DAT, dopamine transporter; SPECT,
single-photon emission computed tomography.
Intractable or medically refractory partial complex seizures may
require surgery for therapy. Precise seizure localization often requires
a
combination
of
scalp
electroencephalogram
(EEG),
MRI,
magnetoencephalography (MEG), and nuclear medicine imaging for
evaluation. These noninvasive studies are important in directing the
invasive intracranial EEG grid placement in the operating room and
determining therapeutic options. Although MRI often reveals
abnormalities at the site of seizure foci, such as mesial temporal
hippocampal sclerosis, it is rare for structural imaging to fully
visualize the actual extent of the abnormally activated neurons by
structural imaging. In addition, although EEG remains critical in
seizure localization, it is often inconclusive, localizing the ictal focus in
only 50% of patients and incorrectly localizing the abnormal area 5%
to 10% of the time.
Box 14.11 Medications Potentially Interfering With
Iodine-123 Ioflupane
Cocaine
Amphetamines
d-amphetamine
methamphetamine
methylphenidate
CNS stimulants
Phentermine
Ephedrine
Methylphenidate
Modafinil
Antidepressants
Amoxapine
Mazindol
Bupropion
Radafaxine
Sertraline
Adrenergic agonists
Phenylephrine
Norepinephrine
Phenylpropanolamine
Anticholinergic: Benztropine
Opioids
Fentanyl
Anxiolytic
Buspirone
Anesthetics
Ketamine
PCP
Isoflurane
Anti-parkinsonian drugs: no significant interference
Dopamine agonists (Levodopa), MAO B inhibitors,
amantadine, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor blockers
Effects uncertain:
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors: paroxetine, citalopram
CNS, Central nervous system; MAO, monoamine oxidase.
PET and SPECT may play important roles in seizure evaluation. In
the ictal state, activated foci show increased activity, representing
increased rCBF and glucose metabolism. Interictal images, however,
show normal or decreased activity. In the immediate postictal state,
activity is changing and may show areas of increased and decreased
activity. Therefore, it is essential to know the clinical status of the
patient at the time of injection. This is best accomplished with
continuous EEG monitoring prior to injection. In addition, because
patients may have more than one type of seizure, the EEG and clinical
presentation can help determine whether the seizure of interest was
actually occurring during the ictal state.
Although ictal studies are most sensitive, they are technically highly
demanding (Fig. 14.29). Patients are admitted and continuously
monitored off medication. Once the seizure is identified, trained
personnel must inject the radiotracer within seconds of seizure onset.
Because the radiotracer is essentially trapped once taken up into the
brain, imaging can be delayed for a few hours until the seizure is
controlled. Ictal PET would not be practical given the shorter half-life
of F-18 FDG. Interictal studies are far less sensitive than ictal exams,
although interictal PET is superior to interictal SPECT. Clinical
knowledge of the most recent seizure is needed to be sure that a study
is truly ictal or interictal. Ictal SPECT has a sensitivity of roughly 90%
in temporal lobe seizures, and the abnormal areas are generally more
extensive than any structural abnormality on MRI. However, the
sensitivity for extratemporal seizures is lower, on the order of 50% to
75%. Interictal FDG PET identifies a hypometabolic ictal focus in
roughly 80% of patients, although this is higher if a discrete MR
abnormality is seen. Interictal SPECT may identify the focus in
approximately 70% of cases involving the temporal lobes. In some
cases, extensive or multifocal abnormalities are seen without an
excisable lesion (Fig. 14.30).
FIG. 14.27  (A) Normal distribution of the dopamine transporter agent
I-123 ioflupane showing high striatal uptake relative to cortex. (B)
Abnormal single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in a
patient with Parkinson’s disease shows absent posterior uptake
bilaterally and asymmetrical decreased activity beginning in the right
caudate. Eventually, caudate activity will also vanish in severe disease.
FIG. 14.28  I-123 ioflupane single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) images initially (A) show subtle abnormal
decreased activity in the posterior right basal ganglia. (B) A repeat
examination confirms the case was abnormal, with disease progression
on the right, now with a mild decrease anteriorly in the caudate, and
subtle decreased activity in the left putamen.
FIG. 14.29  Seizure imaging. (A) Ictal technetium-99m (Tc-99m)
hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) axial (top) and coronal (bottom)
images reveal increased perfusion (arrows) to the right temporal region
from an active seizure. (B) The abnormal temporal region is a subtle
area of hypometabolism (arrows) on the interictal fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) positron emission tomography (PET). (C) Ictal SPECT in a
second patient demonstrates hyperperfusion (arrow) in the right
parasagittal region (left) corresponding to an area of hypometabolism
(arrow) on interictal PET (right) from a seizure focus.
FIG. 14.30  Interictal technetium-99m (Tc-99m)
hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) reveals extensive hypoperfusion in a
congenitally malformed cortex. Ictal images show increased activity
throughout much of the frontal and parietal lobes, without a resectable
focus, and increased uptake in the right cerebellum from diaschisis.
Although MRI and CT are the preeminent modalities for diagnosing
stroke, PET and SPECT can be useful in several situations. They might
help evaluate stroke risk in certain patients, indicate those patients
most likely to benefit from intervention, and even predict stroke
recovery. Relationships such as distant neuronal activity loss
(diaschisis), neuron recruitment, and recovery through neuronal
plasticity can be studied. In acute stroke, Tc-99m HMPAO SPECT has
been used to identify which patients will most likely benefit from
thrombolytic therapy, although this can be done with newer MRI
techniques.
Functional imaging can also assess the expected complications that
might arise if arterial blood supply is compromised by disease or
surgically altered. Finally, planar perfusion exams are frequently used
to aid in the diagnosis of brain death.
After arterial blood flow enters the brain, the vessels join at the
circle of Willis in the base of the brain, allowing blood from one side
to provide flow to areas that are otherwise being underserved. In
theory, this anatomy should protect patients who require internal
carotid artery sacrifice (such as in the treatment of glomus tumor or
intracranial
aneurysm)
or
who
suffer
occlusion
following
endarterectomy or complication from bypass. However, a small but
significant proportion of these patients will suffer a stroke despite an
intact circle of Willis and adequate cross-filling on arteriogram.
Additional testing to assess risk can include transcranial doppler and
Wada neurological testing. During the Wada test, the patient’s speech
and memory function are examined after half the brain is anesthetized
by intracarotid sodium amobarbital infusion and temporary occlusion
by a balloon catheter. The risks of complications from permanent
carotid occlusion can be further reduced through the addition of a Tc-
99m HMPAO or Tc-99m ECD SPECT scan to the preoperative
workup, with previous reports of a decrease of up to 20% in morbidity
and mortality.
FIG. 14.31  Left, hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) single-
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) performed after a
carotid balloon occlusion injection shows severe left middle cerebral
artery territory hypoperfusion, identifying a high risk for stroke. The
patient underwent permanent left carotid occlusion using gradual
occlusion with a Selverstone clamp rather than bypass. Right, This
gradual occlusion was not sufficient to protect the patient, and the
patient had a stroke in the same distribution as the SPECT on follow-up
computed tomography (CT) performed after the procedure.
The
radiopharmaceutical
is
injected
intravenously
in
the
angiography suite at the time of temporary internal carotid artery
balloon occlusion. The balloon is then deflated after 1 minute. Imaging
is done later, after the catheter has been removed and the patient has
been stabilized. Patients at risk for stroke are easily identified by a
significant drop in perfusion to the occluded side compared to
baseline on SPECT images. Carotid bypass is generally warranted in
these patients because the remaining vessels cannot meet the needs of
the side that will be occluded (Fig. 14.31).
The acetazolamide SPECT study is a pharmacological vascular
stress test for the brain that can help evaluate the risk for stroke in
patients
with
prior
stroke,
transient
ischemic
attack
(TIA),
atherosclerotic
stenosis,
vascular
malformations,
or
vascular
compromise such as in moyamoya. The vascular reserve of these
patients can be assessed by Tc-99m HMPAO or Tc-99m ECD SPECT
imaging after intravenous administration of 1 gram of the carbonic
anhydrase inhibitor and antihypertensive agent acetazolamide
(Diamox). The drug causes vasodilation through an increase in carbon
dioxide, which in turn leads to an increase in rCBF. Although global
blood flow is increased, abnormal vessels cannot dilate, and blood is
shunted away. This will accentuate any abnormality and better
demonstrate territories at risk for infarction as areas of relatively
decreased activity on SPECT images (Fig. 14.32). It is important to
compare the resting state to the stress state.
Accuracy and speed in making the diagnosis of brain death become
critical when organ donation is considered and life support systems
must be used. Although the diagnosis of brain death is by definition a
clinical one, clinical diagnosis may be difficult. The specific criteria
necessary to make the diagnosis of brain death are as follows:
FIG. 14.32  Semiquantitative analysis of ischemia with acetazolamide
(Diamox) single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). (A)
Baseline technetium-99m (Tc-99m) hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime
(HMPAO) SPECT before acetazolamide (left) shows mild left parietal
hypoperfusion. After acetazolamide (right), the brain shows increased
activity in response to vasodilation, with the exception of the left
parietal defect, and the decreased activity from ischemia is even more
apparent. (B) Regional cerebral blood flow curves generated from
region of interest (ROI) boxes placed over summed SPECT images
(positioned as on a clock, numbered from 1 o’clock to 12 o’clock). After
acetazolamide administration, counts are increased relative to rest
perfusion with the exception from 2 o’clock to 4 o’clock where the
postdiamox curve dips, signifying an area at high risk for infarction
because it is unable to respond to the vasodilation.
1. The patient must be in deep coma with a total absence of
brainstem reflexes or spontaneous respiration.
2. Potentially reversible causes such as drug intoxication,
metabolic derangement, or hypothermia must be excluded.
3. The cause of the brain dysfunction must be diagnosed (e.g.,
trauma, stroke).
4. The clinical findings of brain death must be present for a
defined period of observation (6-24 hours).
Although confirmatory ancillary tests are used by clinicians to
increase certainty, they cannot themselves establish the diagnosis of
brain death. An isoelectric EEG alone does not establish brain death,
and at least one repeat study is required. In the patient with
intoxication from barbiturates or other depressive drugs or with
hypothermia, the EEG may be flat, even though cerebral perfusion is
still present and recovery is possible.
FIG. 14.33  Brain death. This technetium-99m (Tc-99m)
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) brain blood-flow study
shows radiotracer transiting the internal carotids; however, there is no
intracerebral blood flow. Only external carotid blood flow to the scalp is
seen.
In brain death, edema, softening, necrosis, and autolysis of brain
tissue lead to increased intracranial pressure. As pressure rises, it
eventually prevents intracranial perfusion. On cerebral arteriography,
this is seen with flow that does not extend beyond the internal carotid
arteries in the neck into the brain above. However, catheter
angiography is invasive, resource intensive, and unnecessary. The
radionuclide brain death study is a rapid and simple alternative that
can be performed at the bedside. It is usually indicated when the EEG
and clinical criteria are equivocal or if urgent decisions need to be
made. Scintigraphy is not affected by drug intoxication or
hypothermia, and an abnormal radionuclide angiogram showing no
cerebral perfusion is more specific for brain death than an isoelectric
EEG.
Technetium-labeled radiopharmaceuticals are used to assess
dynamic flow. In the past, Tc-99m DTPA was often used because it
clears rapidly from the blood, allowing a repeat study if necessary.
However, optimal technique is mandatory, and interpretation may be
extremely difficult. Blood flow through the external carotid system
that drains via intracranial veins can be confused with internal artery
flow to the cortex because of the lack of anatomic landmarks (Fig.
14.33).
Tc-99m HMPAO and Tc-99m ECD studies are easier to interpret
and are now preferred because they rely only on delayed images,
which are not as dependent on adequate bolus technique (Fig. 14.34).
Delivery of these agents requires blood flow to be present, and
because uptake only occurs in living brain cells, delayed images
showing the fixed presence or absence of brain uptake require flow to
the brain. If no CBF is present, no cerebral uptake will occur.
Tc-99m
DTPA
requires
diagnostic-quality
imaging
of
the
arteriographic phase following injection, done as dynamic planar
images after injection. Tc-99m HMPAO, on the other hand, is injected
intravenously, and although flow images can be obtained, they are
unnecessary. Delayed planar images can be obtained at the bedside,
and SPECT is unnecessary. Images of the injection site can be
performed to ensure the dose was adequate and not infiltrated. A
radionuclide protocol used in brain death is outlined in Box 14.12.
With brain death, flow to both common carotid arteries is seen
extending up only to the level of the base of the skull. No visualization
of the brain is seen with Tc-99m HMPAO, making it the easiest test to
interpret.
A secondary finding of the “hot-nose” sign is sometimes seen. This
has been reported as being a result of the diversion of intracranial
blood flow into external carotid circulation because of the increased
pressure, resulting in relatively increased flow to the face and nose.
However, lateral views have shown the activity lies far posteriorly,
along the brainstem and posterior fossa region.
