Common Clinical Indications
Diabetic Foot
The insensitivity of the neuropathic foot to pain often results in
asymptomatic trauma, fractures, ulcers, infection, and delay in
diagnosis. Overlying soft tissue infection can make the diagnosis
challenging for clinicians and imagers. Radiographs and MRI may not
be specific.
Interpretation of the three-phase bone scan can be complicated by
the fact that the flow portion of the study may be positive due to
overlying soft tissue infection, and delayed images may be positive
because of fractures, Charcot joints, or degenerative disease. Although
the sensitivity for the diagnosis of osteomyelitis for the bone scan is
high, the specificity is poor (see Table 15.7).
Both In-111-oxine and Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes can be used to
diagnose osteomyelitis of the foot. The superior resolution of Tc-99m-
labeled leukocytes can be an advantage because of better bone and
soft tissue discrimination. However, differentiation of bone uptake
from overlying soft tissue infection on planar imaging can be
problematic using either agent. SPECT/CT can be valuable in
separating soft tissue from bone infection (see Figs. 15.21 and 15.22).
In adults, red marrow is not normally present in the distal
extremities; however, neuropathic Charcot joints form marrow and
accumulate leukocytes. Fractures also stimulate marrow formation.
Bone marrow imaging with Tc-99m SC in conjunction with In-111
leukocytes can improve evaluation of the diabetic mid- and hindfoot.
A mismatch strongly suggests infection (see Fig. 15.23).
FIG. 15.18  Bone scan and In-111 leukocyte scan in diabetic patient
with suspected osteomyelitis of the first metatarsal. (A) Bone scan.
Three-hour delayed bone scan image of the feet shows marked
increase in uptake in the region of the distal first metatarsal. Flow and
blood pool (not shown) were positive. There is decreased uptake on
bone scan in many digits due to severe peripheral vascular disease.
(B) In-111 leukocyte scan shows intense uptake in the region of the
same distal metatarsal, consistent with osteomyelitis, although there is
little anatomical information to be sure this is bone and not soft tissue
infection. No uptake is noted in other areas of the foot, with increased
uptake on the bone scan, suggesting degenerative changes.
Vertebral Osteomyelitis (Spondylodiscitis)
The most common route of acquisition for vertebral infection is
hematogenous spread via the arterial or venous system, although
postoperative
infection
secondary
to
direct
implantation
of
microorganisms into the intervertebral disk also occurs. Tuberculous
infection often affects the thoracic spine and often more than two
vertebral bodies. Hematogenous pyogenic spondylodiscitis usually
involves the lumbar spine. Staphylococcus aureus (60%) is the most
common pyogenic infection, followed by Enterobacter (30%).
Depending on the patient age, microorganisms lodge at different
sites. Below age 4, end arteries perforate the vertebral body end plates
and enter the disk space to allow bacteria to cause discitis (see Fig.
15.15). In adults, the most common infection site is the subchondral
(just below cartilage) region of the vertebral body, which has the
richest network of nutrient arterioles, similar to the vascular tree in
the childhood metaphysis. The infection is primarily spondylitis, with
secondary spread into the disk space. The infection spreads from the
anterior subchondral focus through the vertebral end plate into the
intervertebral disk. Later, it destroys the neighboring end plate,
involves the opposite vertebral body, and may extend to adjacent soft
tissue, resulting in epidural or paravertebral abscess.
FIG. 15.19  Suspected metatarsal osteomyelitis. Positive three-phase
bone scan but negative In-111-labeled leukocyte study. (A) Flow study
(top) shows increased flow in the region of the distal left midfoot. Blood-
pool images were positive (not shown). (B, bottom left) Three-hour
delayed anterior bone scan image shows increased uptake in the third
metatarsal. (Bottom right) In-111 leukocyte study shows no focal
uptake and thus is negative for osteomyelitis. Radiograph showed a
healing metatarsal fracture.
FIG. 15.20  Osteomyelitis of distal phalanx: Bone scan and Tc-99m
HMPAO–labeled leukocytes. Diabetic with purulent drainage of the
distal second digit of the right foot. (A) Two-hour delayed bone scan
(plantar view) shows increased uptake on the distal second digit of the
right. The first two phases were also positive in that area. (B) Tc-99m-
HMPAO leukocyte study is positive, consistent with osteomyelitis.
Other uptake on the bone scan was negative on the leukocyte study
and assumed to be degenerative.
Tc-99m methyl diphosphonate (MDP) bone scans are often used for
screening for suspected infection. The usual scintigraphic pattern of
discitis is increased arterial blood flow, increased blood pool, and
delayed uptake at the ends of adjoining vertebral bodies. With
localized osteomyelitis, the bone scan will be three-phase positive
with focal bone uptake. Blood flow and pool images may be difficult
to evaluate in the thoracic spine because of normal cardiac,
pulmonary, and vascular structures. The bone scan has a high
sensitivity and specificity in bones not affected by underlying
conditions, fractures, orthopedic hardware, and similar factors.
In-111 oxine and Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes have a high false-
negative rate for vertebral osteomyelitis (40–50%) with In-111-oxine or
Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes. Although a positive study is diagnostic,
normal or decreased uptake at the site of suspected infection is
nondiagnostic (Fig. 15.25). This finding may be due to poor blood flow
in bone marrow filled with pus, thrombosis, and or infarction.
Infection-induced death of reticuloendothelial cells that normally take
up labeled leukocytes may also be a factor. Photopenia is also seen in
the spine with tumor, infarction, compression fracture, and Paget
disease.
Ga-67 citrate is superior to leukocyte scintigraphy for diagnosing
vertebral osteomyelitis (see Fig. 15.24). For the best accuracy, Ga-67
should be used in conjunction with a bone scan, using the criteria
described (i.e., greater uptake on Ga-67 vs. bone scan). An associated
disk infection or paraspinal abscess can be detected with Ga-67.
SPECT and SPECT/CT can improve localization and differentiate soft
tissue from bone infection.
F-18 FDG is increasingly used as an alternative to Ga-67 for
suspected vertebral osteomyelitis. The small molecule rapidly enters
poorly perfused areas. Normal bone marrow uptake is low.
Investigations have found it to be superior to Tc-99m MDP and Ga-67
scanning, and FDG compares favorably with MRI. A negative FDG
study result is highly predictive. Orthopedic hardware and
postoperative changes can complicate interpretation. After surgery or
fracture, FDG uptake usually normalizes by 3 to 4 months. Focal mild
to moderate increased uptake may be seen in degenerative spine
disease. Foreign-body reaction around uninfected spinal implants
often results in increased uptake. F-18 FDG PET/CT is superior to FDG
PET alone. FDG is also valuable for monitoring treatment response
(Fig. 15.26).
Prosthetic Joint Infection
The postoperative infection rate after primary hip or knee replacement
is low (1–2%), as well as after revision surgery (3–5%). However,
when infection occurs, morbidity can be severe. Signs and symptoms
are often indolent; thus, diagnosis may be delayed. Joint aspiration
with culture has poor sensitivity. Treatment of prosthetic joint
infection requires excisional arthroplasty, antibiotics, and ultimately
revision arthroplasty, whereas loosening is managed with only a
single-stage
exchange
arthroplasty.
Differentiating
prosthesis
loosening from infection can be challenging clinically and difficult for
imaging. Plain radiographs lack specificity. Hardware-induced
artifacts limit cross-sectional imaging.
FIG. 15.21  Heel pain and single-photon emission computed
tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT). (A, top) Bone
scan immediate postflow blood-pool and delayed (plantar and lateral)
images show abnormal increased uptake in the region of the right heel.
(B) In-111 leukocyte SPECT/CT shows that the intense uptake is in soft
tissue inferior to the calcaneus, consistent with soft tissue infection and
not osteomyelitis.
FIG. 15.22  Single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography (SPECT/CT) In-111 oxine–labeled leukocyte
imaging of foot. Diabetic suspected of having osteomyelitis secondary
to a draining infected large left toe ulcer. The maximum-intensity
projection (MIP) view (bottom right) and the SPECT-only slice (top
right) show diffuse uptake in the region of the distal large toe. Soft
tissue cannot be differentiated from bone uptake. The fused SPECT/CT
image (bottom left) shows that the uptake is in both soft tissue and
bone, consistent with the known overlying soft tissue infection but also
adjacent osteomyelitis.
Bone scan findings of increased blood flow would favor infection.
Delayed uptake at the greater and lesser trochanter and prosthesis tip
is suggestive of loosening, whereas diffuse uptake surrounding the
femoral component is more suggestive of infection. However, the
specificity of these findings is not high. Postoperative uptake usually
resolves by 1 to 2 years after insertion of a cemented total hip
prosthesis and up to 5 years after knee prosthesis implantation. A
cementless or porous coated prosthesis depends on bony ingrowth for
stabilization. Ongoing new bone formation is part of the fixation
process, causing periprosthetic uptake in a variable pattern for a
prolonged period, making interpretation difficult. Knee prostheses are
also problematic for bone scintigraphy. More than half of all femoral
components
and
three-fourths
of
tibial
components
show
periprosthetic uptake more than 12 months after placement. For
patients with a cementless hip or total knee replacement, bone
scintigraphy is most diagnostic if the scan is normal and if serial
studies are available for comparison. Even in conjunction with bone
scintigraphy, Ga-67 is only slightly more accurate for the diagnosis of
an infected joint prosthesis than the bone scan alone.
Superior
diagnostic
accuracy
results
from
the
combined
interpretation of leukocyte and bone marrow scintigraphy. This is because
a joint prosthesis results in marrow displacement in an unpredictable
manner.
Discordance
of
uptake
on
leukocyte
and
marrow
scintigraphy is diagnostic of infection (Fig. 15.27). The addition of the
Tc-99m SC marrow study to WBC scintigraphy avoids the potential of
a false-positive study result (e.g., interpretation of focal uptake as
infection when it is merely displaced marrow). The accuracy is
reported to be greater than 90%. SPECT/CT can help localize the WBC
accumulation and differentiate soft tissue from bone infection. The CT
component can detect joint distension, fluid-filled bursa, and
intramuscular fluid collections, which suggest infection.
The reported accuracy of F-18 FDG for making the diagnosis of
prosthetic joint infection has varied considerably. Some investigations
have found high accuracy; others, not so good. Furthermore, imaging
criteria have varied. One study directly compared leukocyte/marrow
imaging and FDG and found WBC/marrow imaging more accurate
than FDG (95% vs. 71%).
FIG. 15.23  Osteomyelitis—mismatch of In-111 leukocytes and bone
marrow Tc-99m sulfur colloid (SC) scan. (A) The right foot lateral
radiograph shows extensive vascular calcifications and midfoot
neuropathic joint. Superimposed osteomyelitis could not be excluded.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; not shown) was also indeterminate.
(B) The In-111 leukocyte scan (left) shows foci of increased uptake in
the right midfoot (arrow) and the distal left tibia and calcaneus
(arrowheads). On the Tc-99m SC bone marrow image (right), no
corresponding activity is seen in the right midfoot (arrow), consistent
with osteomyelitis. The distribution of activity in the left distal tibia and
calcaneus (arrowheads) is virtually identical to that with In-111
leukocytes, confirming that these foci reflect marrow, not infection.
Right midfoot osteomyelitis was confirmed after a below-knee
amputation.
Courtesy of Christopher Palestro, MD.
Intraabdominal Infection
Postoperative suspected intraabdominal infection is often initially
evaluated with CT, which then directs further investigation,
intervention, and therapy. However, in patients with nonlocalizing
symptoms and negative conventional imaging, scintigraphy can be
quite helpful.
In-111 oxine–labeled leukocytes are the radiopharmaceutical of choice
(Figs. 15.28 and 15.29). Other than the liver and spleen uptake, there is
no other normal organ uptake in the abdomen, nor is there clearance
from the biliary, intestinal, or urinary tracts; thus, intraabdominal
uptake is usually due to infection. The sensitivity is reported to be >
90%. Early imaging at 4 hours has a lower sensitivity for the detection
of infection compared with routine 24 hours; however, in urgent
situations, imaging at this time period may allow for quicker
diagnosis and intervention (e.g., suspected abscess, acute appendicitis,
diverticulitis). However, abnormal leukocyte uptake may be seen in a
variety of noninfectious but inflammatory diseases, such as
pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis, polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid
vasculitis, ischemic colitis, pseudomembranous colitis, and bowel
infarction. Delayed imaging can sometimes help confirm that early
detected abnormal activity remains in a fixed pattern. A shifting
pattern of activity over time implies intraluminal transit of labeled
leukocytes, as seen with inflammatory or ischemic bowel disease,
fistula, abscess in communication with bowel, or swallowed
leukocytes from sinus or tracheobronchial infection (see Box 15.4).
FIG. 15.24  Fever after laminectomy raised the question of
osteomyelitis of the T-11 thoracic spine. (A) Tc-99m methyl
diphosphonate (MDP) bone scan with arrow pointing to T-11. (B) Ga-
67. Ga-67 uptake is less than that seen on the bone scan. The study
was interpreted as negative for osteomyelitis.
Box 15.8 Gallium-67: Clinical Indications
Severe leukopenia (<3000/m3 leukocytes)
Immunosuppressed patients
Fever of unknown origin
Malignant external otitis
Vertebral osteomyelitis
Pulmonary drug reactions (amiodarone, bleomycin)
Low-grade chronic infections
Interstitial and granulomatous pulmonary diseases
Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled leukocytes are usually preferred in children
because of the high splenic radiation dose from In-111 leukocytes (see
the Appendix). Early imaging is required because hepatobiliary and
renal clearance may be seen by 2 to 4 hours and complicate
interpretation.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Both ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease (granulomatous or regional
enteritis) are characterized by intestinal inflammation. Ulcerative
colitis is typically a pattern of continuous colonic and rectal
involvement, with patients at increased risk for colon cancer. Crohn
disease, on the other hand, shows skip lesions and can involve any
part of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, from the mouth to the anus,
classically seen in the terminal ileum, often sparing the rectum.
Leukocyte scintigraphy can confirm the diagnosis, determine active
disease distribution, and detect relapse (Figs. 15.30–15.32). It can aid in
the evaluation of regions hard to see with endoscopy and in
monitoring therapeutic effectiveness.
FIG. 15.25  Vertebral osteomyelitis. False-negative In-111 leukocyte
scan (A) but positive Ga-67 scan (B) for spinal osteomyelitis. History of
laminectomy and fusion, treated successfully for infection; now the
patient has recurrent pain. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was not
diagnostic. Decreased In-111 uptake is seen in the lower lumbar spine.
The Ga-67 scan shows intense uptake in the same region. The final
diagnosis was osteomyelitis and spondylodiscitis in L4/L5.
Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled leukocytes are reported to be superior to
In-111-labeled leukocytes for the diagnosis of inflammatory bowel
disease, probably because of the superior Tc-99m image resolution,
enabling better disease localization. Leukocyte scintigraphy can
differentiate reactivation of inflammatory bowel disease from abscess
formation, a serious complication requiring surgical rather than
medical therapy. Radiolabeled leukocyte uptake in an abscess is focal,
whereas uptake in inflamed bowel follows the contour of the
intestinal wall. Tc-99m-HMPAO imaging should be performed by 2 to
4 hours. If In-111-labeled leukocyte scintigraphy is used, images
should be acquired by 4 hours rather than 24 hours because of
shedding of the inflamed leukocytes into the bowel lumen from the
inflammatory sites with subsequent peristalsis, potentially resulting in
the incorrect assignment of disease to sites distal to the true
inflammatory site.
Fever of Unknown Origin
Fever of unknown origin (FUO) has been defined as a temperature of
≥ 38.3°C (101°F) occurring on at least two occasions, that remains
undiagnosed for at least 3 weeks, and that results in an extensive
workup during a hospital stay of at least 7 days. The source of the
fever may be infection, inflammatory disease, or malignancy.
Infections count for one-fifth of the cases in Western countries.
FIG. 15.26  Lumbar spine osteomyelitis and infected orthopedic
hardware: Utility of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT). (A) A 60-year-old
man had spinal hardware implanted 8 years prior after a motor vehicle
accident. Recent draining left flank wound, referred for suspected
infected orthopedic hardware. (B) FDG PET/CT study coronal images
(left to right: FDG, CT, fused FDG/CT) show left paraspinal
hypermetabolism (arrowhead) along the metal rod extends from T11 to
L3 (standardized uptake value [SUV] 9.3). This activity tracks to an
open hypermetabolic wound in the left flank (double arrow; SUV 7.3).
Focal hypermetabolism (SUV maximum 8.7) is seen in an upper
lumbar vertebra (arrow) consistent with osteomyelitis.
Courtesy of Christopher Palestro, MD.
FIG. 15.27  Infected hip prosthesis. (Left) Tc-99m bone scan shows
increased uptake in the region of the right hip prosthesis laterally,
consistent with known heterotopic calcification. (Middle) In-111
leukocyte study shows focal intense uptake just lateral to the femoral
head and more diffuse uptake within the joint space, suspicious for
infection. (Right) Tc-99m sulfur colloid (SC) marrow study shows a
normal bone marrow distribution with cold head of the femur from the
prosthesis. Discordance between the bone marrow and leukocyte study
is diagnostic of an infected prosthesis.
FIG. 15.28  Peritonitis. Elderly woman with fever, sepsis, and
abdominal pain. The In-111 leukocyte study shows diffuse uptake
throughout the abdomen, very suggestive of peritonitis, and multiple
foci of greater uptake, suggestive of abscesses. In addition, uptake in
the left shoulder suggests a septic joint.
FIG. 15.29  Liver abscess diagnosed with In-111 leukocytes.
Transverse (top) and coronal (bottom) cross-sectional single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) slices show focal uptake of
leukocytes in the right lobe of the liver. An abscess was subsequently
drained.
FIG. 15.30  Patient with history of ulcerative colitis and suspected
recurrence, referred for confirmation of active disease and localization.
In-111 leukocytes study acquired 4 hours after reinfusion shows uptake
in the descending and sigmoid colon.
FIG. 15.31  Crohn disease localized with In-111 leukocytes at 4 hours
after injection. Patient has several-year history of regional ileitis and 2
months of recurrent and worsening symptoms. Scintigraphy confirms
active inflammation of ileum.
FIG. 15.32  Patient with a history of Crohn disease who had prior
small bowel resections, now with suspected new obstruction. In-111
leukocyte study with single-photon emission computed tomography
with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) fused coronal image shows
intense uptake corresponding to a segment of thickened and collapsed
small bowel at site of prior small bowel anastomosis. Consistent with
active inflammation.
Ga-67 citrate has long been used to diagnose FUOs. In addition to
localizing
acute
infection,
it
can
detect
chronic,
indolent,
granulomatous infections and tumor sources of fever. Ga-67 may be
particularly advantageous for low-grade infections (e.g., fungal,
protozoal; see Box 15.8).
Radiolabeled leukocytes have also been used because of their high
sensitivity and specificity for infection, if that is the primary clinical
concern. F-18 FDG-PET/CT is increasingly being used to localize the
source of fever in patients with an FUO. Its advantages include the
lack of a need to radiolabel the patient’s leukocytes, the short duration
of the study, and its ability to detect infectious and noninfectious
source of infection. Like Ga-67, tumor-producing fever can also be
detected. Most studies are retrospective, with varying definitions of
FUO, selected patient populations, and lack of follow-up; however,
nearly all have concluded that it has important clinical utility and
value in 42% to 67% of patients by either identifying the etiology of
the FUO or by guiding further management.
Cardiovascular Disease
Infective endocarditis has significant morbidity and mortality. The
preliminary diagnosis is usually made by positive blood cultures and
echocardiography.
The
most
common
infecting
bacteria
are
staphylococci, streptococci, and enterococci; fungi are much less
common. Echocardiographic findings may be difficult to interpret in
patients with prosthetic valves and implantable cardiac electronic
devices. The added value and higher accuracy of both radiolabeled
leukocyte SPECT/CT and F-18 FDG PET/CT over echocardiography
have now been reported in a number of published investigations. Both
radionuclide imaging methods have proven accurate for the diagnosis
of prosthetic valve endocarditis (Fig. 15.33). They have also shown
value for detecting infection of cardiac implantable devices. It is
important to differentiate superficial wound infection from device
infection. They are treated differently. Both leukocyte and FDG
imaging are somewhat less sensitive for native valve infectious
endocarditis.
FIG. 15.33  Infected pulmonary artery conduit in a 17-year-old patient
with DiGeorge syndrome, truncus arteriosus, and a right ventricular-
pulmonary artery conduit. Recent chills and fever. Blood cultures were
positive for Staphylococcus aureus. (A) Coronal and transverse
computed tomography (CT) shows the pulmonary artery conduit. (B)
Fused single-photon emission computed tomography with computed
tomography (SPECT/CT) In-111 leukocyte images show uptake
consistent with an infected pulmonary artery conduit.
F-18 FDG has advantages over radiolabeled leukocyte SPECT/CT,
including its superior resolution, its short study duration, and the lack
of a need for cell labeling. Another advantage of FDG PET/CT is that
whole-body imaging is standard and useful for detecting unsuspected
septic emboli. Early published imaging studies had reported low
sensitivity attributed to high normal myocardial physiological uptake.
However, much-improved accuracy has been reported by avoiding
the immediate postoperative period and with patient preparation to
inhibit myocardial uptake, which includes a low-carbohydrate and
high-fat diet, fasting for 6 to 12 hours before the study, and, at some
institutions, the use of intravenous heparin before FDG infusion. The
rationale is that heparin induces lipolysis in vivo and induces up to a
5-fold increase in blood free fatty acid (FFA) levels.
With infection of aorto-femoral or femoral-popliteal arterial
prosthetic grafts, ultrasound, CT, and MRI may sometimes be unable to
confirm the diagnosis or distinguish infection from aseptic fluid
collections around the graft. In this situation, radiolabeled leukocytes
can confirm a surgical prosthetic graft infection (Figs. 15.34–15.36). In-
111 leukocytes have the advantage of having no blood-pool
distribution, a limitation of Tc-99m HMPAO. However, early and
serial imaging with Tc-99m HMPAO at 5 and 30 minutes and at 3
hours is reported to lessen this problem.
For vasculitis, FDG PET/CT can potentially make the initial
diagnosis, identify an area for biopsy, evaluate the extent of disease,
and determine the success or failure of therapy. A limitation is that
FDG PET is only able to visualize inflammation of large to medium-
sized vessels (e.g., giant-cell arteritis, Takayasu arteritis, polyarteritis
nodosa, and Kawasaki disease; Fig. 15.37). Smaller-vessel arteritis
imaging may result in false-negative results. Pattern recognition helps
to
differentiate
vasculitis
from
infectious
etiologies
and
atherosclerosis. Vasculitis has homogenous diffuse uptake in the
vessel wall, whereas infection shows focal intense uptake localized
outside
the
boundaries
of
the
vascular
lumen
and
walls.
Atherosclerosis has focal and moderate FDG uptake at the site of an
inflamed plaque, with calcification seen on CT. Steroids may lead to
false-negative results.
FIG. 15.34  Infected thoracic aortic-stented aneurysm in a 69-year-old
female. Computed tomography (CT) showed soft tissue thickening
around descending stented thoracic aortic aneurysm, suspicious for
infection. The In-111 leukocyte study confirms extensive infection
involving soft tissue thickening surrounding the stented aneurysm. (A)
Coronal CT. (B) Fused single-photon emission computed tomography
with computed tomography (SPECT/CT).
Pulmonary Infection and Inflammation
Ga-67 citrate accumulates in many types of acute and chronic
pulmonary infections and inflammatory diseases (see Box 15.8) and
has been used for years in the detection of sarcoidosis (Figs.
15.38–15.39), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, Pneumocystis jiroveci
(formerly known as P. carinii; Fig. 15.40; Box 15.9), and therapeutic
drug–induced pulmonary disease (Box 15.10). However, many of
these indications for Ga-67 are not often requested today because
other diagnostic methods have superseded them. For example, FDG
PET/CT is now often preferred over Ga-67 to confirm active
sarcoidosis
and
idiopathic
pulmonary
fibrosis.
Radiolabeled
leukocytes are not commonly used to detect pulmonary infection.
Low-grade diffuse leukocyte uptake is seen with a variety of
noninfectious noninflammatory causes, including acute respiratory
distress syndrome, atelectasis, and congestive heart failure, and thus
is not diagnostic of infection unless it is focal and intense.
Tuberculosis and fungal infections can be detected with In-111-labeled
leukocytes, but the sensitivity is poorer than for Ga-67 or F-18 FDG.
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is a chronic granulomatous multisystem disease of
unknown
etiology
characterized
by
the
accumulation
of
T
lymphocytes, mononuclear phagocytes, and noncaseating epithelioid
granulomas, occurring in almost any organ of the body, commonly
the lung, liver, and spleen. Systemic symptoms include weight loss,
fatigue, weakness, malaise, and fever. Pulmonary manifestations
include hilar and mediastinal adenopathy, endobronchial granuloma
formation,
interstitial
or
alveolar
pulmonary
infiltrates,
and
pulmonary fibrosis. Extrapulmonary manifestations are not rare and
can involve the skin, eyes, bones, muscle, central nervous system
(CNS), and heart.
The initial presentation is commonly pulmonary, with dyspnea and
dry cough, although 20% of patients may be asymptomatic, with only
an abnormal chest radiograph. The clinical course is variable.
Spontaneous resolution occurs in 30% of patients, 40% have a
smoldering or progressively worsening course, 20% develop
permanent lung function loss, and 10% die of respiratory failure. Four
categories of radiographic findings characterize sarcoidosis (Table
15.8). Although patients with radiographs showing type I findings
tend to have a reversible form of the disease, those with types II and
III usually have chronic, progressive disease.
Diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical, radiographic, and
histological findings. The chest radiograph, although characteristic, is
not diagnostic because bilateral hilar adenopathy may be seen with
other inflammatory and malignant diseases. Biopsy evidence of a
mononuclear-cell granulomatous inflammatory process is mandatory
for definitive diagnosis. Bronchoalveolar lavage, Ga-67, and F-18 FDG
scans have been used as indicators of disease activity. Although many
patients require no specific therapy, those with more severe disease
are treated with steroids that suppress the activated T cells at the
disease site and the clinical manifestations.
Ga-67 citrate scintigraphy is positive in most patients with active
sarcoidosis. The scan has been used to assess the magnitude of
alveolitis, guide lung biopsy, choose the pulmonary segments for
bronchoalveolar lavage, and distinguish active granuloma formation
and alveolitis from inactive disease and fibrotic changes. Increased
Ga-67 lung uptake is >90% sensitive for clinically active disease.
Uptake occurs before characteristic abnormalities are present on
radiographs; thus, it is more sensitive than a chest radiograph for
detecting early disease. Ga-67 scans are negative in inactive cases, and
these patients nearly always have a negative biopsy. Patients with a
diagnosis of sarcoidosis and an abnormal chest radiograph, but
inactive disease, have negative Ga-67 scans. Ga-67 is a sensitive
indicator of treatment response, superior to clinical symptoms, chest
radiograph, and pulmonary function tests.
FIG. 15.35  Infected thoracic aortic graft. Patient history of thoracic
aortic dissection and subsequent endovascular repair and graft. Now
with fever and bacteremia. In-111 white blood cell (WBC) single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) shows focal increased uptake in the midportion of the
aortic graft. Fused coronal (left), sagittal (middle), transverse (right).
FIG. 15.40  Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly P. carinii) infection and
whole-body Ga-67 scan. A 57-year-old HIV-positive man with bilateral
pulmonary pneumonitis. Diffuse bilateral Ga-67 uptake.
Box 15.9 Ga-67 Uptake in Interstitial and
Granulomatous Pulmonary Diseases
Tuberculosis
Histoplasmosis
Sarcoidosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Pneumocystis jiroveci
Cytomegalovirus
Pneumonoconioses (asbestosis, silicosis)
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Box 15.10 Therapeutic Drug Pulmonary Toxicity—Ga-
67 Lung Uptake
Bleomycin
Amiodarone
Busulfan
Nitrofurantoin
Cyclophosphamide
Methotrexate
Nitrosourea
Table 15.8
Classification of Chest Radiographic Findings in Sarcoidosis
Type Radiographic Findings
I
Hilar and/or mediastinal node enlargement with normal lung parenchyma
II
Hilar and/or mediastinal node enlargement and diffuse interstitial pulmonary disease
III
Diffuse pulmonary disease without node involvement
IV
Pulmonary fibrosis
For pyelonephritis, Tc-99m dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) has
been an important scintigraphic study used most commonly in
children. In adults, radiolabeled leukocyte imaging may be used (Fig.
15.42). Although radiolabeled leukocytes seem to have similar
accuracy to DMSA, they are rarely used in young children because of
the need for leukocyte labeling requiring 20 to 50 cc of blood and the
high radiation dose to the spleen. Tc-99m HMPAO has renal
clearance, limiting its use. Radiolabeled leukocytes have limited utility
for the evaluation of renal transplants because all exhibit some uptake,
regardless of the presence or absence of clinical infection, because of
ongoing low-grade rejection (see Fig. 15.8), although focal uptake may
be useful diagnostically.
FIG. 15.41  Malignant external otitis with osteomyelitis on Tc-99
methyl diphosphonate (MDP) scan. Single-photon emission computed
tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) fused images
localize uptake to the region of the left mastoid and temporal lobes,
transverse (left), coronal (middle), and sagittal (right).
FIG. 15.42  Infected polycystic kidneys on In-111 leukocyte scan.
Renal stones, recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs), and recent
persistent fever of uncertain cause. Low-dose computed tomography
(CT; top) demonstrates large multicystic kidneys. Fused single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) images (bottom) show multiple areas of increased uptake
(yellow) in the renal cysts, diagnostic of infection.
Suggested Reading
Adams H, Keijsers R.G, Korenromp I.H.E, Grutters J.C. FDG PET for gauging of sarcoid
disease activity.  Semin Respir Crit Care Med . 2014;35:352–361.
Andor W.J.M, Glaudemans M.D, Israel O, Slart R. Pitfalls and limitations of radionuclide and
hybrid imaging in infection and inflammation.  Semin Nucl Med . 2015;45:500–512.
Datz F.L, Taylor A.T.  Cell labeling: techniques and clinical utility .  Freeman and Johnson’s Clinical
Radionuclide Imaging . 3rd ed. New York: Grune & Stratton; 1984.
Granados U, Fuster D, Pericas J.M, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 18F-FDG PET/CT infective
endocarditis and implantable cardiac electronic device infection: a cross-sectional study.  J
Nucl Med . 2016;57:1726–1732.
Kouijzer I.J.E, Mulders-Manders M, Bleeker-Rovers C.P, Oyen W.J.G. Fever of unknown
origin: the value of FDG-PET/CT.  Semin Nucl Med . 2017;48:100–107.
Kouranos V, Hansell D.M, Sharma R, Wells T.U. Advances in imaging of cardiopulmonary
involvement in sarcoidosis.  Current Opinion . 2015;21:538–545.
Lawal I, Zeevaart J, Ebenhan T, et al. Metabolic imaging of infection.  J Nucl Med
. 2017;58:1727–1732.
Matesan M, Bermo M, Cruite I, et al. Biliary leak in the post-surgical abdomen: a primer to
HIDA scan interpretation.  Semin Nucl Med . 2017;47:618–629.
Mostard R.L.M, Marinus J.P.G, Drent M. The role of the PET scan in the management of
sarcoidosis.  Current Opinion . 2013;19:538–544.
Nakahara M, Ito M, Hattori N, et al. 18F-PET/CT better localizes active spinal infection than
MRI for successful minimally invasive surgery.  Acta Radiol . 2015;56:829–836.
Palestro C.J. Radionuclide imaging of musculoskeletal infection. A review.  J Nucl Med
. 2016;57:1406–1412.
Sarrazin J.-F, Philippon F, Trottier M, Tessier M. Role of radionuclide imaging for diagnosis of
device and prosthetic valve infections.  World J Cardiology . 2016;8:534–546.
Signore A, Glaudemans A, Gheysens O, et al. Nuclear medicine imaging in pediatric infection
or chronic inflammatory diseases.  Semin Nucl Med . 2017;47:286–303.
Takeuchi M, Dahabreh I.J, Nihashi T, et al. Nuclear imaging for classic fever of unknown
origin: metananalysis.  J Nucl Med . 2016;57:1913–1919.
