Radiopharmaceuticals
In-111-labeled leukocytes were first introduced in 1977. Indium-111 8-
hydroxyquinoline (oxine) and Tc-99m hexamethylpropyleneamine
oxime (HMPAO)–labeled leukocytes each have advantages and
disadvantages (Table 15.1).
Indium-111 Oxine Leukocytes
The radionuclide Indium-111 (In-111) is cyclotron produced, decays by
electron capture, emits two gamma photons (173 and 247 keV), and
has a physical half-life of 67 hours (2.8 days; Table 15.2).
Adequate radiolabeling to provide good image quality usually
requires 5000/mm3 peripheral leukocytes, although sometimes the
study can be performed with counts as low as 2000/mm3. The in vitro
labeling procedure requires a minimum of 2 hours. Lacking facilities
and trained personnel to radiolabel the cells, imaging clinics send a
patient’s blood to an outside commercial radiopharmacy for
radiolabeling. The time required for sending the blood to the
radiopharmacy, radiolabeling the cells, returning the cells to the clinic,
and reinfusing them is 3 to 4 hours.
Fifty milliliters of venous blood usually ensures sufficient
leukocytes for adequate labeling; 20 to 30 mL may be acceptable for
children. Radiolabeling must be performed under a laminar flow
hood to ensure sterility. Careful handling is required to avoid
damaging cells, which could adversely affect their migration and
viability. Proper labeling does not affect normal physiological
function. The radiolabel remains stable in vivo for more than 24 hours.
FIG. 15.1  Acute inflammation. This diagram illustrates the body’s
response to tissue injury and infection. The permeability of the vascular
endothelium plays a central role in allowing blood cells and serum
components access to the tissues. Antibodies and lymphocytes amplify
or focus these primary mechanisms. If inflammation persists beyond a
few days, macrophages and lymphocytes play an increasing role. CRP,
Chronic reactive protein; IL, interleukin; LT, leukotriene; MONO,
monocyte; PG, prostaglandin; PMN, polymorphonuclear neutrophil; T,
T lymphocyte; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
With permission, Immunology at a Glance, 10th edition. J.H.L. Playfair
and B.M. Chain, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 2013.
Table 15.1
Advantages and Disadvantages of In-111-Oxine Versus Tc-99m-HMPAO Leukocytes
Advantages and Disadvantages
In-111-Oxine WBCs
Tc-99m-HMPAO WBCs
Radionuclide readily available
No
Yes
Stable radiolabel, no elution from cells
Yes
No
Allows labeling in plasma
No
Yes
Radiation dosimetry
Poor
Good
Early routine imaging
No
Yes
Half-life allows for delayed imaging
Yes
No
Imaging time
Long
Short
Permits dual-isotope imaging
Yes
No
Intestinal and renal clearance
No
Yes
Image resolution
Fair
Good
HMPAO, Hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime; WBC, white blood cell.
Table 15.2
Physical Characteristics of In-111, Tc-99m, F-18, and Ga-67
Radionuclide
Half-Life
Photopeak (keV)
% Photon Abundance
In-111
67 hours
Tc-99m
6 hours
F-18
110 minutes
Ga-67
78 hours
The methodology for radiolabeling leukocytes is described in detail
in Box 15.2. Radiolabeling cannot be performed in plasma, so it must
be separated and retained for later resuspension with the leukocytes
before reinfusion. The leukocyte pellet is suspended in saline and
incubated with In-111 oxine. The lipid solubility of the In-111 oxine
complex allows it to diffuse through cell membranes. Intracellularly,
the complex dissociates, oxine diffuses back out of the cell, and In-111
binds to nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. In-111 oxine binds to
granulocytes, lymphocytes, monocytes, platelets, and erythrocytes.
Pure In-111 granulocyte preparations have been radiolabeled and
used clinically. However, they require density gradient centrifuge
separation techniques and have not shown a clinical advantage over
mixed leukocytes. They are generally not used clinically.
Box 15.2 Methodology for Radiolabeling of Autologous
Leukocytes With Indium-111 Oxine
Preparation
1. Patient’s peripheral leukocyte count should be >5000
cells/mm3.
Procedure
1. Collect autologous blood.
Draw 30 to 50 mL into an anticoagulant citrate dextrose
(ACD) anticoagulated syringe using a 19-gauge needle.
2. Isolate leukocytes:
Separate red blood cells (RBCs) by gravity sedimentation
and 6% Hetastarch, a settling agent.
Centrifuge the leukocyte-rich plasma at 300 to 350 g for 5
minutes to remove platelets and proteins.
A leukocyte button forms at the bottom of the tube.
Draw off and save the leukocyte-poor plasma (LPP) for
later washing and resuspension.
3. Label leukocytes:
Suspend leukocytes (LPP) in saline.
Incubate with In-111 oxine for 30 minutes at room
temperature and gently agitate.
Remove unbound In-111 by centrifugation. Save wash—
calculate labeling efficiency.
4. Prepare injectate:
Resuspend 500 μmCi In-111-labeled leukocytes in saved
plasma (LPP).
Inject via peripheral vein within 2 to 4 hours.
5. Perform quality control:
Microscopical examination of cells
Calculate labeling efficiency:
Assay the cells and wash in dose calibrator.
Labeling efficiency = C/([C + W] × 100%)
where C is activity associated with the cells, and W is
activity associated with the wash.
Standard quality-control measures (e.g., testing for sterility and
pyrogenicity) cannot be performed because of the need for prompt
reinfusion after labeling to ensure cell viability. However, the final
radiopharmaceutical preparation should be examined for abnormal
morphology, clumping, excessive red blood cell (RBC) contamination,
and percent labeling efficiency, typically ranging from 75% to 90%.
When labeling is less than 50%, the cells should not be administered to
the patient. The final preparation contains radiolabeled granulocytes,
lymphocytes, and monocytes and some platelets and erythrocytes.
After infusion of the In-111 leukocytes, no significant elution of the
In-111 from the leukocytes occurs. Initial distribution is to the blood
pool, lungs, liver, and spleen. Localization is the result of diapedesis
and chemotaxis (Table 15.3). Lung uptake is caused by activation from
in vitro cell manipulation, which may be increased by the underlying
disease process. By 4 hours after reinjection, lung and blood-pool
activity markedly decrease (Fig. 15.2). By 24 hours, the greatest uptake
is in the spleen, followed by the liver and bone marrow. Persistent
blood
pool
suggests
a
high
percentage
of
labeled
RBCs.
Genitourinary, hepatobiliary, and intestinal clearance are not
normally seen. The ultimate test of the viability of leukocytes is
in vivo function manifested by a normal distribution within the body
and the ability to detect infection (Table 15.4). Uptake outside of
expected normal uptake sites suggests infection (Figs. 15.3 and 15.4). If
the infused white blood cells (WBCs) become nonviable, increased
liver and lung uptake is seen.
Table 15.3
Mechanisms of Localization of Infection-Seeking Radiopharmaceuticals
Radiopharmaceutical
Mechanism
Radiolabeled leukocytes
Diapedesis and chemotaxis
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
Glucose metabolism
Ga-67 citrate
Iron binding to lactoferrin and bacterial siderophores
An imaging protocol for In-111 oxine leukocytes is described in Box
15.3. Images are acquired on their 173- and 247-keV photopeaks (20%
window) using a medium-energy collimator. Whole-body imaging is
routine. High-count spot images, SPECT, and SPECT/CT are options.
The spleen receives the highest radiation dose, precluding its use in
pediatric patients. Dosimetry is detailed (see the Appendix). Images
are routinely acquired 24 hours after reinfusion (Table 15.5). Further
delayed images rarely give additional information. Early imaging
(e.g., at 4 hours) is less sensitive than 24-hour imaging for detecting
infection, although when the patient is quite sick, early imaging may
detect the focus of infection (e.g., an abscess that requires urgent
intervention). Four-hour imaging is standard for inflammatory bowel
disease. Inflamed mucosal cells slough, become intraluminal, and
move distally. Thus, 24-hour images can be misleading and erroneous
as to the site of inflammation. Scintigraphic images reflect the
distribution of leukocytes in the body. Focal or diffuse activity outside
their expected normal distribution suggests inflammation or infection
(see Table 15.4).
Interpretive pitfalls (i.e., potential false-positive and false- negative
findings) should be kept in mind (Box 15.4). Leukocytes accumulate at
sites of inflammation (e.g., intravenous catheters; nasogastric,
endogastric, and drainage tubes; tracheostomies; colostomies; and
ileostomies). Unless intense, this uptake should be considered normal.
Uninfected postsurgical wounds show uptake for 2 to 3 weeks. If
uptake is intense, persists, or extends beyond the surgical wound site,
infection should be suspected (Fig. 15.5). Uptake occurs at healing
bone-fracture sites, with the amount depending on the length of time
since fracture, its severity, and whether it is healing properly.
A major advantage of In-111 leukocytes is the normal lack of
intraabdominal activity. However, on occasion, abdominal activity
may not be due to infection but rather the result of an accessory
spleen, splenosis, pseudoaneurysm, or a noninfected hematoma (Figs.
15.6 and 15.7). Renal transplants normally accumulate leukocytes,
probably as a result of low-grade rejection (Fig. 15.8). Intraluminal
intestinal activity can result from swallowed or shedding cells that
occur with pharyngitis, sinusitis, esophagitis, pneumonia, or
gastrointestinal bleeding.
FIG. 15.2  Normal In-111 oxine–labeled leukocyte whole-body scan at
4 and 24 hours. Anterior (Ant) and posterior (Post) whole-body images
show highest uptake in the spleen, followed by the liver, then bone
marrow. The 4-hour images show mild bilateral lung uptake that has
cleared by 24 hours. Image quality is superior at 24 hours due to
clearance of lung background. No activity is seen in the abdomen
except mild diffuse background and bone marrow.
Table 15.4
Normal Distribution of Infection-Seeking Radiopharmaceuticals
Radiopharmaceutical
Liver Spleen Marrow Bone Gastrointestinal Genitourinary Lung
Ga-67 citrate
∗∗∗
∗
∗
∗
∗∗∗
∗
In-111 oxine–labeled
leukocytes
∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗
Tc-99m HMPAO–
labeled leukocytes
∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗
F-18 FDG
∗∗∗
∗∗
∗
∗∗
∗∗
HMPAO, Hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime.
The sensitivity of leukocyte imaging may be reduced in conditions
that alter leukocyte function (e.g., hyperglycemia, steroid therapy, and
chemotherapy). Conflicting data exist regarding the sensitivity of In-
111 leukocyte scintigraphy for detecting infection in patients receiving
antibiotics. Investigations have not found a difference in sensitivity for
detection of acute versus chronic infections. Although chronic
inflammations preferentially attract lymphocytes, monocytes, plasma
cells, and macrophages, they still have significant neutrophilic
infiltration.
FIG. 15.3  (A) In-111 leukocyte scan in patient with postoperative
lesser sac and left subphrenic infection. Note splenectomy. (B) A
different patient, recently diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, has
postoperative purulent infection originating from surgical bed. In-111-
oxine leukocyte scan shows intraabdominal infection in the right
infrahepatic and left upper quadrants and ill-defined multiloculated left
paracolic gutter collection, suggestive of abscesses. Note left-sided
drain with purulent drainage. See Fig. 15.4 for abdominal single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography
(SPECT/CT) of this patient.
Tc-99m-HMPAO Leukocytes
The radionuclide technetium-99m (Tc-99m) is generator-produced from
molybdenum-99. Tc-99m decays by isomeric transition and emits one
gamma photon of 140 keV, with a 6-hour physical half-life (see Table
15.2). The radiopharmaceutical Tc-99m exametazime (Ceretec) is labeled
to leukocytes by HMPAO. Tc-99m HMPAO was originally approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for cerebral
perfusion imaging. Its lipophilicity allows it to cross cell membranes.
In brain imaging, it crosses the blood–brain barrier and is taken up by
cerebral cortical cells, where it changes into a hydrophilic complex
and becomes trapped. This led to the use of Tc-99m HMPAO to label
leukocytes. The FDA has accepted Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled
leukocytes as an acceptable alternative use of Tc-99m HMPAO.
Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled leukocytes have some advantages over In-
111-labeled leukocytes (see Table 15.1). The radiation dose to the
patient is considerably lower (see the Appendix); thus, greater activity
can be administered, resulting in higher photon yield and better
image quality.
The methodology for radiolabeling leukocytes with Tc-99m
HMPAO is similar to that for In-111 oxine labeling of leukocytes (see
Box 15.2). The differences are that Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocyte labeling
can be performed in plasma and that the resulting labeling is
primarily of granulocytes. The biological half-life of Tc-99m-HMPAO
leukocytes in blood is shorter than that of In-111 oxine leukocytes, 4
versus 6 hours, because of slow elution of the Tc-99m HMPAO from
circulating radiolabeled cells. Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes distribute
in the body similar to In-111-labeled cells, except that the Tc-99m
leukocytes have hepatobiliary and genitourinary clearance due to
elution from the leukocytes (Fig. 15.9; see also Table 15.4). In addition,
a secondary labeled hydrophilic complex is excreted, also seen with
Tc-99m-HMPAO brain imaging. The kidneys and bladder are
normally visualized by 1 to 2 hours after injection. Biliary and bowel
clearance occurs as early as 2 hours, is routinely seen by 3 to 4 hours,
and increases with time (Fig. 15.10; see also Fig. 15.9).
An important advantage of Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes is its much
lower radiation dose to the spleen, particularly in children, <2.0 rads
compared with approximately 50 rads for In-111 leukocytes (see the
Appendix). Thus, Tc-99m-labeled leukocytes are not indicated for
children. Because of the shorter physical half-life and hepatobiliary
and urinary clearance of Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes, images are
acquired at an earlier time point than In-111 oxine–labeled WBCs (see
Table 15.5). An imaging protocol is described in Box 15.5. Abdominal
imaging should be performed approximately 2 hours after reinfusion
to minimize the likelihood of urinary and gastrointestinal clearance.
For other body regions, such as the chest and extremities, later
imaging at 3 to 4 hours is recommended, although further delayed
imaging may at times be useful (Fig. 15.11). Blood-pool activity is
commonly seen with Tc-99m leukocytes compared with In-111-
labeled leukocytes because of the elution of activity from the
radiolabeled cells. This can potentially complicate interpretation in the
chest or major vessels. Care should be used in the interpretation of
intraabdominal activity because of the normal genitourinary and
hepatobiliary clearance. Potential false-positive and false-negative
results are listed in Box 15.4. Delayed imaging, particularly
SPECT/CT, can often improve localization.
FIG. 15.4  Single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography (SPECT/CT) of patient with whole-body scan in
Fig. 15.3B. (Left column) Coronal CT, SPECT, fused images; (middle)
Sagittal images; and (right) Transverse images. These cross-sectional
images more precisely localize infection to the right infrahepatic and left
upper quadrants and left paracolic gutter infection, strongly suggesting
intraabdominal abscesses.
FIG. 15.5  Postoperative fever and wound infection. In-111 leukocyte
whole-body scan (anterior and posterior). Dehiscence of the abdominal
incision site was caused by an abscess inferior and deep to incision.
Note the intense activity inferiorly. No evidence of intraabdominal
infection.
Table 15.5
Optimal Imaging Time for Infection-Seeking Radiopharmaceuticals
Radiopharmaceutical
Time (hours)
Ga-67 citrate
In-111-oxine leukocytes
Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes
1-4
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
HMPAO, Hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime.
Box 15.3 Indium-111-Oxine Leukocyte Scintigraphy:
Protocol Summary
Radiopharmaceutical
In-111 oxine in vitro–labeled leukocytes, 500 μCi (18.5 MBq)
Instrumentation
Camera: Large field of view
Window: 20% centered over 173- and 247-keV photopeaks
Collimator: Medium energy
Patient Preparation
Draw 50 mL of blood. Radiolabel white cells (see Box 15.2).
Procedure
Inject labeled cells intravenously, preferably by direct
venipuncture through a 19-gauge needle. Contact with
dextrose in water solutions may cause cell damage.
Imaging at 4 hours is critical in localizing inflammatory bowel
disease.
Perform routine whole-body imaging at 24 hours.
Acquire spot views as needed: anterior abdomen for 500k
counts, then other images for equal time. Include anterior and
posterior views of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and spot
images of specific areas of interest (e.g., feet) for a minimum
of 200k counts or 20 minutes.
Perform SPECT or SPECT/CT as needed.
SPECT,
Single-photon
emission
computed
tomography;
SPECT/CT, single-photon emission computed tomography with
computed tomography.
Box 15.4 Interpretative Pitfalls in Leukocyte Imaging
False-Negative Results
Vertebral osteomyelitis
Chronic low-grade infection
Parasitical, mycobacterial, or fungal infections
Hyperglycemia
Corticosteroid therapy
False-Positive Results
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Healing fracture
Swallowed leukocytes; oropharyngeal, esophageal, or lung
disease
Surgical wounds, stomas, or catheter sites
Hematomas
Tumors
Accessory spleens
Renal transplant
Pseudoaneurysm
Fluorine-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose
The radionuclide fluorine-18 (F-18) undergoes positron decay,
emitting two gamma photons of 511 KeV, 180 degrees apart, with a
physical half-life of 2 hours (see Table 15.2). FDG is a glucose analog.
After injection, the radiopharmaceutical F-18 FDG is transported into
activated granulocytes, macrophages, monocytes, giant cells, and
CD4-positive T cells by upregulated glucose transporters. The degree
of FDG uptake is related to the cellular metabolic rate and the number
of glucose transporters. Within the cell, it is phosphorylated by
hexokinase to F-18 FDG-6 phosphate but is not metabolized further
and remains fixed in the cell (see Table 15.3).
FIG. 15.6  False-positive In-111- leukocyte scan. The patient
presented with recurrent fever. Planar images of the chest and
abdomen (anterior and posterior). No spleen is seen because of a
splenectomy in the past after trauma. Multiple very intense foci of
uptake are seen in the abdominal view, all of which correlated with
suspected splenules on computed tomography (CT).
FIG. 15.7  In-111 leukocyte single-photon emission computed
tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) in a patient with
fever and bacteremia. History of prior splenectomy. Multiple masses
were seen on computed tomography (CT), suspected to be splenules.
This was confirmed with SPECT/CT. The single transverse slices show
one of the splenules in the left upper quadrant.
FIG. 15.8  Renal transplant uptake on In-111 leukocyte scan. Patient
presented with persistent fever of uncertain etiology 4 weeks after
transplantation. No definite site of infection is seen. There is
moderately increased diffuse uptake in the transplant in the left pelvis,
consistent with mild chronic rejection, not infection. Splenomegaly of
uncertain etiology.
F-18 FDG PET has some advantages over Tc-99m and In-111
leukocytes for infection imaging. Problems associated with blood
drawing, radiolabeling, and reinfusion of blood products are
eliminated, and imaging is completed more rapidly. F-18 FDG PET
imaging methodology is similar to oncologic imaging, beginning 1
hour after injection and completed by 2 hours (see Table 15.5). FDG
PET image resolution is superior to single-photon imaging, whole-
body imaging is routine, and combined PET/CT is standard. The
disadvantage of FDG imaging, like Ga-67, is that uptake is not specific
for infection, and it can be seen with inflammatory causes (e.g.,
fractures, postoperative inflammation, degenerative disease, reaction
to orthopedic hardware, tumor). Infection detection in patients with
poorly controlled diabetes may be poorer due to the effect of
hyperglycemia on FDG uptake. Infection diagnosis in the brain and
urinary tract is limited by its high cerebral uptake and urinary
excretion. Published data confirming the utility of FDG for various
inflammatory and infectious indications are growing but still limited.
In published studies, good data on accuracy are limited due to the
lack of a gold standard and the relatively high number of patients
without a final diagnosis. However, clinical utility seems to be high.
Reimbursement is also an issue.
Gallium-67 (Ga-67) Citrate
The radionuclide Ga-67 is cyclotron-produced; decays by electron
capture; emits a spectrum of gamma rays (93, 185, 288, 394 keV), all
with low abundance (% likelihood of emission with each decay); and
has a physical half-life of 78 hours (see Table 15.2). Image quality is
limited by scatter from the lower-energy photons, and the higher-
energy photons are difficult to collimate and not efficiently detected
by the thin crystal (3/8 inch) of gamma cameras.
After intravenous injection, Ga-67 citrate circulates in plasma bound
to transferrin, which transports it to the inflammatory site. It enters
inflammatory/infectious sites as a result of locally increased blood
flow and vascular permeability (see Table 15.3). The ferric ion–like
properties Ga-67 permit it to bind to lactoferrin released from dying
leukocytes (greater binding affinity to lactoferrin than to transferrin)
and bacterial iron-containing siderophores. Ga-67 clears slowly from
the blood pool. By 48 hours after injection, 10% is still bound to
plasma proteins, and total body clearance is slow (25-day biological
half-life), resulting in considerable image background. Sufficient
uptake occurs at the site of infection by 12 to 24 hours. Excretion
during the first 24 hours is primarily via the kidneys. Thereafter, the
colon is the major route of excretion. Normal uptake is greatest in the
liver, followed by bone marrow and spleen (Fig. 15.12; see also Table
15.4).
Inflammatory or stimulatory processes that increase lactoferrin
production result in increased uptake in the salivary glands in
Sjögren’ syndrome, the lacrimal glands in sarcoidosis, and the breast
during lactation (see Figs. 15.11 and 15.12). Normal breast uptake
varies according to the menstrual cycle phase and is seen prominently
postpartum. Thymic uptake is normal in children and seen in patients
postchemotherapy. Postoperative sites may have increased Ga-67
uptake for 2 to 3 weeks. Uptake occurs at healing fractures (Fig. 15.13)
and in sterile abscesses associated with frequent intramuscular
injections. The normal distribution is altered by whole-body
irradiation, multiple blood transfusions (excess ferric ions), or recent
gadolinium magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Salivary gland uptake
is increased after local external-beam irradiation.
A Ga-67 imaging protocol is summarized in Box 15.6. Bowel
preparation with laxatives/enemas is not recommended because it
may cause mucosal irritation and inflammation, resulting in increased
Ga-67 uptake, and is relatively ineffective. The usual administered
adult dose is 5 mCi (185 MBq). A medium-energy collimator is
required. The three lower photopeaks (93, 185, 300 keV) are acquired
for imaging. Although 24-hour images can be diagnostic, whole-body
images at 48 hours are superior and standard, due to greater
background clearance and good target-to-background ratio. SPECT
and SPECT/CT are most helpful for localization of uptake.
FIG. 15.9  Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled leukocyte whole-body imaging
(anterior and posterior) at 4 (left) and 24 hours (right). Considerable
blood-pool activity is seen at 4 hours, but no intraabdominal activity,
except for faint visualization of the renal pelvises. At 24 hours,
considerable intraabdominal activity is seen, transiting the intestines
and urinary tract. Image quality is inferior to that at 4 hours because of
decay due to the 6-hour half-life of Tc-99m.
Radiopharmaceuticals Under Investigation or
Not Approved by the Food and Drug
Administration
Tc-99m fanolesomab (NeutroSpect) was approved by the FDA in the
United States in 2004. It is a murine immunoglobulin (Ig)M
monoclonal antibody that binds to surface CD15 antigens expressed
on human neutrophils. However, approval was subsequently
withdrawn because two deaths were reported. Tc-99m sulesomab
(LeukoScan), a Tc-99m-labeled antigranulocyte (IgG1) murine
antibody Fab′’ fragment, is used clinically in Europe. Fab′’ fragments
have less immunoreactivity than whole antibodies and a better target-
to-background ratio because of rapid renal clearance. Accuracy is
similar to In-111 leukocytes. A number of radiopharmaceuticals under
investigation are listed, and their mechanisms of uptake described, in
Table 15.6.
