Clinical Applications for Infection Scintigraphy
Osteomyelitis
Pathophysiology
Bone infection is most commonly bacterial in origin. Microorganisms
reach the bone by either hematogenous spread, extension from a
contiguous site of infection, or direct introduction of organisms into
bone by trauma and surgery. The terminology for acute and chronic
osteomyelitis is not always consistent. Acute indicates hematogenous
spread. Chronic is usually the result of an infection starting in
overlying soft tissue or introduced at the time of trauma or surgery. It
is an active infection and has a neutrophilic inflammatory component.
Sometimes, infection initially acquired as a child or adult may recur
years later as intermittent or persistent drainage from a sinus tract
communicating with the involved bone, usually the femur, tibia, or
humerus, or as a soft tissue infection overlying it.
Acute Hematogenous Osteomyelitis
Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis most commonly occurs in
children. It typically involves the red marrow of long bones, often in
the femur, due to the relatively slow blood flow in metaphyseal
capillaries and sinusoidal veins in the region adjacent to the growth
plate as well as a paucity of phagocytes (Figs.15.14 and 15.15). Less
commonly, it occurs in the axial skeleton as discitis and then vertebral
osteomyelitis (Fig. 15.16A). It is often secondary to a distant
staphylococcal skin or mucosal infection. In adults, hematogenous
osteomyelitis most commonly occurs in diabetics. The initiating event
is usually septicemia from a urinary tract infection, bacterial
endocarditis, or intravenous drug abuse. The infection rarely involves
the long bones because adult red marrow has been replaced by yellow
marrow (adipose tissue). Infection typically occurs in vertebral bodies,
where the marrow is cellular, with an abundant vascular supply. It
begins near the anterior longitudinal ligament and spreads to adjacent
vertebrae by direct extension through the disk space or by
communicating venous channels (see Fig. 15.16B). Because the adult
disk does not have a vascular supply, disk-space infection is the result
of osteomyelitis in an adjacent vertebra.
FIG. 15.10  Whole-body Tc-99m-HMPAO images at 4 hours shows
radiotracer already in the gallbladder, small bowel, and urinary bladder
and incidental urinary contamination in genital area.
FIG. 15.11  Infected arteriovenous graft—Tc-99m-HMPAO white blood
cells (WBCs). Image obtained at 4 hours (left) shows focal uptake
within the right arm arteriovenous (AV) graft. Delayed image at 24
hours (right) shows further increase in uptake in the graft, suggestive of
infection.
Box 15.5 Tc-99m-HMPAO Leukocyte Scintigraphy:
Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
Wound dressings changed before imaging
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m-HMPAO in vitro–labeled WBCs, 10 mCi (370 MBq)
Instrumentation
Camera: Large field of view; two-headed camera preferable
for whole-body imaging
Collimator: Low energy, high resolution
Windows: 20%, centered over 140-keV photopeaks
Patient Preparation
Draw 50 mL of blood.
Procedure
Radiolabel patient’s leukocytes in vitro with Tc-99m HMPAO.
Reinject labeled cells intravenously, preferably by direct
venipuncture through 19-gauge needle. Contact with dextrose
in water solutions may cause cell damage.
Imaging
Imaging by 2 hours is necessary for intraabdominal imaging
or to localize inflammatory bowel disease.
Imaging at 4 hours or later may be advantageous for
peripheral skeleton (e.g., osteomyelitis of feet).
Whole-body imaging: Two-headed camera with whole-body
acquisition for 30 minutes; 10-minute spot images for regions
of special interest
SPECT or SPECT/CT in selected cases.
HMPAO, Hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime; SPECT, single-
photon emission computed tomography; SPECT/CT, single-photon
emission computed tomography with computed tomography; WBC,
white blood cell.
FIG. 15.12  Normal female Ga-67 citrate distribution at 48 hours.
Considerable soft tissue and breast activity is seen in this thin patient.
Normal lacrimal gland uptake is seen bilaterally. The highest organ
uptake occurs in the liver, followed by bone and marrow. Lesser activity
is seen in the spleen and nasopharyngeal region. Some large intestinal
clearance is noted.
The histopathology of acute osteomyelitis includes neutrophilic
inflammation, edema, and vascular congestion. Because of the bone’s
rigidity, intramedullary pressure increases, compromising the blood
supply and causing ischemia and vascular thrombosis. The
suppurative and ischemic injury may result in bone fragmentation
into devitalized segments called sequestra. Infection may spread via
Haversian and Volkmann canals to the periosteum, resulting in
abscesses, soft tissue infection, and sinus tracts (see Fig. 15.15). With
persistent infection, chronic inflammatory cells (e.g., lymphocytes,
histiocytes, and plasma cells) join the neutrophils. Fibroblastic
proliferation and new bone formation then occur. Periosteal
osteogenesis may surround the inflammation to form a bony
envelope, or involucrum. Occasionally, a dense fibrous capsule
confines the infection to a localized area, or Brodie abscess.
Extension From a Contiguous Site of Infection
The most common cause of osteomyelitis is direct extension from
overlying soft tissue infection, secondary to trauma, pressure sores,
radiation therapy, or burns. In patients with diabetes and vascular
insufficiency, organisms may enter soft tissues through a cutaneous
ulcer, usually in the foot, producing cellulitis and then osteomyelitis.
Direct Introduction of Organisms Into Bone
Direct inoculation may occur with open fractures, open surgical
reduction of closed fractures, or penetrating trauma by foreign bodies.
Osteomyelitis may also arise from perioperative contamination of
bone during surgery for nontraumatic orthopedic disorders (e.g.,
laminectomy, discectomy, or joint prosthesis placement).
Diagnosis of Osteomyelitis
Biopsy with culture is the definitive test for the diagnosis of
osteomyelitis; however, it is invasive and sometimes contraindicated
because noninfected bone may become contaminated by overlying
soft tissue infection. There is also a risk for pathological fracture in the
small bones of the hands and feet. Imaging is often required to
confirm or exclude the diagnosis.
Anatomical Imaging
Plain film radiographs show the characteristic changes of soft tissue
swelling, blurring of adjacent fat planes, medullary trabecular lysis,
cortical destruction, and periosteal new bone formation. These
findings can take 10 to 14 days to develop. The sensitivity is 50% to
75%, and the specificity is 75% to 85%. MRI can detect early marrow
changes, including low signal intensity on T1-weighted images, high
signal intensity on fat-suppressed T2-weighted images caused by
inflammatory
marrow
edema,
and
gadolinium
enhancement.
Secondary changes such as sinus tracts and cortical interruption
increase the diagnostic certainty. Diseases that replace marrow and
result in increased tissue water may not be distinguishable from
infection (e.g., healing fractures, tumors, and Charcot joints). The
sensitivity and negative predictive value of MRI are high; however,
the specificity is poorer.
FIG. 15.13  Ga-67 citrate uptake at fracture sites. Male patient was in
an auto accident 2 weeks prior, resulting in extensive trauma. Scan
requested for postoperative fever and concern for possible infection in
known fractured L3 vertebral body. Images show very mild uptake, not
suggestive of infection but consistent with fracture history. Moderate
uptake is also seen in healing right femur fracture.
Scintigraphy—Three-Phase Bone Scan
In patients with no underlying bone pathology, such as fractures,
orthopedic implants, and neuropathic joints, a three-phase bone scan
should be the first scintigraphic study performed (Box 15.7). The
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy are high, greater than 95% in
adults and children (Table 15.7). A negative study result excludes
osteomyelitis with a high degree of certainty. However, there are
reports of false-negative studies in neonates. Although the sensitivity
of the bone scan remains high in patients with underlying bone
disease or prior surgery, the specificity is considerably poorer (30–
50%). In these cases, the first scintigraphic study should be
radiolabeled leukocytes.
The positive scintigraphic findings for the three-phase bone scan to
diagnose osteomyelitis are (1) focal hyperperfusion on the blood-flow
phase, (2) focal increased activity on the immediate postflow blood-
pool (extracellular-space) phase, and (3) focal increased bone uptake
on 2- to 3-hour delayed imaging (Fig. 15.17). Distinguishing soft tissue
from bone uptake may be problematic with planar imaging of the
lower extremities and feet because of slow soft tissue clearance due to
overlying cellulitis and edema. Delayed imaging at 12 to 24 hours
allows time for greater background clearance. SPECT/CT can be very
helpful in separating soft tissue from bone uptake at the standard 3-
hour delayed-imaging time.
Table 15.6
Infection Radiopharmaceuticals Under Investigation
Radiopharmaceutical
Mechanism
Tc-99m besilesomab (Scintimun)
Monoclonal antibody binds to granulocytes
Tc-99m sulesomab (LeukoScan)
Monoclonal antibody binds to leukocytes
Tc-99m interleukin 8
Cytokine binds to chemokine receptor on WBC
Tc-99m ciprofloxacin
Radiolabeled antibiotic
Tc-99m radiolabeled antimicrobial peptides
Transported by leukocytes
In-111 biotin (vitamin B7)
Required for glucose metabolism
WBC, White blood cell.
Box 15.6 Ga-67 Citrate Imaging: Protocol Summary
Patient Preparation
No recent barium contrast studies
Radiopharmaceutical
Ga-67 citrate 5 mCi (185 MBq) injected intravenously
Instrumentation
Gamma camera: Large field of view
Photopeak: 20% window over 93-keV, 185-keV, and 300-keV
photopeaks
Collimator: Medium energy
Imaging Procedure
24-hour images in very sick patient, looking for abscess (etc.)
48-hour images (routine): Whole-body anterior and imaging
including head and extremities
High-count spot images (e.g., laterals, obliques, etc.), as
needed
SPECT or SPECT/CT of the head and neck, chest, abdomen, or
pelvis, when indicated
SPECT, Single-photon emission computed tomography;
SPECT/CT, single-photon emission computed tomography
with computed tomography.
Scintigraphy—Radiolabeled Leukocytes
The reported accuracy of radiolabeled leukocytes for the diagnosis of
osteomyelitis has varied; however, it is clearly superior to the bone
scan and Ga-67 citrate (see Table 15.7). Attempts have been made to
improve its accuracy by interpreting the study in conjunction with a
bone scan, and at times this can be helpful (Figs. 15.18–15.20);
however, it has not significantly improved in the diabetic foot, spine,
or hip and knee prostheses. SPECT/CT can improve the diagnostic
accuracy in some cases (Figs. 15.21 and 15.22).
An underlying assumption of leukocyte scintigraphy interpretation
for the diagnosis of osteomyelitis is that the marrow distribution is
uniform and symmetrical and that an area of focally increased uptake
is diagnostic of infection. However, when marrow distribution is
altered by prior infection, fracture, orthopedic hardware, Charcot
joint, or other factors, focal increased radiolabeled leukocyte uptake
might be misinterpreted as infection. In these cases, Tc-99m sulfur
colloid (SC) can serve as a template for the patient’s bone marrow
distribution. With no infection, the leukocyte and marrow scans will
have a similar distribution. With infection, the radiolabeled leukocyte
study will be discordant with the marrow scan (i.e., focal increased
uptake on the leukocyte study and normal or decreased uptake on
marrow study; Fig. 15.23).
FIG. 15.14  Vascular supply of long bones in an infant, child, and
adult. From infancy up to 18 months of age, small vessels perforate the
physis to enter the epiphysis. After 18 months and during childhood,
the perforating vessels involute. This results in the epiphysis and
metaphysis having separate blood supplies. After closure of the physis,
branches of the nutrient artery extend to the end of the adult bone, and
the principal blood supply is again from the nutrient artery in the
medullary canal. The periosteal artery supplies the outer cortex,
whereas branches of the nutrient artery supply the inner cortex.
FIG. 15.15  Hematogenous osteomyelitis in the long bone of a child.
(A) Bacterial embolization occurs via the nutrient artery, and bacteria
lodge in the terminal blood supply in the metaphysis. (B) Once infection
is established, it expands within the medullary canal toward the cortex
and diaphysis. The physis serves as an effective barrier. (C) The
infection can then extend vascular channels to the cortex to elevate
and strip the periosteum from the cortex, and periosteal new bone
forms. The bond between the periosteum and perichondrium at the
physis prevents extension of the infection into the joint.
Different approaches have been used to combine the leukocyte and
marrow studies. One is to inject and acquire the Tc-99m SC marrow
scan on day 1. Blood required for In-111 WBC labeling is drawn just
before the Tc-99m SC injection. Imaging of Tc-99m SC is performed 15
to 20 minutes after injection. Then the patient’s radiolabeled
leukocytes are infused. By 24 hours after infusion, Tc-99m activity has
decayed, and In-111 WBC images are acquired.
Dual-isotope acquisition with In-111 oxine–labeled leukocytes and Tc-
99m SC allows for same-day simultaneous imaging of both studies
with the site of interest identically positioned. Imaging is acquired
approximately 24 hours after In-111 leukocytes are reinfused and 20
minutes after Tc-99m SC. The studies are acquired simultaneously on
the different radionuclide photopeaks. For Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled
WBCs, imaging is usually performed on separate days, although
subtraction imaging on the same day is feasible.
FIG. 15.16  (A) Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in the spine of a
child. The infection typically begins as discitis, then spreads to an
adjacent vertebral body to become osteomyelitis. (B) In the adult, the
hematogenously spread infection starts in the subchondral region of
the vertebral body. As it enlarges, it may then perforate the vertebral
surface, spreading to the intervertebral space. If it progresses, infection
of the adjacent vertebral body can result and then spread to
subligamentous and paraspinal regions.
Box 15.7 Scintigraphic Diagnosis of Osteomyelitis by
Clinical Situation
Normal radiograph: Three-phase bone scan
Neonates: Three-phase bone scan; if negative, Tc-99m-
HMPAO leukocytes
Suspected vertebral osteomyelitis: Ga-67 citrate or F-18 FDG
Suspected osteomyelitis in bone marrow–containing skeleton:
Bone marrow scan (Tc-99m SC) + leukocyte study
FDG, Fluorodeoxyglucose; HMPAO, hexamethylpropyleneamine
oxime; SC, sulfur colloid.
Scintigraphy—Gallium-67 Citrate
Gallium-67 citrate is normally taken up by both bone and bone
marrow; thus, increased uptake of Ga-67 is seen at sites of increased
bone turnover for whatever reason, similar to that seen on bone scans,
and is nonspecific. Thus, false-positive interpretation may result in
patients with underlying bone disease or orthopedic hardware. The
specificity can be increased if interpreted in conjunction with a bone
scan. The criteria for the diagnosis of osteomyelitis using Ga-67
scintigraphy in conjunction with a bone scan are (1) Ga-67 uptake
greater than that on the bone scan or (2) Ga-67 and bone scan uptake
distribution that are incongruent. The study is negative for
osteomyelitis if Ga-67 uptake is less than on the bone scan (Fig. 15.24).
Similar uptake on both studies is considered equivocal, and infection
cannot be excluded. The accuracy of the combined two studies is still
inferior to that of radiolabeled leukocytes, except for the case of
vertebral osteomyelitis. Other indications are listed in Box 15.8.
Table 15.7
Diagnosis of Osteomyelitis: Accuracy of Scintigraphy and MRI
Type of Study
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Three-phase bone scan (normal radiograph)
Three-phase bone scan (underlying bone disease)
Ga-67
In-111 oxine–labeled leukocytes
Tc-99m-HMPAO WBCs
Leukocytes (vertebral)
Leukocytes + bone marrow
MRI
HMPAO, Hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; WBC, white
blood cell.
Scintigraphy—F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose
The role of F-18 FDG for diagnosis of osteomyelitis is still evolving.
The most certain indication is for suspected vertebral osteomyelitis.
Limited and conflicting data have been published regarding its use for
prosthesis infection and pedal osteomyelitis.
Ga-67, leukocyte scintigraphy, and F-18 FDG have all been used to
monitor response to therapy (e.g., to determine whether an infection
has been controlled before surgical replacement of a new prosthesis).
Abnormal scintigraphic findings will revert to normal within 2 to 8
weeks of appropriate antibiotic therapy.
FIG. 15.17  (A and B) Osteomyelitis—three-phase positive bone scan.
Two-year-old with fever and left knee pain. An effusion was seen on
ultrasonography. The study is three-phase positive for osteomyelitis in
the region of the left distal femur. (A) Increased blood flow to region of
left knee. (B) Blood-pool (left) and delayed images (right) show
increased uptake in the distal femur, consistent with osteomyelitis.
