Inflammation and Infection
Infection imaging has long been an important indication for
scintigraphy. Gallium-67 citrate (Ga-67) was the first infection-seeking
radiopharmaceutical used clinically. It is still in use today, however, in
a much more limited role than in the past. For decades now, In-111
oxine leukocytes have been the primary radiopharmaceutical used to
detect
infection.
Tc-99m
hexamethylpropyleneamine
oxime
(HMPAO)–labeled leukocytes have also found a role. In recent years,
Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18 FDG) is increasingly being used
for confirming or excluding infection (Box 15.1). Single-photon
emission
computed
tomography
with
computed
tomography
(SPECT/CT) and positron emission tomography with computed
tomography (PET/CT) have added specificity and
improved
localization for all of the radiopharmaceuticals.
Pathophysiology of Inflammation and Infection
Inflammation is a tissue response to injury attracting cells of the
immune system to the site of damage. It is triggered by tissue injury
(e.g., trauma, foreign particles, or neoplasm). The inflammatory
response results in increased blood flow, vasodilation, increased
vascular permeability, and migration of leukocytes out of blood
vessels into the tissues (chemotaxis). The plasma carries proteins,
antibodies, and chemical mediators that modulate the inflammatory
response to the site of infection (Fig. 15.1). Leukocytes are attracted to
the infection site in response to chemoattractants (e.g., bacterial
products). Infection implies the presence of microorganisms. Although
infection is usually associated with inflammation, the reverse is not
always true. Infection without inflammation occurs in severely
immunosuppressed patients.
Leukocytes are the major cellular components of the inflammatory
and immune response that protect against infection and neoplasia and
assist in the repair of damaged tissue. Nucleated precursor cells
differentiate into mature cells within the bone marrow. Peripheral
leukocytes include granulocytes (neutrophils 60%, eosinophils 3%,
basophils 1%), lymphocytes (30%), and monocytes (5%). Only 2% to
3% of neutrophils reside in the circulating blood, using it transiently
when moving to sites of need. The rest are distributed in a
“marginated” pool that is adherent to vascular endothelial cells in
tissues, mostly in the bone marrow but also in the spleen, liver, lung,
gastrointestinal tract, and oropharynx. These marginated cells can be
marshaled into the circulating pool by various stimuli, including
exercise, epinephrine, or bacterial endotoxins.
Box 15.1 Radiopharmaceuticals for Infection Imaging
Ga-67 citrate
In-111 oxine–labeled leukocytes
Tc-99m HMPAO–labeled leukocytes
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
Tc-99m sulesomab (LeuTech; approved in Europe)
HMPAO, Hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime.
Neutrophils respond to an acute inflammatory stimulus by
migrating toward an attractant (chemotaxis) and enter tissues between
postcapillary
endothelial
cells
(diapedesis).
The
neutrophils
phagocytize the infectious agent or foreign body and enzymatically
destroy it within cytoplasmic vacuoles. Lymphocytes, including B
cells, T cells, and natural killer cells, arrive at inflammatory sites
during the chronic phase. Monocytes act as tissue scavengers,
phagocytosing damaged cells and bacteria and detoxifying chemicals
and toxins. At sites of inflammation, they transform into tissue
macrophages. Corticosteroids and ethanol inhibit the inflammatory
process.
