A patchy, focal FDG pattern of uptake is suggestive of cardiac
sarcoid (Figs. 16.35 and 16.36). More diffuse uptake suggests that
myocardial suppression has been insufficient. The FDG study is
usually preceded by or combined with a perfusion study. Normal
perfusion but abnormal FDG suggests early disease, whereas
abnormal perfusion and increased FDG is likely due to advanced
disease. Late-stage scarring may result in abnormal perfusion without
FDG uptake. Uptake resolves with successful therapy, usually
corticosteroids. On cardiac MR, delayed enhancement represents
cardiac damage. There is only mild to moderate correlation between
FDG and MR. Cardiac MR is reported to have higher specificity but
lower sensitivity than FDG.
Radionuclide Ventriculography
Tc-99m RBC radionuclide ventriculography (RVG), or the multigated
acquisition (MUGA) study, has been used clinically since the 1970s to
analyze global and regional ventricular function. A major advantage
of the radionuclide method versus echocardiography or other
anatomical methods is that calculation of LVEF is not dependent on
mathematical assumptions of ventricular shape. LV emitted counts
are proportional to its volume, making possible accurate LVEF
quantification. Two approaches have been used: the first-pass method,
in which all data collection occurs during the initial transit of a tracer
bolus through the central circulation; and the equilibrium method, in
which data are collected over many cardiac cycles using ECG gating
and a tracer that remains in the blood pool. The latter has become the
standard method at most centers.
FIG. 16.33  Negative for hibernating myocardium. Rb-82 myocardial
perfusion stress (top), rest (middle), and F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG; bottom) with matching defects consistent with myocardial
infarction and nonviable myocardium.
Equilibrium Blood-Pool Method
Radiolabeling RBCs is most commonly done using either the modified
in vivo method or the in vitro method (Ultra-Tag), as described in the
gastrointestinal chapter (Box 10.10). The in vitro kit method has the
highest labeling efficiency, >97% versus 85% for the modified in vivo
method. Poor RBC labeling is uncommon using the in vitro method.
FIG. 16.34  Importance of glucose loading for fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) cardiac imaging. N-13 ammonia images (top row) and two sets
of F-18 FDG images of a patient with diabetes. The N-13 ammonia
images show a large perfusion defect at the cardiac apex. The initial F-
18 FDG images show uptake in the blood pool but essentially no
myocardial uptake (middle row). After insulin (I) administration (bottom
row), FDG accumulates in the myocardium and reveals a matched
defect at the apex.
Box 16.6 Fluorine-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron
Emission Tomography Cardiac Viability: Summary
Protocol
Patient Preparation
Patient should fast after midnight.
Obtain rest myocardial perfusion scan.
Obtain serum fasting blood sugar (BS).
Nondiabetic
If BS ≤150 mg/dL: 50 g oral glucose solution + regular insulin 3
units intravenously
If BS 151 to 300 mg/dL: 25 g oral glucose solution + regular
insulin 3 units intravenously
If BS 301 to 400 mg/dL: 25 g oral glucose solution + regular
insulin 5 units intravenously
If BS >400 mg/dL: 25 g oral glucose solution + regular insulin 7
units intravenously
Inject F-18 FDG at least 45 minutes after glucose loading and
when BS <150 mg/dL
Diabetic
If BS <150 mg/dL: 25 g oral glucose solution
If BS 151 to 200 mg/dL: Regular insulin 3 units intravenously
If BS 201 to 300 mg/dL: Regular insulin 5 units intravenously
If BS 301 to 400 mg/dL: Regular insulin 7 units intravenously
If BS ≥ 401 mg/dL: Regular insulin 10 units intravenously
Obtain BS every 15 mins for 60 minutes. If BS elevated,
administer additional insulin per scale. At least 45 minutes after
glucose loading and when BS ≤150 mg/dL, inject F-18 FDG.
Radiopharmaceutical
F-18 FDG 0.22 mCi/kg (100 μCi/lb)
Time of Imaging
After 60-minute uptake phase
Procedure
PET acquisition: Cardiac field of view
Processing
Reconstruct along the short and long axis of the heart similar
to the perfusion study
FDG, Fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography.
ECG leads are placed on the patient, and a gating signal triggered
by the R wave of the ECG tracing is sent to the computer. The R wave
occurs at the beginning of systole. The cardiac cycle is divided into 16
frames (bins) by computer processing software (Fig. 16.37A).
Sufficient frames are needed to catch the peaks and valleys of the
cardiac cycle (temporal sampling). During each heartbeat, data are
acquired sequentially into the 16 bins spanning the cardiac cycle. With
imaging of 100 to 300 cardiac cycles, sufficient counting statistics are
obtained for valid quantitative analysis and reasonable spatial
resolution. Approximately 250,000 counts per frame are acquired. An
equilibrium gated MUGA protocol is described in Box 16.7.
An underlying assumption of R-wave gating and 16 bins is that the
patient has a normal sinus rhythm so that data can be added together
from corresponding segments of each cardiac cycle over the entire
study period. Arrhythmia results in misplacement of data into bins,
thus reducing the accuracy of quantitative analysis. Significant
quantitative error can result with >10% premature ventricular
contractions. A rhythm strip should be obtained before injection of the
radiotracer to ensure a regular rhythm (Fig. 16.38). Review of the beat
(phase) histogram display (time between beats) is also helpful for
analyzing the cardiac rhythm (see Fig. 16.37). A widened histogram
suggests rhythm variability. Potential gating problems include
spurious signals from skeletal muscle activity, giant T waves
triggering the gating device, and pacemaker artifacts.
The standard computer software method that attempts to correct for
premature beats is to exclude the subsequent beat that also has an
abnormal R-to-R wavelength due to a compensatory pause. The
premature beat has already been accepted. So one beat is premature,
and the following one is excluded. If this happens frequently, data are
reduced, image quality suffers, and quantification becomes less
accurate.
FIG. 16.35  Cardiac sarcoidosis in a 35-year-old male with a history of
pulmonary sarcoidosis who developed an atrial-ventricular conduction
block. Echocardiography showed a reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) of 45%, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
showed biventricular enlargement and patchy fibrosis of the left
ventricle and septum. The rest N-13 ammonia images (top) show
hypoperfusion of the inferior, inferoseptal wall, and basal septum. The
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) images show a mismatch with uptake in the
regions of hypoperfusion, as well as patchy uptake in the right ventricle.
For studies at rest, multiple views (anterior, left anterior oblique,
left lateral) are obtained to evaluate regional ventricular wall motion.
The exact camera angle for the left anterior oblique view, the one used
to calculate the LVEF, is determined by moving the gamma camera
head to find the view that best separates the left and right ventricles,
usually 35% to 45% left anterior oblique.
Data Analysis and Multigated Acquisition
Study Interpretation
Qualitative Analysis
Comprehensive analysis and interpretation of MUGA studies require
both qualitative and quantitative assessments. Wall motion is
analyzed by viewing a repetitive cinematic closed-loop display.
Ventricular contraction is evaluated by noting a reduction in the size
of the ventricular cavity from diastole to systole and evidence of
normal wall motion. Septal contraction is usually less than other
walls. The complete absence of wall motion is termed akinesis,
diminished contraction is termed hypokinetic, and paradoxical wall
motion (outward bulge during systole) is dyskinetic. In normal
subjects, all wall segments should contract, with the greatest incursion
seen in the left ventricular free wall and apex. Areas of ventricular
scar are typically akinetic or dyskinetic. Cardiac muscle contraction is
inferred from noting brightening with systole. Complete qualitative or
visual analysis includes assessment of cardiac chamber size, overall
biventricular function and regional wall motion, and any extracardiac
abnormalities (e.g., aortic aneurysm or pericardial effusions).
FIG. 16.36  Cardiac sarcoidosis—pre- and posttherapy. (Left)
Maximum-intensity projection (MIP) images of a 40-year-old patient
with cardiomegaly, multiple areas of focal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
uptake in the right and left ventricle, consistent with clinically suspected
cardiac sarcoidosis. (Right) After therapy, there has been complete
resolution of cardiac involvement.
FIG. 16.37  (A) Normal multigated acquisition (MUGA) study. Sixteen
sequential frames of R-wave gated MUGA study acquired in the left
anterior oblique (LAO) view. Displayed in grayscale and a color scale.
Note the change in size and count density of the cardiac chambers
during the cardiac cycle. End-diastole is the first image, and end-
systole is the seventh frame. The grayscale and four-color images are
from the same date.(B) Computer-processed display shows end-
diastolic, end-systolic, and background regions of interest. The normal
left ventricular time–activity curve (TAC) is shown with the atrial kick
during the later phase. Phase and functional images are shown and the
rate histogram. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is 62%. Avg,
Average; bkgnd, background; EF, ejection fraction; filt, filter; Kcts,
kilocounts; ROI, region of interest; SV, stroke volume.
Quantitative Data Analysis
The LVEF is defined as the fraction of the left ventricular volume
expelled during each contraction. Ventricular counts are determined
by placing an ROI around the left ventricle for end-diastole and end-
systole and a background region, a crescent adjacent to the left
ventricular apex (see Fig. 16.37B). End-diastole is the frame
demonstrating the highest counts, and end-systole is the frame with
the fewest counts. A background-corrected ventricular time–activity
curve (TAC) is generated.
The LVEF is calculated as follows, with count corrected for
background:
The normal ejection fraction is 50% to 75%.
The time–activity (cardiac volume) curve should be inspected as a
quality-control measure. The count values at the beginning and end of
the curve should be identical. The trailing frames in late diastole may
have fewer counts, owing to variations in cardiac cycle length, even in
patients with normal sinus rhythm. In patients with frequent
premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and rapid atrial fibrillation
with an irregular ventricular response, the fall-off in counts at the end
of the curve is much greater.
Box 16.7 Equilibrium Gated Blood-Pool
Ventriculography: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Rhythm strip to confirm normal sinus rhythm (<10%
premature ventricular contractions)
Radiopharmaceutical
Tc-99m red blood cells 20 mCi (740 MBq) intravenously
Instrumentation
Collimator: low-energy general-purpose or high-resolution
collimator
Window: 15% to 20% centered at 140 keV
Imaging: Anterior, left anterior oblique (LAO; best septal
view), and left lateral views.
Gamma camera persistence scope to determine optimal LAO
view for separating left and right ventricular activity
Sixteen frames per cardiac with frame duration of 50 msec or
less
250k counts per frame for studies performed at rest
100k counts per frame in the optimum LAO view for studies
obtained during an intervention
Calculation of a right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) from
equilibrium data can be performed similarly, although the ROIs are
more difficult to draw because of overlap of the right ventricle with
the right atrium and RV outflow tract. Thus, the results are subject to
some error. The RVEF is normally lower than the LVEF. The stroke
volume is the same for both, but the right ventricular volume is larger
than the left ventricular volume.
Clinical Applications
Coronary Artery Disease
In the past, stress MUGA studies were performed to detect regional
myocardial
ischemia
and
infarction,
showing
wall
motion
abnormalities and a decrease of LVEF with exercise. MUGA studies
are not used for this purpose today but, rather, sometimes to quantify
the LVEF when echocardiography is unsuccessful or, most commonly,
to detect cardiac toxicity.
Assessment of Cardiac Toxicity
Anthracycline drugs (e.g., doxorubicin [Adriamycin]), commonly
used in the treatment of breast cancer and malignant lymphoma,
produce a cumulative dose-dependent depression of left ventricular
function (Fig. 16.39). Cardiac toxicity leads to progressive left
ventricular dysfunction and heart failure. Trastuzumab (Herceptin),
used for the treatment of breast cancer, is also cardiotoxic. However,
the dose is not cumulative, and there is a high likelihood of reversal of
new dysfunction within 2 to 4 months if the medication is
discontinued.
FIG. 16.38  Electrocardiogram rhythm strips. (A) Normal sinus rhythm.
(B) Sinus tachycardia. (C) Atrial fibrillation with irregular ventricular
response. (D) Premature vascular contractions with bigeminy.
FIG. 16.39  Abnormal multigated acquisition (MUGA) scan. Sixteen
sequential frames show diffuse hypokinesis of both the right and left
ventricle. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 25%. LAO, Left
anterior oblique.
Doxorubicin doses of more than 450 to 500 mg/m2 can result in
cardiotoxicity and heart failure. Overt failure is preceded by a
progressive fall in the LVEF. Serial monitoring can detect a change in
cardiac function, and the drug can be stopped or reduced when a
reduction in the LVEF is observed. Complete recovery may occur if
therapy is discontinued at an early stage.
In patients with a normal baseline LVEF (>50%), moderate toxicity
is defined as a decline of >10% in the absolute LVEF, with a final LVEF
of <50% (Box 16.8). In patients with abnormal baseline (>30% and
<50%), a study is performed before each dose. Doxorubicin is
discontinued with an absolute decrease in the LVEF of ≥10% or a final
LVEF of ≤30%. Trastuzumab should be discontinued at least
temporarily if the LVEF falls by >10% to a level of <50%.
Pulmonary Disease
Right ventricular enlargement can be seen with the MUGA study. In
patients with a new onset of dyspnea, it can help differentiate left
ventricular from pulmonary dysfunction. Normal wall motion, LVEF,
and chamber size strongly suggest a pulmonary cause.
Box 16.8 Guidelines for Monitoring Doxorubicin
Cardiotoxicity
Baseline evaluation: Before the start of therapy or at least
before 100 mg/m2 has been given
Subsequent evaluations: 3 weeks after the last dose at
recommended intervals
Patients with normal baseline LVEF (>50%):
Obtain second study after 250 to 300 mg/m2.
Obtain a repeat study after 400 mg/m2 in patients with
heart disease, hypertension, radiation exposure,
abnormal electrocardiogram, cyclophosphamide therapy
or after 450 mg/m2 in the absence of risk factors.
Obtain sequential studies thereafter before each dose.
Discontinue therapy if >10% decrease in LVEF to <50%.
Patients with abnormal baseline LVEF (<50%):
With baseline LVEF <30%, do not start therapy.
With baseline LVEF >30% and <50%, perform a study
before each dose.
Discontinue drug in patients with an absolute decrease in
LVEF ≥30% or final LVEF ≤30%.
LVEF, Left ventricular ejection fraction.
FIG. 16.40  Right-to-left shunt. (A) Brain cortical uptake is seen. (B)
Whole-body quantification of right-to-left shunt. Regions of interest are
drawn for the whole body and lungs. Quantification found the percent
shunt to be 15%.
Congenital Heart Disease—Right-to-Left Shunts
Right-to-left shunts result from a variety of congenital cardiac
diseases. The shunts can be confirmed and quantified with Tc-99m
macroaggregated albumin (MAA). With shunting, images show
uptake in other organs of the body (Fig. 16.40A). Cerebral cortex
uptake is easiest to see and is diagnostic. If not seen, there is no
significant shunt. Different methods of quantification have been used.
One method uses whole-body imaging. ROIs are drawn for the lungs
and total body (see Fig. 16.40B). A caution, however, is that the %
shunt calculation does not accurately quantify the actual % shunt but
does correlate with its severity. A calculated shunt >10% is usually
abnormal. Right-to-left shunts have been considered a relative
contraindication to the use of Tc-99m MAA because of the theoretical
risk for embolizing the capillary bed of the brain. In practice, this is
not a clinical problem, although it is still recommended that the
number of particles be reduced.
Suggested Reading
Al Jaroudi W.A, Iskandrian A.E. Regadenoson: a new myocardial stress agent.  J Am Coll
Cardiol . 2009;54:1123–1130.
Arumugam P, Tout D, Tonge C. Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy using rubidium-82
positron emission tomography.  Br Med Bull . 2013;107:87–100.
Cerqueira M.D, Weissman N.J, Dilsizian V, et al. Standardized myocardial segmentation and
nomenclature for tomographic imaging of the heart.  Circulation . 2002;105:539–549.
Chareonthaitawee P, Beanlands R.S, Chen W, et al. Joint SNMMI–ASNC Expert consensus
document on the role of 18F-FDG PET/CT in cardiac sarcoid detection and therapy
monitoring.  J Nucl Med . 2017;58:1341–1353.
De Jong M.C, Genders T.S, van Geuns R.J, Moelker A, Hunink M.G. Diagnostic performance
of stress myocardial perfusion imaging for coronary artery disease: a systematic review
and meta-analysis.  Eur Radiol . 2012;66:477–492.
Di Carli M.F, Asgarzadie F, Schelbert H.R, et al. Quantitative relation between myocardial
viability and improvement in heart failure symptoms after revascularization in patients
with ischemic cardiomyopathy.  Circulation . 1995;92:3436–3444.
Dilsizian V, Bacharach S.L, Beanlands R.S, et al. ASNC imaging guidelines/SNMMI procedure
standard for positron emission tomography (PET) nuclear cardiology procedures.  J Nucl
Cardiol . 2016;23:1187–1226.
Dilsizian V, Narula J, Braunwald E.  Atlas of Nuclear Cardiology . 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Current
Medicine; 2013.
Eitzman D, Al-Aouar Z, Kanter H.L, et al. Clinical outcome of patients with advanced
coronary artery disease after viability studies with positron emission tomography.  J Am
Coll Cardiol . 1992;20:559–565.
Henzlova M.J, Duvall Wl, Einstein A.J, et al. ASNC imaging guidelines for SPECT nuclear
cardiology procedures: Stress, protocols, and tracers.  J Nucl Cardiol . 2016;23:606–639.
Lim S.P, McArdle B.A, Beanlands R.S, Hessian R.C. Myocardial viability: it is still alive.  Semin
Nucl Med . 2014;44:358–374.
Murthy V.L, Bateman T.M, Beanlands R.S, et al. Clinical quantification of myocardial blood
flow using PET: Joint position paper of the SNMMI Cardiovascular Council and the
ASNC.  J Nucl Cardiol . 2018;25 269–27.
Nandalur K.R, Dwamena B.A, Choudhri A.F, et al. Diagnostic performance of positron
emission tomography in the detection of coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis.  Acad
Radiol . 2008;15:444–451.
Rischpler C, Nekolla S.G, Kunze K.P, Schwaiger M. PET/MRI of the heart.  Semin Nucl Med
. 2015;45:234–247.
Sampson U.K, Dorbala S, Limaye A, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of rubidium-82 myocardial
perfusion imaging with hybrid positron emission tomography/computed tomography in
the detection of coronary artery disease.  J Am Coll Cardiol . 2007;49:1052–1058.
Schatka I, Bengel F.M. Advanced imaging of cardiac sarcoidosis.  J Nucl Med . 2014;55:99–106.
Zaret B.L, Beller G.A.  Clinical Nuclear Cardiology: State of the Art and Future Directions . 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010.
