Myocardial Perfusion Scintigraphy
The underlying physiological principles that make myocardial
perfusion imaging an important diagnostic tool remain unchanged.
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy depicts the following sequential
physiological events. The radiopharmaceutical must first be delivered
to the myocardium. Then viable metabolically active myocardial cells
must be available to extract the radiotracer. Finally, a significant
amount of the radiopharmaceutical must remain within the cells to
allow for imaging. The scintigraphic images are a map of regional
myocardial perfusion. If a patient has reduced regional perfusion as a
result of hemodynamically significant coronary artery disease (CAD)
or a loss of cell viability as a result of myocardial infarction (MI), a
perfusion defect or cold region is seen on the images. All diagnostic
patterns in the many diverse applications follow from these
observations.
Single-Photon Radiopharmaceuticals for
Myocardial Scintigraphy
Radiopharmaceuticals
Both Tc-99m sestamibi and Tc-99m tetrofosmin are routinely used
today for cardiac perfusion imaging. They have relatively minor
differences (Table 16.1). Thallium-201 was the original perfusion agent
used before the introduction of the technetium agents, but it is now
reserved for special situations, as described in the following
subsection.
FIG. 16.1  Three views of the heart that correspond to the short
(transaxial) and long (horizontal, vertical) axes of the heart on single-
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion
images.
Table 16.1
Physiology and Pharmacokinetics of Thallium-201, Tc-99m Sestamibi, and Tc-99m
Tetrofosmin
Physiology
Thallium-201
Tc-99m Sestamibi
Tc-99m Tetrofosmin
Chemical
class/charge
Elemental cation
Isonitrile cation
Diphosphine cation
Mechanism of
uptake
Active transport
Na/K ATPase
pump
Passive diffusion, negative
electrical potential
Passive diffusion, negative
electrical potential
Myocyte
localization
Cytosol
Mitochondria
Mitochondria
Intracellular
state
Free
Bound
Bound
Preparation
Cyclotron
Generator/kit
Generator/kit
First-pass
extraction
fraction
85%
60%
50%
Percent cardiac
uptake
3%
1.5%
1.2%
Myocardial
clearance
4-hr T1⁄2
Minimal
Minimal
Body clearance
Renal
Hepatic
Hepatic
Imaging time
after
injection
Stress
10 min
15–30 min
5–15 min
Rest
3–4 hr
30–90 min
30 min
Tc-99m Sestamibi (Cardiolite)
Tc-99m sestamibi (Cardiolite) was approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for cardiac imaging in 1990. Generic Tc-
99m sestamibi became available in 2008. Sestamibi is a lipophilic
cation and member of the chemical isonitrile family (Fig. 16.2A). After
intravenous injection, Tc-99m sestamibi distributes in the heart in
proportion to myocardial blood flow and passively diffuses into the
myocardial cell because of its lipid solubility. The positively charged
lipophilic
molecule
is
attracted
to
the
negatively
charged
mitochondria, where it is retained. Extraction is proportional to
coronary blood flow, although it is underestimated at high flow rates
and overestimated at low flow rates. This is true of all the perfusion
agents (Fig. 16.3). Myocardial uptake is prompt, and the ratio of
myocardium to background activity improves as the lungs clear.
Blood clearance is rapid due to renal, biliary, and intestinal excretion.
Radiotracer remains fixed within the myocardium, providing an
imaging time window of several hours. Image acquisition begins 45 to
60 minutes after tracer administration for resting studies and as early
as 30 minutes for exercise stress studies due to its more rapid
background clearance.
Tc-99m Tetrofosmin (Myoview)
Tc-99m tetrofosmin (Myoview) was approved by the FDA for cardiac
imaging in 1996. It is a member of the diphosphine chemical class (see
Fig. 16.2B). Similar to sestamibi, tetrofosmin is a lipophilic cation that
localizes near mitochondria in the myocardial cell and remains fixed
there. After intravenous injection, it clears rapidly from the blood, and
myocardial uptake is prompt. Extraction is proportional to blood flow,
although it is underestimated at high flow rates (see Fig. 16.3). Minor
differences compared with Tc-99m sestamibi are described (see Table
16.1). The heart-to-lung and heart-to-liver ratios improve with time
due to clearance via the liver and kidneys. The heart-to-liver ratios are
higher for tetrofosmin than sestamibi because of faster hepatic
clearance, allowing for earlier imaging. After exercise stress, imaging
at 15 minutes is feasible; rest studies can be started at 30 minutes.
FIG. 16.2  Tc-99m sestamibi and Tc-99m tetrofosmin molecular
structure. (A) Tc-99m sestamibi is composed of six isonitrile ligands
(hexakis 2-methoxyisobutyl isonitrile) surrounding the Tc-99m
radionuclide. (B) Tc-99m tetrofosmin has the chemical name 6,9-bis (2-
ethoxyethyl)-3,12-dioxa-6,9 diphosphatetradecane.
FIG. 16.3  Myocardial perfusion radiopharmaceuticals, Tl-201, Tc-99m
sestamibi, and Tc-99m tetrofosmin, uptake relative to coronary blood
flow. An ideal myocardial perfusion tracer would show a linear
relationship to blood flow over a wide range of flow rates (straight
diagonal dark dashed line). Tl-201, Tc-99m sestamibi, and Tc-99m
tetrofosmin all have extraction that is proportional to blood flow but
underestimate flow at high flow rates.
Thallium-201 Chloride (Tl-201)
The radionuclide Tl-201 is cyclotron-produced. It decays by electron
capture to its stable mercury-201 daughter, with a physical half-life of
73 hours. The emitted photons available for imaging are mostly
mercury K-characteristic x-rays ranging from 69 to 83 keV (95%
abundant) and some gamma rays of 167 keV (10%) and 135 keV (3%).
For imaging, a 30% camera window is set for the 69- to 83-keV x-ray
emissions and a 20% window at 167 keV. After intravenous injection,
Tl-201 blood clearance is rapid (Fig. 16.4). It behaves similar to K+ and
is transported across the myocardial cell membrane by the Na + /K +
ATPase pump. First-pass extraction and percent uptake are higher
than for Tc-99m sestamibi or tetrofosmin (see Table 16.1). However, it
is not ideal for gamma camera imaging, especially for large patients,
because its mercury x-ray emissions have relatively low photoenergies
and not a single energy photopeak, Compton scatter is high, and the
administered dose (3.0 mCi) is low because of poor dosimetry (see the
Appendix).
Scintigraphic images after initial uptake reflect capillary myocardial
blood flow. Unlike the Tc-99m perfusion agents, it then undergoes
redistribution, a process of continual dynamic exchange between
myocardial cells and the vascular blood pool. Several hours after
injection, the images depict an equilibrium reflecting regional blood
volume. With normal perfusion, initial capillary blood flow and
delayed regional blood-volume images are similar. Regions of
decreased perfusion on early poststress images are due to either
decreased blood flow (ischemia) or lack of viable cells to fix the tracer
(infarction). If an initial perfusion defect persists on delayed images, it
is infarcted. Defects showing “fill-in” of Tl-201 between stress and rest
are viable myocardium rendered ischemic during stress. These unique
pharmacokinetic characteristics of Tl-201 are the basis for “stress-
redistribution” imaging used in the past for the detection of CAD (see
Fig. 16.4) but today, more commonly, for viability.
FIG. 16.4  Tl-201 pharmacokinetics: Redistribution. After intravenous
injection, Tl-201 rapidly clears from the blood pool. Normal stress peak
myocardial uptake occurs by 10 minutes. Redistribution begins
promptly after initial uptake. There is a constant dynamic exchange of
Tl-201 between the myocytes and blood pool. Normal myocardium
progressively clears over 3 hours. In the presence of ischemia, uptake
is delayed and reduced, and clearance is slow. With infarction, there is
little uptake or change over time. The diagram relates thallium
pharmacokinetics (bottom) to scintigraphic findings (top). The ischemic
region, although initially hypoperfused compared with the normal
region, equalizes at 3 hours.
Imaging Methodologies
Planar Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
FIG. 16.13  Ischemia—Tc-99m sestamibi single-photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion scintigraphy.
Reduced perfusion (cold, photopenic) at stress in the anterior lateral
left ventricle; near normal perfusion at rest. DLY, Delay; hax, horizontal
long axis; sax, short axis; STR, stress; vax, vertical long axis.
Cardiac Stress
Exercise Stress
Graded treadmill exercise with ECG monitoring has long been the
standard method to diagnose ischemic CAD (Fig. 16.14). Exercise
increases cardiac workload and oxygen demand. The degree of stress
must be sufficient to unmask underlying ischemia (Box 16.1). The
treadmill study allows for an assessment of the patient’s functional
cardiac status by monitoring exercise tolerance, heart rate, blood
pressure, and ECG response to graded exercise. Contraindications to
cardiac stress testing are listed (Box 16.2).
Exercise-induced myocardial ischemia produces characteristic ECG
ST-T segment depression (Fig. 16.15). The adequacy of exercise is
critical for interpretation. Patients achieving more than 85% of the age-
predicted maximum heart rate (220 – age) are considered to have
achieved adequate exercise stress. The product of heart rate × blood
pressure, metabolic equivalents (METS), and exercise time (minutes)
are also used to judge the adequacy of exercise. Failure to achieve
adequate exercise is the most common reason for a false-negative
stress test result (Box 16.3).
The accuracy of the cardiac treadmill exercise test for the diagnosis
of CAD is modest, approximately 75%, with many false-negative and
false-positive results. The specificity is particularly poor in women, in
patients with resting ECG ST-T abnormalities, left ventricular
hypertrophy, or bundle branch block, and for those on digoxin. These
patients often require myocardial perfusion scintigraphy to confirm or
exclude the diagnosis of CAD.
FIG. 16.14  Treadmill graded patient exercise with
electrocardiographic, blood pressure, heart rate, and symptom
monitoring.
Box 16.1 Exercise Testing: Rationale and Endpoint
Measures
Physiological Rationale
Physical exercise increases cardiac work.
Increased work increases myocardial oxygen demand.
Normal coronary arteries dilate, and flow increases.
Stenotic vessels cannot dilate, and flow reserve is limited.
Myocardial ischemia is induced.
Manifestations of Myocardial Ischemia
Electrocardiogram: Ion flux across cell membrane is impaired,
producing ST-segment depression.
Perfusion scintigraphy: Decrease in regional flow produces
cold defect on scintigraphy.
Radionuclide ventriculography: Regional wall-motion
abnormality or fall in left ventricular ejection fraction with
stress
Methodology for Exercise Stress
The patient must fast for 4 to 6 hours before the test to prevent gastric
symptoms and minimize splanchnic blood distribution. Cardiac
medications may be held depending on the indication for the stress
test (e.g., whether for diagnosis or to determine the effectiveness of
therapy; Table 16.4). Beta-blockers may prevent achievement of
maximum heart rate, and nitrates and calcium channel blockers may
block or prevent cardiac ischemia, limiting the test’s diagnostic value.
In addition to a standard 12-lead electrocardiogram, an intravenous
line is kept open. Graded treadmill exercise is usually performed
according to the Bruce protocol (Table 16.5). When the patient has
achieved maximal exercise or peak patient tolerance, the radiotracer is
injected. Exercise is continued for another minute to ensure adequate
myocardial uptake. Early discontinuation of exercise may result in
uptake reflecting perfusion at submaximal exercise levels. Indications
for terminating exercise are listed in Box 16.4. Many are
manifestations of ischemia; others are due to underlying medical,
cardiac, or pulmonary conditions.
Pharmacological Stress
Patients receive pharmacological stress with coronary vasodilators
rather than exercise stress when it is anticipated that they will not be
able to achieve adequate exercise due to concurrent medical problems
(e.g., pulmonary disease or lower extremity musculoskeletal
problems). The disadvantage of this approach is the lack of functional
cardiac information provided by exercise. Dipyridamole (Persantine)
and adenosine (Adenoscan) have long been used for pharmacological
stress myocardial perfusion imaging. Regadenoson (Lexiscan) was
approved by the FDA in 2009 and is the most recently FDA-approved
drug.
FIG. 16.15  Treadmill electrocardiographic ischemia. Baseline (left)
and maximal stress (right) 12-lead electrocardiogram demonstrates ST-
T wave depression in II, III, aVF, and V6, consistent with stress-induced
ischemia.
Box 16.2 Contraindications for Stress Testing
Acute myocardial infarction
Unstable angina
Severe tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias
Uncontrolled symptomatic heart failure
Critical aortic stenosis
Acute aortic dissection
Pulmonary embolism
Poorly controlled hypertension
Table 16.4
Drugs That Interfere With Stress Testing: Recommended Withdrawal Interval
Drugs
Withdrawal Interval
Exercise
Beta-blockers
48–96 hr
Calcium channel blockers
48–72 hr
Nitrates (long acting)
12 hr
Pharmacological
Theophylline derivatives
48 hr
Caffeine
24 hr
Table 16.5
Drugs That Interfere With Stress Testing: Recommended Withdrawal Interval
Stage (min)
Total Time (min)
Speed (mile/hr)
Grade (%)
Standard Bruce Protocol
1 (3)
1.7
2 (3)
2.5
3 (3)
3.4
4 (3)
4.2
5 (3)
5.0
6 (3)
6.0
Modified Bruce Protocol
1 (3)
1.7
2 (3)
1.7
3 (3)
1.7
4 (3)
2.5
5 (3)
3.4
6 (3)
4.2
7 (3)
5.0
The modified Bruce starts with the same speed as the standard Bruce,
but with no slope, followed by a slight increase in slope and then in
speed. This protocol is suited for elderly patients or when one
anticipates difficulties with physical performance.
Box 16.3 Reasons for Failing to Achieve Adequate
Exercise
Poor general conditioning, low exercise tolerance
Poor motivation
Arthritis, other musculoskeletal problems
Lung disease
Peripheral vascular disease
Medications (beta-blockers)
Angina
Arrhythmia
Cardiac insufficiency
Box 16.4 Indications for Terminating a Stress Test
Patient request
Inability to continue because of fatigue, dyspnea, or faintness
Moderate to severe chest pain
Dizziness, near syncope
Pallor, diaphoresis
Ataxia
Claudication
Ventricular tachycardia
Atrial tachycardia or fibrillation
Onset of second- or third-degree heart block
ST-segment depression greater than 3 mm
Decrease in systolic blood pressure from baseline
Increase in systolic blood pressure above 240 mm Hg or
diastolic above 120 mm Hg
Coronary vasodilators increase coronary blood flow by 3 to 5 times
in normal vessels. Because coronary arteries with significant stenoses
cannot increase blood flow to the same degree, vasodilator stress
results in vascular regions of relative hypoperfusion on myocardial
perfusion scintigraphy, similar to that seen with exercise-induced
ischemia. This is really not a test of ischemia because cardiac work is
not involved but, rather, a test of coronary flow reserve. However,
comparative studies have shown similar scintigraphic patterns and
diagnostic accuracy for exercise and pharmacological stress.
Endogenous adenosine is normally physiologically released from
the coronary endothelial cells and activates four coronary receptor
subtypes, A1, A2A, A2B, and A3. Only A2A activation produces
coronary vasodilation. Activation of the other receptors is responsible
for side effects. The adenosine analog (Adenoscan) used for stress
testing has a similar effect. It is short acting, and discontinuation of
infusion promptly resolves any adverse symptoms. Dipyridamole
exerts its pharmacological effect by blocking the reuptake of
adenosine and thus raising endogenous adenosine blood levels.
Regadenoson is a selective A2A receptor.
Methodology
Because vasodilators are counteracted by drugs and food containing
methylxanthines (e.g., theophylline and caffeine), they should be held
for 12 to 24 hours before the study (see Table 16.4). The technical
details for dipyridamole, adenosine, and regadenoson infusion
protocols vary somewhat (Fig. 16.16) due to their different
pharmacokinetics (Table 16.6). Unlike adenosine and dipyridamole,
which are given as constant infusions based on weight, regadenoson
is given in a fixed dose as an intravenous bolus. A mild to moderate
increase in heart rate and a reduction in blood pressure confirm the
drugs’ pharmacological effect.
Not uncommon side effects of these drugs include dizziness,
headache, and flushing. Infrequently, patients experience chest pain;
however, it is not usually caused by ischemia. A coronary steal
syndrome may sometimes produce true ischemia, manifested by ECG
ST-T depression during the infusion, suggesting significant CAD.
Dyspnea and atrioventricular (AV) conduction blocks occur
predominantly with adenosine.
Although dipyridamole was the first agent approved, it is less often
used today because of its long physiological effect, often causing
adverse symptoms and requiring reversal with aminophylline. Both
adenosine and dipyridamole may cause bronchospasm in patients
with
asthma
and
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease.
Regadenoson is somewhat safer in patients with mild to moderate
reactive airway disease and may have fewer side effects overall.
FIG. 16.16  Coronary vasodilator stress protocols compared for
dipyridamole, adenosine, and regadenoson.
Table 16.6
Adenosine, Dipyridamole, and Regadenoson Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics Dipyridamole
Adenosine
Regadenoson
Administration
Intravenous infusion
Intravenous infusion
Intravenous
bolus
Dose
Mode of
action
Duration of
infusion
0.56 mg/kg
Blocks reuptake of
adenosine, raising
endogenous adenosine
blood levels
4–8 min
140 μgm/kg/min
Nonselective
4–6 min
400 μg
Selective
A2A
agonist
10-sec bolus
Time to peak
Duration of
action
Elimination
6.5 min
12 min
Liver
30 sec
6 sec after infusion
stopped
Cellular
33 sec
2.3 min
Renal (57%)
uptake/metabolism
Because of adenosine’s short half-life (<10 seconds), side effects
resolve promptly when the infusion is stopped. Because the effect of
dipyridamole and regadenoson is prolonged after stopping the
infusion, intravenous aminophylline may be required to reverse the
side effects.
Dobutamine
For patients unable to exercise and with contraindications to
vasodilator therapy (e.g., symptomatic asthma), dobutamine can be
used as an alternative. It is a synthetic catecholamine that acts on
alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors, producing inotropic and
chronotropic effects that increase cardiac work. In normal coronary
arteries, increased blood flow results. With significant stenosis,
regional flow does not increase, producing scintigraphic patterns
similar to those seen with exercise and pharmacological stress.
Methodology
The initial dopamine infusion rate is 5 μg/kg/min over 3 minutes, then
increased to 10 μg/kg/min for another 3 minutes and increased further
by the same amount every 10 minutes until a maximum of 40
μg/kg/min is achieved. The radiopharmaceutical is injected 1 minute
after the maximal tolerable dose. Dobutamine infusion is continued
for 1 minute.
Table 16.7
Protocols for Stress Myocardial Perfusion Scintigraphy
Method
Radiopharmaceutical
Rationale
2 day
Tc-99m sestamibi/tetrofosmin
Obesity, image quality
1 day
Tc-99m sestamibi/tetrofosmin
Image quality, efficiency
1 day
Tl-201
Viability
Dual isotope
Tl-201 and Tc-99m sestamibi/tetrofosmin
Image quality, viability, logistics
The accuracy of dobutamine perfusion imaging is similar to that of
exercise or pharmacological stress. However, it is limited by the
frequent occurrence of side effects, including chest pain, arrhythmias,
and the inability of patients to tolerate the maximum dose. The main
adverse effects are hypotension and arrhythmias, which are dose
related and require cessation of infusion.
Imaging Protocols
The specific stress/rest perfusion imaging protocol used depends on
the radiopharmaceutical chosen, physician preference, and clinic
logistics (Table 16.7; Box 16.5).
Box 16.5 Tc-99m Sestamibi and Tetrofosmin SPECT
Myocardial Perfusion Imaging: Summary Protocol
Patient Preparation
Patient should fast for 4 hours before the study.
Radiopharmaceutical
10 to 30 mCi (370–1110 MBq) intravenously (see the following
individual protocols)
SPECT Imaging Protocol
1-Day rest–stress imaging
Rest: 10 mCi (370 MBq); imaging at 30 to 90 minutes
Stress: 30 mCi (1110 MBq); imaging at 15 to 30 minutes
2-Day rest–stress or stress–rest imaging: 30 mCi (1110 MBq)
SPECT Acquisition Parameters
Patient position: supine, left arm raised (180-degree arc)
Rotation: counterclockwise
Matrix: 128 × 128 word mode
Image/arc: 64 views (180-degree and 45-degree right anterior
oblique; 135-degree left posterior oblique)
SPECT Reconstruction Parameters a
Ramp filter
Convolution filter: Butterworth
Attenuation correction: Review images with and without
correction.
Oblique-angle reformatting: Short axis, vertical long axis, and
horizontal long axis
Gated SPECT
Electrocardiogram synchronized data collection: R-wave
trigger, 8 frames/cardiac cycle
Planar Imaging Protocol
Collimator: High resolution
Window: 20% centered at 140 keV
For 1-day rest and stress studies, give 10 mCi (370 MBq) at
rest and image at 30 to 60 minutes.
Rest studies: Begin imaging at 60 to 90 minutes after tracer
injection.
Obtain anterior, 45-degree left anterior oblique and left lateral
images.
Obtain 750,000 to 1 million counts per view.
Wait 4 hours and give 30 mCi (1110 MBq) with repeat
imaging at 15 to 30 minutes.
Stress studies: Begin imaging at 15 to 30 minutes after tracer
injection.
Obtain stress and rest images in identical projection.
a  Choice of SPECT acquisition and reconstruction parameters is influenced by the
equipment used.
SPECT, Single-photon emission computed tomography.
Tc-99m Sestamibi and Tc-99m Tetrofosmin
Single-Day Protocol
Separate injections are required for the rest and stress studies. The
patient receives a lower administered dose of the radiopharmaceutical
for the initial study (8–10 mCi [266–370 MBq]) and a several-fold-
higher dose (25–30 mCi [925–1110 MBq]) for the second study, so that
the first study will be only in background. The most common
approach is to perform the rest study first, followed by the stress
study with the administered dose approximately 3 times higher. Some
centers are doing the stress study first with the lower dose. If normal,
no rest study is performed. If abnormal, the rest study is acquired
after administering the larger dose. This approach can improve
patient throughput and reduce patient radiation. The downside is that
the stress test has fewer counts, and the image quality is sometimes
suboptimal.
Two-Day Protocol
Tissue attenuation can be quite marked in large patients and result in
poor image quality and interpretative problems, particularly for the
lower-dose rest study. A 2-day approach allows administration of the
maximum dose (25–30 mCi) for both studies.
Thallium-201 Chloride
Only one injection of radiopharmaceutical is required. After peak
stress injection, initial stress images are acquired at 10 to 15 minutes
and delayed rest images at 3 hours (Fig. 16.17).
Dual-Isotope Protocol With Tc-99m Sestamibi and Thallium-201
Chloride
The dual-isotope approach is used at some centers because the entire
study can be completed more rapidly than with Tc-99m protocols.
Imaging begins earlier, immediately after the rest study (Tl-201) and
10 minutes after the stress study (Tc-99m sestamibi). It takes
advantage of the different photopeaks of Tc-99m (140 keV) and Tl-201
(69-83 keV). The Tl-201 rest study is performed first with 3 to 3.5 mCi
(110–130 MBq), followed by the stress study, using 20 to 30 mCi (740–
1110 MBq) of the Tc-99m radiopharmaceutical. The downside is the
poorer resolution of Tl-201.
Quality Control and Image Quality
Gamma camera quality control is required to routinely obtain high-
quality images and is described in detail in Part I, Radiation Detection
and Instrumentation. Image quality may be poor because of
insufficient myocardial counts due to a low administered dose,
inadvertent subcutaneous injection, or soft tissue attenuation. Patient
motion and scatter from radioactivity in the liver or bowel can
degrade image quality. Review of the acquisition raw data for patient
movement and significant attenuation should be routine. The 2-D
unprocessed planar images acquired every few degrees for 180
degrees from each camera head can be displayed in a cinematic loop
to look for motion. Another method for confirming movement is to
review the “sinogram.” Each projection image is stacked vertically
and compressed, with maintenance of the count density distribution
in the x-axis but minimization in the y-axis. Because the heart is not in
the center of the camera radius of rotation, the position of the left
ventricle in the stacked frames varies sinusoidally. Motion is seen as a
break in the sinogram (Fig. 16.18). With significant motion, the study
should ideally be reacquired. If this is not possible due to poor patient
cooperation or logistical issues, software motion-correction programs
are available with most camera computer systems. However, these
programs usually correct only in the vertical axis, and patients often
move in multiple dimensions.
Image quality can sometimes be limited by activity below the
diaphragm from the liver or bowel activity scattering into the heart,
causing artifacts and sometimes interpretative problems. When
serious, further delayed imaging can be performed, allowing time for
clearance.
Image Interpretation
Although the anatomy of the coronary circulation varies in detail, the
distribution of the major vessels is reasonably predictable (Fig. 16.19;
see also Table 16.3). The left anterior descending (LAD) coronary
artery serves most of the septum and the anterior wall of the left
ventricle. Its diagonal branches course over the anterior lateral wall,
and septal perforators penetrate into the septum. The left circumflex
coronary artery (LCX) and its marginal branches serve the lateral wall
and the inferior segment of the lateral wall. The right coronary artery
(RCA) and its branches serve the right ventricle, the inferior portion of
the septum, and the inferior wall of the left ventricle.
FIG. 16.17  Tl-201 1-day protocol shows hypoperfusion in the anterior
apical wall 10 minutes after stress (top) and complete redistribution
(bottom) 3 hours later.
FIG. 16.18  Sinogram—detection of patient motion. The projection
images are stacked vertically. Because the heart is not in the center of
the camera radius of rotation, the position of the left ventricle in the
stacked frames varies sinusoidally. Any significant motion is seen as a
break in the sinogram. There is a horizontal break in the midsinogram
(left). The repeat acquisition shows no break and thus no significant
motion (right).
Planar Images
The cardiac scintigraphic configuration depends on patient habitus
and the orientation of the heart in the chest, but it is usually circular or
ellipsoid in different views (see Figs. 16.5 and 16.6). The right ventricle
has much less uptake than the left. The anterior view best shows the
anterior wall and apex. The inferior wall and septum overlap in this
view. The LAO view best demonstrates the lateral wall and septum,
but the apex and inferior wall may overlap depending on the
orientation of the heart. The left lateral view best demonstrates the
inferior wall and apex. Stress and rest images should be acquired at
the same angle.
Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography Images
The cinematic rotating 2-D raw (unprocessed) data should be
reviewed for the presence of attenuation and motion. Regions of
reduced myocardial activity from breast or soft tissue and
subdiaphragmatic attenuation could potentially be misinterpreted as
myocardial infarction. If attenuation is noted on the cine display, this
could help explain a finding on cross-sectional images. If the breasts
are in different positions during the two studies, this could be
misinterpreted as ischemia if not noted on the rotating raw data
views.
FIG. 16.19  Normal coronary anatomy and cardiac perfusion beds.
The left main coronary artery is only 0 to 15 mm in length before
dividing into the left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries.
Major branches of the left anterior descending artery are the diagonal
and septal branches. The left circumflex artery (LCX) has obtuse
marginal branches. The right coronary artery (RCA) originates
separately and has important branches that include the posterior right
ventricular branches and the posterior descending artery. “Dominance”
refers to which coronary artery (RCA or LCX) supplies the
diaphragmatic surface of the left ventricle and posterior septum by
giving rise to the posterior descending and posterior left ventricular
branches. Right posterior descending (RPD), right marginal branch
artery (RMA). The apex may be perfused by branches from any of the
three main vessels. AO, Aorta; AV, aortic valve; IVC, inferior vena
cava; LCA, left coronary artery; LCX, left circumflex; L Desc, left
anterior descending; L Diag, left diagonal; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral
valve; PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary valve; RA, right atrium;
RMA, right mesenteric artery; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena
cava; TV, tricuspid valve.
With normal myocardial perfusion there is relatively uniform
uptake throughout the left ventricle (LV) myocardium (see Fig. 16.7).
On short-axis SPECT views, the LV has a doughnut appearance. The
lateral wall usually has more uptake than the anterior or inferior wall.
Near the base of the heart, there is less or no uptake in the septum
because of the membranous septum and valve planes, giving the heart
a horseshoe- or U-shaped appearance on vertical and horizontal long-
axis SPECT slices. Reduced uptake in the apex (apical thinning) is a
normal finding. The right ventricle (RV) has less uptake than the left
ventricle due to its lesser myocardial muscle mass. RV hypertrophy
results in increased uptake (Fig. 16.20). Atria are not visualized.
Although some normal lung uptake is seen, increased uptake on rest
most commonly occurs in heavy smokers and patients with
underlying lung disease or heart failure.
Stress images after exercise or pharmacological stress are not
strikingly different in distribution from those at rest, although there
are some differences. The stress image cardiac-to-background ratio is
higher because of the increased myocardial blood flow and thus
radiotracer uptake. RV uptake is often increased but is still
considerably less than the LV. With good treadmill exercise, reduced
liver activity is seen because of the diversion of blood flow from the
splanchnic bed to the leg muscles. Vasodilator pharmacological stress
results in increased liver activity.
Soft tissue attenuation is seen on most SPECT images and is marked
in large patients. Males typically have decreased activity in the
inferior wall (Fig. 16.21). This is referred to as diaphragmatic
attenuation, specifically attenuation due to subdiaphragmatic organs
interpositioned between the heart and gamma camera. The amount of
attenuation effect is dependent on patient size, shape, and internal
anatomy. Women often have reduced activity in the anterior, apex, or
anterior lateral wall due to breast attenuation, the extent depending on
the size and position of the breasts (Fig. 16.22). Anterior and lateral
wall attenuation may be seen in males with excessive adipose tissue or
muscle hypertrophy and is marked in patients not able to elevate their
arms during imaging.
Attenuation correction improves the specificity (Fig. 16.23; see also
Fig. 16.21). There are two methods. An older method used a rotating
gadolinium-153 gamma source attached to the camera head to
produce an attenuation map. Hybrid SPECT/CT systems use the CT
transmission data for this purpose. SPECT and CT images are usually
acquired during tidal volume breathing as the heads rotate around the
patient. Thus, some misregistration is not unusual. Fused images
should be checked for significant misregistration because this could
result in incorrect attenuation correction.
Gated SPECT has become routine at most centers (see Fig. 16.10),
obtained immediately after stress. In addition to analyzing global and
regional myocardial wall motion and calculating an LVEF, it can be
helpful for differentiating the decreased activity from attenuation
artifact from myocardial infarction. Good wall motion and myocardial
thickening suggest that the decreased counts are due to attenuation
and not infarction.
Extracardiac
uptake
is
always
present
because
the
radiopharmaceuticals are normally taken up in all metabolically active
tissues in the body except for the brain. Structures accumulating the
cardiac radiopharmaceuticals often in the field of view are the thyroid,
salivary glands, skeletal muscle, and kidneys. Gallbladder, biliary,
and intestinal activity are also routinely seen. Uptake may be seen in
many benign and malignant tumors.
Activity emanating from the liver and bowel adjacent to the heart
may cause scatter of counts into the inferior wall and adjacent walls of
the heart, increasing apparent uptake and causing artifacts, which can
complicate interpretation. The activity scattering into the inferior wall
may cause focal hot spots. Intense subdiaphragmatic radioactivity
adjacent to the heart may also produce cold defects due to
reconstruction artifacts. Both may cause interpretive problems.
FIG. 16.20  Right ventricular hypertrophy. Patient has severe
pulmonary hypertension secondary to interstitial pulmonary fibrosis.
Stress and rest Tc-99 sestamibi show prominent uptake in the
hypertrophied right ventricle.
Diagnostic Patterns in Coronary Artery Disease
Terms used to characterize the status of the myocardium, such as
ischemia, infarction, hibernating, and stunning, are defined in Table 16.8 .
Ischemia and Infarction
Diagnostic interpretation makes use of the difference in the
appearance of the scans at stress and rest (Table 16.9). The stress study
is initially assessed for the presence or absence of perfusion defects,
noting the location, size, severity, and likely vascular distribution of
visualized abnormalities. The rest study is then compared with stress,
looking for stress-induced perfusion deficits not present at rest.
Computer quantitative methods are routinely used in conjunction
with image analysis to enhance interpretation (Fig. 16.24). Perfusion
defects caused by CAD are most commonly distal in the vascular bed,
rather than limited to the base of the heart. A true perfusion defect is
seen on more than one cross-sectional slice. Certainty increases with
lesion size and the degree or severity of the photon deficiency.
Left Bundle Branch Block
Exercise-induced reversible hypoperfusion of the septum can be seen
in patients with left bundle branch block (LBBB) in the absence of
coronary disease. The apex and anterior wall are not involved, as
would be expected with left anterior descending CAD. The stress-
induced decreased septal blood flow is thought due to asynchronous
relaxation of the septum, which is out of phase with diastolic filling of
the remainder of the ventricle when coronary perfusion is maximal.
This is not seen with pharmacological stress.
Multiple Perfusion Defects
Perfusion defects in more than one coronary artery distribution
indicate multiple-vessel CAD. The prognosis worsens with increasing
number and size of perfusion defects (Fig. 16.25). Not all significant
coronary artery stenoses are seen on stress perfusion scans. Stress-
induced ischemia of the most severe stenotic lesion may limit further
exercise, and thus other stenoses may not be seen, and multiple-vessel
disease may be underestimated. Three-vessel balanced disease may
not be apparent at all.
Transient Ischemic Dilation
The normal cardiac response is to dilate during stress and return to
normal size promptly with cessation of exercise. Poststress ventricular
dilation is abnormal and suggests multivessel disease. There are two
possible explanations for the finding, widespread subendocardial
ischemia or myocardial stunning during stress.
Stunned Myocardium
After a transient period of severe ischemia followed by reperfusion,
there may be delayed recovery of regional left ventricular function
(stunned myocardium; Fig. 16.26). The ischemic episode may be a single
event, multiple, brief, or prolonged but is not severe enough to cause
necrosis. It is most commonly seen after thrombolysis or angioplasty
in patients who have had acute coronary occlusion. Tissue in the
affected perfusion watershed is viable and accumulates the
radiopharmaceutical immediately after reperfusion. However, the
myocardial segment is akinetic. If it is only stunned and not infarcted,
wall motion will improve with time. Stress-induced transient ischemic
dilation and gated poststress SPECT ventricular dysfunction are
manifestations of stunned myocardium.
FIG. 16.21  Inferior wall attenuation correction. Dipyridamole
(Persantine) stress and rest Tc-99m sestamibi single-photon emission
computed tomography with computed tomography (SPECT/CT) study.
Non–attenuation corrected (NAC) stress and rest images and the
attenuation-corrected images (AC). Note the improvement in inferior
wall perfusion with attenuation correction. The study was interpreted as
normal.
Myocardial Viability (Hibernating Myocardium)
Although the scintigraphic findings of regional hypoperfusion at
stress and rest along with myocardial dysfunction are usually due to
myocardial infarction, some of these patients do not have infarction
but, rather, severe chronic ischemia or hibernating myocardium (see Fig.
16.26). Although severely underperfused, the myocytes have
preserved cell membrane integrity and sufficient metabolic activity to
maintain cellular viability but not contractility and thus will have
reduced myocardial contraction. These segments are “hibernating” in
a functional and metabolic sense. Patients with viable but
hypoperfused myocardium benefit from coronary revascularization,
with resulting improvement in cardiac function and reduction in
mortality. Patients with hibernating myocardium usually have known
CAD, prior myocardial infarction, and ventricular dysfunction. A
perfusion study shows a fixed defect and reduced contraction.
Infarction must be differentiated from hibernating myocardium. In
patients being considered for bypass surgery, the surgeon wants to
know whether sufficient viable myocardium exists to justify
revascularization.
FIG. 16.22  Breast attenuation. (A) Single-projection images from a
cinematic display at stress (left) and rest (right) illustrate breast
attenuation seen as decreased activity in the superior portion of the
heart. (B) The patient’s single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) cross-sectional slices show mild to moderate reduced activity
in the anterior wall, best seen in the short-axis and sagittal views.
FIG. 16.23  Attenuation correction for patient with prior inferior wall
infarction. Uncorrected images show much-reduced activity in the
inferior wall. Corrected images continue to show reduced uptake but to
a much lesser extent. A fixed apical perfusion defect is also seen. AC,
Attenuation-corrected images; NAC, noncorrected images.
Tl-201 has been used to evaluate for viability/hibernating
myocardium. Uptake is an energy-dependent process requiring intact
cell-membrane integrity; thus, uptake implies preserved myocardial
cell viability. The amount of uptake correlates with the extent of tissue
viability. Various protocols have been used to diagnose viability based
on Tl-201 pharmacokinetics. Two methods use a stress–rest Tl-201
study. If this shows a fixed perfusion defect, further delayed images
are acquired 8 to 24 hours later or, alternatively, reinjecting Tl-201 at
the time of redistribution and repeat imaging 20 minutes later (Fig.
16.27). With both methods, viability is confirmed with Tl-201 uptake.
A third approach can be used, a rest–rest study. After Tl-201 injection
at rest, images are obtained at 15 minutes and 3 to 4 hours later or the
next day. Uptake reflects viability and the likely benefit from
revascularization (Fig. 16.28). F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/CT is
now most commonly used for viability and is discussed with cardiac
PET.
Table 16.8
Definitions Describing Myocardial Status
Term
Definition and Scan Appearance
Myocardial
ischemia
Oxygen supply below metabolic requirements because of inadequate blood
circulation caused by coronary stenosis
Hypoperfusion (cold defect) on stress perfusion scintigrams and normal at
rest
Myocardial
infarction
Necrosis of myocardial tissue as a result of coronary occlusion
Hypoperfusion on both rest–stress perfusion and decreased uptake with
metabolic imaging
Transmural
infarction
Necrosis involves all layers, from endocardium to epicardium
High sensitivity for detection by perfusion imaging
Subendocardial
infarction
Necrosis involves only muscle adjacent to endocardium
Lower sensitivity for detection on perfusion imaging
Myocardial scar
Late result of infarction; hypoperfusion on scintigraphy
Hibernating
myocardium
Chronic ischemia with decreased blood flow and down-regulation of
contractility; reversible with restoration of blood flow
No perfusion on rest imaging, poor ventricular contraction
Improved perfusion given a long recovery between rest–rest imaging or
delayed reinjection Tl-201
Increased uptake by FDG metabolic imaging mismatched to reduced uptake
on perfusion scan
Stunned
myocardium
Myocardium with persistent contractile dysfunction despite restoration of
perfusion after a period of ischemia; usually improves with time
Normal perfusion imaging, poor ventricular contraction
Uptake by FDG metabolic imaging
FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose.
Table 16.9
Diagnostic Patterns: Stress Myocardial Perfusion
Stress
Rest
Diagnosis
Normal
Normal
Normal
Defect
Normal
Ischemia
Defect
Defect (unchanged)
Infarction
Defect
Some normalization with areas of persistent defect
Ischemia and scar
Normal
Defect
Reverse redistribution a
a  The term reverse redistribution was first described with Tl-201, and thus the reason for the
terminology. It signifies a larger defect at rest than stress but has no real clinical significance.
Quantitative Analysis
Relative regional perfusion is often illustrated on a 2-D polar map or
bull’s-eye display generated with circumferential slice count profiles
obtained from the SPECT study, with the apex at the center of the
display and the base of the ventricle at the periphery (see Figs. 16.25B
and 16.26B). Three-dimensional displays are also available. Stress–rest
difference polar maps are commonly used to analyze for reversible
ischemia. Gated SPECT analysis of wall motion and thickening is
standard (see Fig. 16.24C). Calculation of an LVEF is obtained by
measuring the change in the size of the ventricular cavity during the
cardiac cycle using edge-detection algorithms.
Clinical Scenarios
Although diagnosis continues to be an important indication for
SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging, risk stratification and
prognosis have become its primary role.
Acute Ischemic Syndromes
Emergency Room Chest Pain
Clinical decision making requires triage of patients into risk categories
based on the probability of infarction or unstable angina and risk
assessment. SPECT perfusion imaging can provide information critical
to this decision-making process. The accuracy of diagnosis is highest
when the radiopharmaceutical is injected during pain, although good
accuracy is obtainable for several hours thereafter.
Tc-99m sestamibi or tetrofosmin can be injected in the emergency
room and the patient transferred for imaging when initial evaluation
and stabilization is complete. Because the radiopharmaceutical is fixed
and does not redistribute, this delayed imaging still reflects blood
flow at the time of injection. Negative SPECT studies are highly
predictive of a good prognosis. Cardiac events occur in less than 1.5%
of patients compared with a 70% incidence in those with a positive
study. SPECT perfusion scintigraphy has a high sensitivity (>90%) for
the detection of transmural infarction immediately after the event. The
sensitivity decreases with time as the edema and ischemia resolve. By
24 hours, small infarctions may not be detectable, and the overall
sensitivity for larger ones decreases. The sensitivity is lower for
nontransmural infarctions.
Acute Myocardial Infarction With ST Elevation
Infarct size, LVEF, and residual myocardium at risk provide
important prognostic management information. Submaximal exercise
(achieving less than target heart rate) SPECT perfusion scintigraphy
after infarction can be used to detect the presence and extent of stress-
induced residual ischemia. However, pharmacological stress can be
safely done earlier than submaximal exercise, 2 to 5 days after
infarction. Evidence for ischemia warrants aggressive management,
coronary angiography, or revascularization. If negative, the patient
can be treated conservatively.
Unstable Angina and Non–ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction
Early invasive interventional therapy is recommended for patients
with high-risk indicators such as positive myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy. SPECT can be used for predischarge risk stratification of
patients with unstable angina. Ischemia is seen in a high percentage
(90%) of patients who develop subsequent cardiac events compared
with those without evidence of ischemia (20%).
FIG. 16.24  Anterior lateral and inferior lateral wall ischemia—
dipyridamole stress and rest study. (A) Stress images (top) show
hypoperfusion of the apical-anterior lateral wall and no perfusion to the
inferior lateral wall. Rest images (bottom) show markedly improved
perfusion to the anterior lateral wall but still incomplete perfusion of the
inferior wall. (B) Polar map display in two dimensions and three
dimensions confirms definite ischemia. The reversibility percentage is
as high as 23% to 32% in the anterior lateral and inferior lateral walls.
(C) Myocardial wall motion and thickening of images of same patient.
Images in the left column show septal wall thickening (manifested by
brightening) and, to a lesser degree, lateral wall thickening. Reduced
thickening is seen in the inferior wall. The cardiac time–volume curve
and calculated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF; 41%) show
diffuse hypokinesis. ANT, Anterior; LAT, lateral; SEPT, septal.
Chronic Ischemic Syndromes, Patient Management
Identification of patients at high risk but minimal symptoms can
reduce mortality with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or
angioplasty. High risk and low risk are defined as >3% and <1%
cardiac mortality rate per year, respectively. Factors assessed by
SPECT that determine patient prognosis include the extent of
infarcted myocardium, amount of jeopardized myocardium supplied
by vessels with hemodynamically significant stenosis, and severity of
ischemia. A normal stress SPECT perfusion study predicts a good
prognosis, with <1% annual risk for cardiac death or infarct. An
abnormal study is associated with an increased risk for cardiac death
or infarction. Multivessel disease is associated with high risk. Reduced
LVEF is a strong negative prognostic predictor.
Assessment of Coronary Bypass Surgery and Angioplasty
Because 40% to 60% of angiographically detected stenotic lesions of
50% to 75% are of uncertain significance, myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy can help stratify risk and assess which patients require
revascularization. Those with no ischemia have a low risk for cardiac
events, even with left main or three-vessel disease on angiography.
Those with ischemia will be helped by successful intervention.
After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
Symptom status and exercise electrocardiography are not reliable
indicators of restenosis. Of patients with recurrent chest pain within a
month of intervention, 30% have restenosis. Stress perfusion imaging
can identify recurrent ischemia.
After Coronary Bypass Surgery
Abnormal perfusion suggests bypass graft disease in the native
coronary arteries beyond the distal anastomosis, nonrevascularized
coronaries or side branches, or new disease. SPECT can determine the
location and severity of ischemia and has prognostic value early and
late after coronary bypass surgery. Ischemia occurring less than 12
months after surgery is usually caused by perianastomotic graft
stenosis. Ischemia developing after 1 year postoperatively is usually
caused by new stenoses in graft conduits or native vessels.
Heart Failure, Assessment for Coronary Artery Disease
Heart failure in the adult can be due to various causes, including
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypertensive or valvular heart disease,
and ischemic and idiopathic cardiomyopathy. Determining whether
left ventricular dysfunction is due to the consequences of CAD or
other causes is critical for patient management. If it is the result of
coronary disease, revascularization can reverse the dysfunction.
FIG. 16.25  Multivessel disease. (A) Lateral wall infarction and inferior
lateral wall ischemia. Dipyridamole stress images show no perfusion of
the lateral wall and reduced perfusion to the inferior wall. Rest images
show no improvement in the lateral wall but improved perfusion to the
inferior wall. (B) Polar map and quantitative volume display from this
patient. The reversibility percentage on the polar map shows one
inferior wall region with 19%. The graph in the right column shows the
discrepancy between the stress extent and the reversibility extent,
representing the infracted lateral wall. ANT, Anterior; INF, inferior;
SEPT, septal.
FIG. 16.26  Hibernating versus stunned myocardium. (A) Hibernating
myocardium (chronic ischemia) develops over time as a result of
chronic hypoperfusion, causing regional wall-motion dysfunction. When
perfusion is reestablished by surgical intervention, myocardial function
gradually returns. (B) Stunned myocardium is often due to an acute
ischemic episode, such as thrombosis, which, when relieved (e.g., with
angioplasty), results in prompt reperfusion. Functional recovery is
considerably delayed.
Modified with permission from Dilsizian V, Narula J. Atlas of nuclear
cardiology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Current Medicine LLC; 2006.
FIG. 16.27  Pharmacokinetics of the Tl-201 reinjection method for
diagnosing hibernating myocardium for viability. During routine Tl-201
imaging, delayed images may show a persistent fixed perfusion defect
in a region of severe or chronic ischemia. Low blood levels of Tl-201 do
not allow for adequate redistribution of Tl-201 to the myocardium.
Augmenting the Tl-201 blood levels permits greater myocardial uptake
