Cardiac Sympathetic Hyperactivity—I-123
Metaiodo-Benzyl-Guanidine
Heart failure is growing in incidence and has a high 1-year mortality
rate. Implantable cardiac devices (ICDs; e.g., cardiac defibrillators)
and resynchronization therapy can improve survival. Selecting
appropriate patients is important but uncertain. Many ICDs are not
really needed, whereas other patients have operative complications or
malfunction after placement.
Cardiac sympathetic hyperactivity is associated with fatal
arrhythmias. I-123 metaiodo-benzyl-guanidine (mIBG) can help
identify patients who will most benefit from ICD implantation. I-123
mIBG was approved by the FDA for this purpose in 2013. I-123 mIBG
is a norepinephrine analog that has the same presynaptic uptake,
storage, and release mechanism as norepinephrine. Because it is not
metabolized, its accumulation over several hours is a measure of
myocardial neuronal sympathetic integrity. Parameters of I-123 mIBG
myocardial uptake and washout have been shown to be of clinical
value, particularly for assessment of prognosis.
Planar scintigraphy has been best validated. After administration of
5 mCi (185 MBq) I-123 mIBG, 10-minute images are acquired at 15
minutes and 4 hours. Regions of interest (ROIs) for the heart and
mediastinum are drawn. Early and late heart/mediastinal (H/M) ratios
and cardiac washout (WO) rates are calculated. The early H/M ratio
reflects the integrity of the sympathetic nerve terminals. The late H/M
ratio provides information about neuronal function resulting from
uptake, storage, and release. WO reflects the neuronal integrity of
sympathetic tone. Cardiac sympathetic hyperactivity is reflected by a
decreased I-123 mIBG late H/M ratio and increased WO. Both are
associated with increased fatal arrhythmia and cardiac mortality.
Cardiac Positron Emission Tomography
Positron Emission Tomography Perfusion
Scintigraphy
PET cardiac perfusion imaging is growing in use due to the increased
availability of PET/CT cameras, the availability of Rb-82 generators, its
superior spatial resolution and image quality, and the ability to better
perform attenuation correction compared with SPECT. All of this
contributes to improved accuracy. Its use is particularly advantageous
in obese patients.
Radiopharmaceuticals
Nitrogen-13 (N-13) ammonia is the preferred PET myocardial perfusion
agent because of its superior imaging characteristics. However, it has
a very short physical half-life of 10 minutes, requiring on-site
cyclotron production. It decays 100% by positron (β+) emission (Table
16.10). At physiological pH, the major form of ammonia is NH4 +.
When injected intravenously, it clears rapidly from the circulation,
with 85% leaving the blood in the first minute and only 0.4%
remaining after 3.3 minutes. It diffuses across the myocardial cell
capillary membrane, is converted by glutamine synthetase to N-13
glutamine,
and
is
subsequently
trapped
within
tissues
by
incorporation in the cellular pool of amino acids.
Myocardial N-13 ammonia uptake is proportional to coronary blood
flow. It has a 70% to 80% extraction rate by myocardial cells at normal
coronary flow rates (see Table 16.10). As with other perfusion tracers,
its extraction efficiency drops at higher flow rates. The N-13 label
remains within the myocardium with a relatively long biological
residence time, although its physical half-life is short. Its range of 5.4
mm in tissue contributes to its good imaging characteristics.
N-13 ammonia, 10 to 20 mCi (370–740 MBq), is administered
intravenously. Imaging begins 4 minutes after injection, allowing time
for pulmonary background clearance. In the diagnosis of CAD, a
second study is performed after pharmacological stress with protocols
similar to those described for SPECT myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy (Fig. 16.30).
Rubidium-82 Chloride
The commercial availability of strontium-82 (Sr-82)/Rb-82 generator
systems is a relatively inexpensive alternative to having an on-site
cyclotron for N-13 ammonia. The half-life of the Sr-82 parent is 25
days (see Table 16.10); thus, facilities using Rb-82 require one new
generator system each month. This is still expensive, and thus a
sufficient volume of cardiac studies, four per day, is needed to make it
financially feasible. Some regional radiopharmacies now deliver Rb-82
from a single generator to multiple sites on specified days, reducing
the cost for low-volume centers.
Rb-82 is a monovalent cation and true analog of potassium. Like Tl-
201, Rb-82 is taken up by the myocardium via active transport
through the Na+/K ATPase pump. Its extraction is lower than that of
N-13 ammonia (60%). The relative myocardial extraction and
localization of Rb-82 are proportional to blood flow. The short 70-
second half-life of Rb-82 (see Table 16.10) allows sequential
myocardial perfusion studies before and after pharmacological
interventions (Fig. 16.31). Rb-82 decays by positron emission (95%)
and electron capture (5%). In addition to 511-keV annihilation
photons, it emits a 776-keV gamma (15% abundance) and 1395-keV
gamma (0.5% abundance). It has a range of 13 to 15 mm in soft tissue
before undergoing annihilation, resulting in inferior resolution and
image quality compared with N-13. However, the image quality is
superior to that of SPECT, and there is less attenuation effect and
subdiaphragmatic scatter.
Rb-82 (40–60 mCi [1480–2220 MBq]) is infused intravenously over
30 to 60 seconds. Imaging is delayed for about 90 seconds in
individuals with normal left ventricular function or 120 seconds in
patients with low LVEF (e.g., <30%) to allow time for blood-pool
clearance. The study is completed 8 minutes after injection. Imaging
time is short because of rapid decay and the need to minimize
reconstruction artifacts. About 80% of the useful counts are acquired
in the first 3 minutes and 95% in the first 5 minutes. Sequential studies
can be performed within 10 minutes.
Table 16.10
Cardiac Positron Radiopharmaceuticals
Mechanism
Radionuclide Pharmaceutical
Half-
Life
Extraction Energy
(MeV)
Range
in Soft
Tissue
Produ
Meth
Perfusion
N-13
Ammonia
10 min
70–80%
1.09
5.4 mm
Cyclo
Rb-82
Rubidium chloride
1.3 min
60%
3.15
15.0
mm
Gene
O-15
Oxygen
2.0 min
95%
1.73
7.3 mm
Cyclo
Glucose
metabolism
F-18
Fluorodeoxyglucose
min
0.635
2.4 mm
Cyclo
Oxygen-15 (O-15) Water
Because it is a freely diffusible perfusion tracer with 95% extraction by
the myocardium (see Table 16.10) and not affected by metabolic
factors, O-15 water is an excellent radiotracer for quantitative regional
myocardial
flow
measurements
(mL/min/gram).
Unlike
other
perfusion agents, extraction remains linear at very high flow rates;
therefore, the myocardial distribution reflects regional perfusion.
However, the image quality is far inferior to that of other PET
myocardial perfusion agents. Tracer circulating in the blood pool
remains within the ventricular chamber and must be subtracted to
visualize the myocardium. Its 2-minute half-life requires that on-site
cyclotron production occur in an adjacent facility. Its use is primarily
reserved for research.
Future Cardiac Positron Emission Tomography
Radiopharmaceuticals
N-13 ammonia and Rb-82 are currently the only FDA-approved
myocardial perfusion PET tracers for the evaluation of CAD. Limits to
their widespread use include the high cost of both the on-site
cyclotrons required for N-13 ammonia and the generators for Rb-82
and their short half-lives, which impose logistical difficulties.
FIG. 16.30  N-13 ammonia myocardial perfusion scintigraphy in
severe multivessel ischemia. (A) The stress study shows extensive
hypoperfusion of the anterior lateral, lateral, inferior-lateral, and inferior
wall. The rest study shows normal perfusion. Stress images suggest
dilatation compared with rest (transient ischemic dilation).(B) Bull’s-eye
display showing significant reperfusion of multiple segments. Stress
and rest left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) are also calculated and
shown. ANT, Anterior; EDV, end-diastolic volume; EF, ejection fraction;
ESV, end-systolic volume; LAT, lateral; LV, left ventricle; SEPT, septal;
SV, stroke volume; TID, transient ischemic dilatation.
These issues may be overcome in the near future with the
development of cyclotron-produced fluorinated perfusion tracers. F-
18 flurpiridaz is presently under active investigation. It complexes to a
mitochondrial protein in myocardial cells. The long half-life (110
minutes) will allow it to be shipped from off-site cyclotron facilities,
similar to F-18 FDG. It will also make possible exercise stress
protocols. F-18 has the highest resolution of clinically used positron
emitters, approximately 2 mm, because emitted positrons travel only
1.2 mm before annihilation.
Diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease
Present-day cardiac PET stress tests use pharmacological rather than
exercise
stress
because
of
the
short
half-life
of
the
radiopharmaceuticals and because, unlike SPECT, images are
acquired during stress testing. After a resting baseline study,
pharmacological stress is used to challenge coronary flow reserve,
similar to single-photon protocols. The scintigraphic appearance of the
heart and the diagnostic criteria for Rb-82 and N-13 ammonia studies
are the same as for SPECT perfusion scans (see Table 16.9).
FIG. 16.31  Rb-82 stress myocardial perfusion study. Reversible
ischemia is seen in the anterior lateral and apical myocardium. HLA,
horizontal long axis; SA, short axis; VLA, vertical long axis.
Accuracy of PET Versus SPECT
PET myocardial perfusion tracers have superior pharmacokinetic
properties because of their greater myocardial net uptake rates at
higher coronary flow than their SPECT counterparts, translating into
better PET sensitivity for the diagnosis of single-vessel or multivessel
CAD. PET instrumentation provides superior spatial resolution than
SPECT (5–7 mm vs. >15 mm); better temporal resolution, allowing for
data acquisition in dynamic sequences to delineate radiotracer kinetics
for quantification of absolute myocardial blood flow; increased ability
to detect tissue radiotracer concentration; and improved correction
methods for photon scatter, random events, and photon attenuation.
This translates into higher image quality, interpretive certainty, and
diagnostic accuracy compared with SPECT, particularly for obese
patients and females. The sensitivity and specificity of PET to detect
coronary luminal stenotic lesions of ≥50% is 92% and 85%,
respectively, versus 87% and 80%, respectively, for SPECT.
Absolute Myocardial Blood Flow Quantification
PET makes possible in vivo dynamic quantitative measurement of
radiotracer in the heart so that estimation of absolute myocardial
blood flow at baseline and during vasodilator-induced peak
hyperemia is possible.
Coronary Flow Reserve
Low coronary flow reserve is thought to be an independent predictor
of adverse cardiovascular events, even in the presence of normal
regional myocardial perfusion imaging. Patients with severe triple-
vessel coronary disease may on occasion demonstrate no perfusion
abnormalities on rest–stress PET imaging because of balanced three-
vessel ischemia; however, coronary flow reserve measured by PET
will be decreased in these patients, enabling diagnosis of this high-risk
population missed by standard myocardial perfusion imaging. It can
also suggest multiple-vessel disease when standard perfusion imaging
demonstrates only one ischemic coronary bed, and in other patients, it
can confirm small-vessel disease.
Myocardial Viability/Hibernating Myocardium
Hibernating myocardium refers to a state of persistent left ventricular
dysfunction
secondary
to
chronically
compromised
resting
myocardial blood flow in patients with CAD, in whom a
revascularization procedure can result in partial or complete recovery
of cardiac function. The combination of perfusion imaging and
metabolic imaging with F-18 FDG can diagnose the presence of
hibernating myocardium and assess the potential utility of
revascularization (see Table 16.8). Under normal conditions, the
energy needs of the heart are met through fatty acid metabolism. The
rationale for using F-18 FDG is that severely ischemic, dysfunctional,
but viable myocardium switches from fatty acid metabolism to
glucose metabolism. Thus, FDG uptake is increased in severely
hypoperfused hypokinetic or akinetic myocardial segments compared
with the remainder of the heart. This is referred to as metabolic–
perfusion mismatch, diagnostic of hibernating myocardium (Fig.
16.32). The combination of matched perfusion and FDG uptake is
indicative of scar formation (Fig. 16.33).
Fluorine-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose
F-18 FDG is a marker of myocardial glucose metabolism. The
radionuclide F-18 has a physical half-life of 110 minutes (see Table
16.10). Only 1% to 4% of the injected F-18 FDG radiopharmaceutical is
trapped in the myocardium. The target-to-background ratio is high.
Blood clearance of FDG takes considerably longer than perfusion
agents. Imaging begins 45 to 60 minutes after tracer injection (10–15
mCi [370–555 MBq]), allowing for maximal myocardial uptake and
blood and soft tissue background clearance.
For the evaluation of myocardial viability with F-18 FDG, high
serum glucose and insulin levels and low free fatty acids promote
uptake (Fig. 16.34). Thus, patient preparation requires glucose loading
after a fasting period of at least 6 hours to induce an endogenous
insulin response. The temporary increase in plasma glucose levels
stimulates insulin production, which in turn reduces fatty acid levels.
A common method of glucose loading is to give an oral load of 25 to
100 g, although intravenous loading can also be used. The intravenous
route avoids potential problems due to variable gastrointestinal
absorption times or the inability to tolerate oral administration.
However, most clinics use the simpler oral glucose-loading approach,
with supplemental insulin administered as needed. Diabetic patients
pose a challenge, either because they have limited ability to produce
endogenous insulin or because their cells are less able to respond to
insulin stimulation. Thus, the fasting/oral glucose-loading method is
often not effective. Use of insulin infusion along with close monitoring
of blood glucose can yield satisfactory results (Box 16.6).
An FDG metabolic–perfusion mismatch is accurate in predicting
improvement of regional wall motion and global LVEF after
revascularization. The sensitivity and specificity for predicting
improvement of regional function after revascularization are reported
to be approximately 95% and 80%, respectively. The positive
predictive value of preserved F-18 FDG uptake in predicting
functional recovery has been reported to be 85%, and the negative
predictive value has been reported as 92%. FDG uptake is the most
important independent predictor of future cardiac events.
Cardiac Sarcoidosis
Cardiac sarcoidosis is being increasingly recognized in patients with
sarcoidosis and is associated with a poor prognosis. Although it is
frequently associated with pulmonary sarcoidosis, this is not always
the case. It manifests as dysrhythmias, conduction defects, heart
failure, and sudden death. It is difficult to diagnose clinically because
its manifestations are nonspecific, and the diagnostic modalities are of
limited value. Endomyocardial biopsy can confirm sarcoidosis;
however, the sensitivity is poor (25%) due to its heterogeneity and
thus sampling error. Any region of the heart can become the site of
granuloma deposition, including the myocardium, endocardium, and
pericardium. The most frequently involved areas are the ventricular
septum (32%) followed by the inferior wall, anterior left ventricle,
right ventricle, and lateral left ventricle. SPECT or PET perfusion
scintigraphy may detect fixed defects in the right and the left ventricle
in some patients; however, no abnormalities are seen in others. Ga-67
was used in the past; however, FDG PET is clearly superior. Cardiac
magnetic resonance (MR) can detect the active inflammatory phase of
the disease and the chronic scarring and fibrosis phase.
With inflammation, there is increased glucose metabolism. The
inflammation can be visualized using the glucose analog F-18 FDG. In
healthy subjects as well as oncologic patients, uptake is sometimes
inhomogeneous throughout the left ventricle, particularly the lateral
and basal walls. This must not be confused with myocardial
inflammation. Normal myocardial uptake must be suppressed for the
study. Patient preparation varies between institutions, but the general
consensus is that it requires a low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet the
evening before the study, then prolonged fasting (12–18 hours) and, in
some clinics, also heparin loading. Heparin increases plasma free fatty
acid levels and thus suppresses glucose metabolism.
FIG. 16.32  Hibernating myocardium. Mismatched myocardial
perfusion. Top images are resting Rb-82, and bottom images are F-18
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). There is a perfusion–metabolic mismatch in
the anterior, septal, and apical walls. ANT, Anterior; INF, inferior; LAT,
lateral; SEP, septal.
