Pearls, Pitfalls, and Frequently
Asked Questions
This chapter reinforces concepts presented in this textbook. Students
of medicine gather pearls of wisdom from their mentors that may not
fit well into a didactic treatment of a subject but are valuable in day-
to-day practice. We all learn to avoid pitfalls that arise that have
escaped our formal education. Interpretative questions require
assembling multiple bits of information for a correct answer, and
these questions are not necessarily asked in quite the same way that
subject material was presented didactically. This chapter is neither
comprehensive nor necessarily weighted toward the relative
importance of the topics.
Radiopharmaceuticals
Pearl
Radiopharmaceuticals
are
radioactive
molecules
comprised
of
a
radionuclide that permits external detection and a biologically active
molecule or drug that acts as a carrier that determines localization and
biodistribution. Exceptions are radioiodine, gallium, thallium, and oxygen-
15, in which the radioactive atoms themselves confer the localization
properties.
Q: What is the relationship between the half-lives of a parent
radionuclide and a daughter radionuclide in a generator
system?
A: A longer-lived parent decays to a shorter-lived
daughter in all clinical generator systems. The
parent radionuclide must have a long enough half-
life to permit the formulation and distribution of the
generator. The daughter half-life must be long
enough for the clinical application.
Q: How are parent and daughter radionuclides separated in
generator systems?
A: Because the parent and daughter are different
elements, they can be chemically separated (e.g.,
molybdenum-99 and technetium-99m).
Pearl
The most common radionuclide contaminant in the generator eluate is the
parent radionuclide, Mo-99. Tc-99, the daughter product of the isomeric
transition of Tc-99m, is also present but is not considered an impurity or
contaminant, although significant Tc-99 can be a problem from a
radiolabeling standpoint.
Q: What quality-assurance procedure is used to detect
radionuclide impurities?
A: Thin-layer chromatography.
Pearl
If 5% of a Tc-99m-labeled radiopharmaceutical activity remains as free
pertechnetate in a radiolabeling procedure, the radiochemical purity is
reported as 95%.
Q: What is the legal limit for Mo-99 in Tc-99m-containing
radiopharmaceuticals?
A: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) limit is
0.15 microcurie of Mo-99 activity per 1 mCi of Tc-
99m activity in the administered dose.
Q: How does the ratio of Mo-99 to Tc-99m change with time?
A: In any preparation in which the radionuclidic
contaminants have longer half-lives than the
desired radionuclide label, the relative activity of
the contaminant increases with time.
Q: What is the purpose of stannous ion in Tc-99m-labeling
procedures?
A: Stannous ion is used to reduce technetium
pertechnetate from a +7 valence state to lower
valence states necessary to allow for labeling a wide
range of agents.
Q: What constitutes a medical event, formerly known as a
misadministration of a radiopharmaceutical?
A: Previously, a misadministration was defined by the
NRC as a radiopharmaceutical given to the wrong
patient, receiving the ordered radiopharmaceutical
by the wrong route of administration, or the
administered dose differing from the prescribed
dose by greater than an allowable standard.
Although these are all of concern and need
reporting within a department and institution, as
well as a record of the event, the NRC now requires
reporting them only when they are medical events,
defined as an event where the effective dose
equivalent to the patient exceeds 5 rem to the whole
body or 50 rem to an individual organ.
Q: Describe the general response to the spill of radioactive
material.
A: The person who recognizes that a spill has occurred
should notify all persons in the vicinity, and the
area should be restricted. If possible, the spill
should be covered. For minor spills, cleanup using
appropriate disposable and protective clothing can
be accomplished until background or near-
background radiation levels are observed. For major
spills, the source of the radioactivity should be
shielded. For both major and minor spills, all
personnel potentially exposed in the area should be
surveyed, with appropriate removal of
contaminated clothing and decontamination of skin.
The radiation safety officer should be notified of all
spills and has the primary responsibility for
supervising cleanup for major spills and
determining what reports must be made to
regulatory agencies.
