Radiation Detection and Instrumentation
Q: What are examples of the uses of ionization chambers in
nuclear medicine?
A: Ionization chambers are used for radiation survey
meters and some pocket dosimeters. The
radionuclide dose calibrator incorporates an
ionization chamber.
Q: What is the purpose of the thallium impurity added to
sodium iodide crystals in gamma detectors?
A: The thallium is used to “activate” the sodium
iodide crystal. The thallium impurity provides
“easier” pathways for the return of electrons from
the conduction band of the crystal to the valence
bands of atoms.
Q: What is the relationship between photon energy and
detection efficiency in a sodium iodide crystal?
A: For a given crystal size, detection efficiency
decreases with increasing photon energy.
Q: Why do photopeaks appear as bell-shaped curves in pulse
height spectra rather than as discrete spikes corresponding to
the energy of the gamma ray?
A: Although gamma rays have discrete energies, the
detection process is subject to statistical factors at
each step of the process. The bell-shaped curve
corresponding to the gamma-ray photopeak reflects
these statistical variations, which results in different
events being measured as having slightly different
energies. The better the “energy resolution” of a
pulse height analyzer, the narrower the bell-shaped
curve.
Q: In using a gamma scintillation camera, what does it mean to
“set” the energy window?
A: Gamma cameras are equipped with pulse-height
analyzers that allow the operator to select a range of
observed energies for accepting photons to be used
in making the scintigraphic image. The window is
usually described by giving the photopeak energy
of interest and a percentage range that defines the
limits of acceptance above and below the photopeak
energy. A typical window for the 140-keV photon of
Tc-99m is 20%, or ±14 keV.
Q: What are the causes of inhomogeneous flood field images in
gamma camera quality control?
A: Causes include improper photomultiplier tube
voltage adjustment, off-peak camera pulse-height
analyzer setting, crystal imperfections or damage,
poor coupling of the crystal and the photomultiplier
tubes, and inadequate mixing of radiotracer in the
flood phantom.
Q: What effects do Compton-scattered photons have on
scintigraphic image quality?
A: Compton-scattered photons are the enemy!
Scattered photons that fall within the acceptance
limits of the energy window are included in the
image. They represent false data because they are
recorded in a different spatial location than the
origin of the primary photon. Thus, Compton
scattering reduces image contrast and spatial
resolution. Compton-scattered photons falling
outside the energy window still must be processed
by the gamma camera pulse-height-analyzer
circuitry. These rejected events contribute to dead
time and reduce the count-rate capability of gamma
cameras.
Q: What photons are desired in the scintigraphic image?
A: Primary (unscattered) photons that arise in the
organ of interest in the body and travel parallel to
the axis of the gamma camera collimator field of
view are the photons desired in the image.
Intuitively, one may think of these as “good”
photons. All other photons are “bad” photons. The
good photons include (unscattered) photons that
arise in the object or organ of interest but travel “off
axis,” primary photons that arise in front of or
behind the organ of interest (background photons),
and all scattered photons.
Q: What is the purpose of the collimator?
A: The collimator defines the geometrical field of view
of the gamma camera crystal. Off-axis photons,
whether they are primary photons or scattered
photons, are absorbed in the septa of the collimator
and do not get to the crystal.
Pearl
Pinhole collimators allow resolution of objects below the spatial
resolution
of
the
gamma
camera
through
geometrical
magnification.
Q: What is the construction difference between a low-energy,
all-purpose collimator and a low-energy, high-resolution
collimator?
A: A high-resolution collimator has more holes that
are smaller and deeper.
Q: How does poor energy resolution degrade spatial resolution?
A: Gamma cameras with poor energy resolution have
reduced ability to reject scattered photons on the
basis of pulse-height analysis, as well as reduced
ability for accurate determination of x- and y-
coordinates for spatial localization of events.
