Genitourinary
Q: What percentage of renal plasma flow is filtered through the
glomerulus, and what percentage is secreted by the tubules?
A: Twenty percent of renal plasma flow is cleared by
glomerular filtration and 80% by tubular secretion.
Q: What are the mechanisms of renal uptake for Tc-99m
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), Tc-99m
mercaptylacetyltriglycine (MAG3), and Tc-99m
dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA)?
A: Tc-99m DTPA, glomerular filtration; Tc-99m
MAG3, tubular secretion; Tc-99m DMSA, cortical
proximal tubular binding
Q: What is the percent cortical binding of Tc-99m DMSA?
A: The percent cortical binding is 40% to 45%.
Pearl
Dehydration will delay radiotracer uptake and clearance. All patients
undergoing renal scintigraphy should be well hydrated.
Q: What time interval is used to calculate a differential renal
function for dynamic renal scintigraphy?
A: Because cortical uptake of the renal
radiopharmaceutical is the interest, the optimal
interval is after the initial flow but before the
collecting system activity appears, usually 1 to 3
minutes. With good function, activity may be seen
before 3 minutes, especially in children. Thus, the 1-
to 2-minute interval may be optimal overall.
Q: What are the general methods for calculating absolute
glomerular filtration rate (GFR)?
A: Blood sampling, blood sampling and urine
collection, and camera-based methods can be used
to calculate the absolute GFR.
Q: What is the proper renal region-of-interest (ROI) selection for
diuresis renography?
A: The ROI should include the dilated collecting
system and mostly exclude the cortex.
Q: What factors can affect the accuracy of diuresis renography?
A: The state of hydration, renal function, diuretic
dose, choice of radiopharmaceutical, and bladder
capacity can affect the accuracy. Adequate
hydration is required for good urine flow and
adequate response to the diuretic. A full bladder
may cause a functional delay in clearance. Urinary
catheterization is strongly suggested in children and
in adults who cannot void. Because of its high
extraction efficiency and good image resolution, Tc-
99m MAG3 is the radiopharmaceutical of choice. Tc-
99m DTPA works well in patients with good renal
function. Poor renal function is a limitation to
diuresis renography. The kidney must be able to
respond to the diuretic challenge. Therefore, the
dose of diuretic must be increased in renal
insufficiency, but the exact dose required is only an
educated estimate.
Q: What is the most sensitive technique for diagnosing scarring
secondary to reflux?
A: Tc-99m DMSA cortical imaging is the most
sensitive. CT is good but results in a considerably
higher radiation dose to a child. Ultrasonography
has lower sensitivity.
Q: How can radionuclide imaging differentiate upper from
lower urinary tract infection, and why is this differentiation
important?
A: With upper tract infection or pyelonephritis, Tc-
99m DMSA shows tubular dysfunction, manifested
by decreased uptake. This is a reversible process.
With appropriate therapy, tubular function will
return in 3 to 6 months. Upper tract infection may
lead to subsequent renal scarring, hypertension, and
renal failure.
Q: What is the advantage of radionuclide versus contrast
cystography?
A: The radionuclide test is more sensitive for the
detection of reflux than contrast-enhanced voiding
cystourethrography and results in much less
radiation exposure, by a factor of 50- to 200-fold.
However, in the first evaluation of a male child, the
better resolution of the contrast study can permit
the diagnosis of an anatomical abnormality such as
posterior urethral valves.
