The most common false positive for parathyroid scanning is a thyroid
adenoma. Benign and malignant tumors are other potential causes for
false-positive scintigraphy.
Bone
Q: What percentage of Tc-99m-labeled bone
radiopharmaceuticals is retained in the skeleton at the usual
time of imaging?
A: In normal adult subjects, 40% to 60% of the injected
dose is in the skeleton 2 to 3 hours after tracer
administration.
Pitfall
The greatest pitfall in interpreting a bone scan is a failure to appreciate its
nonspecificity. The bone scan is very sensitive; however, specificity is
considerably lower. The most common pitfalls are diagnosing areas of
arthritis or prior trauma as metastases, or vice versa. Correlative
anatomical imaging is advisable.
Q: Which factors favor osteoarthritis versus metastatic disease as
the cause of increased activity?
A: Osteoarthritis has characteristic locations in the
extremities. Because metastatic lesions are relatively
rare below the proximal femurs or beyond the
proximal humeri, osteoarthritis should be
considered first in the elbows, wrists, hands, knees,
and feet of older patients. The involvement of both
sides of a joint is common in arthritis but unusual in
metastatic disease. The lower lumbar spine is the
most problematic area because both arthritis and
metastases are common there. Degenerative disease
is often more posterior and lateral, compared with
metastases. Anatomical imaging is advised to help
differentiate.
Q: What is the distribution of metastatic deposits from epithelial
primary malignancies in the skeleton?
A: A rule of thumb is that 80% of metastases are found
in the axial skeleton (spine, pelvis, ribs, and
sternum). The remaining metastases are distributed
equally between the skull (10%) and the long bones
(10%). A single rib with uptake has a low likelihood
of being a metastasis. A sternal lesion in a patient
with breast cancer has a high likelihood of being a
metastasis.
Pearl
The majority of epithelial tumor metastases localize first in the red
marrow. The skeletal tracers do not localize in the tumor tissue but, rather,
in the reactive bone around the metastatic deposits.
Pitfall
A small amount of activity is frequently seen at the injection site; this
should not be confused with pathology. Extravasation at the injection site
may result in proximal nodal uptake. Variable degrees of urinary
contamination on the skin may be superimposed on skeletal structures and
could be confused with activity caused by metastatic disease. Multiple
views can be helpful to make the distinction.
Pearl
In many diseases, the bone scan has a very high sensitivity for the
detection of bone metastases. Sensitivity is lower in tumors with a lytic
rather than blastic response, such as multiple myeloma, thyroid cancer,
and renal-cell carcinoma. The bone scan is also less sensitive for tumors
that preferentially go to bone marrow, such as lymphoma.
Q: How can the radiation dose to the bladder, ovaries, and testes
be reduced?
A: The radiation dose to these structures is largely
caused by radioactivity in the bladder. Frequent
voiding reduces the patient’s radiation dose.
Pearl
Faint or absent visualization of the kidneys should alert the observer to the
possibility of a superscan. This may be misinterpreted as indicating lack of
excretion of tracer through the kidneys. In cases of superscan resulting
from metastatic or metabolic disease, visualization of the kidneys is faint
(1) because the skeleton accumulates more tracer than usual, leaving less
available for renal excretion, and (2) because of the increased skeletal tracer
uptake, the renal activity may actually fall below the grayscale threshold.
The presence of renal activity is readily established by adjusting the
intensity-setting window.
Q: What factors distinguish a superscan resulting from
metastatic disease from a superscan resulting from metabolic
disease?
A: In the usual superscan caused by metastatic
disease, the increased uptake is usually restricted to
the axial skeleton and the proximal parts of the
femurs and humeri, the red marrow–bearing areas.
Usually there is some focality to it as well. In
metabolic bone disease, the entire skeleton is
typically affected, with increased uptake seen in the
extremities and axial skeleton.
Q: What is the mechanism of the “flare” phenomenon?
A: In some patients treated with chemotherapy for
metastatic disease, regression of the tumor burden
is associated with increased osteoblastic activity,
caused by skeletal healing in response to
chemotherapy. This can appear on bone scans as a
paradoxical increase or apparent worsening of the
abnormal tracer. This may last for up to 6 months
after therapy.
