reporting within a department and institution, as
well as a record of the event, the NRC now requires
reporting them only when they are medical events,
defined as an event where the effective dose
equivalent to the patient exceeds 5 rem to the whole
body or 50 rem to an individual organ.
Q: Describe the general response to the spill of radioactive
material.
A: The person who recognizes that a spill has occurred
should notify all persons in the vicinity, and the
area should be restricted. If possible, the spill
should be covered. For minor spills, cleanup using
appropriate disposable and protective clothing can
be accomplished until background or near-
background radiation levels are observed. For major
spills, the source of the radioactivity should be
shielded. For both major and minor spills, all
personnel potentially exposed in the area should be
surveyed, with appropriate removal of
contaminated clothing and decontamination of skin.
The radiation safety officer should be notified of all
spills and has the primary responsibility for
supervising cleanup for major spills and
determining what reports must be made to
regulatory agencies.
Nuclear Medicine Physics
Pearl
Positrons are positive electrons, and thus they are particles. With
radioactive decay, an emitted positron travels 2 to 10 mm in tissue
(depending on the radionuclide) before losing its kinetic energy, then
interacts with an electron. The two particles annihilate each other and emit
two 511-keV gamma photons at approximately 180-degree angles from
each other. The gamma photons can be detected by positron emission
tomography (PET) coincidence detectors. This conversion of mass to
energy is predicted by Einstein’s well-known formula: E = mc2.
Q: What is the difference between x-rays and gamma rays?
A: Both x-rays and gamma rays are ionizing radiation.
X-rays originate outside the atomic nucleus; gamma
rays originate inside the atomic nucleus. The
respective energy spectra for x-rays and gamma
rays substantially overlap at the high-energy end of
the spectrum for all forms of electromagnetic
radiation.
Q: What is the energy equivalent of the rest mass of an electron?
A: The energy equivalent is 511 keV. This is also the
energy equivalent of a positron (positive electron).
Q: What is the difference between the rad, roentgen, and rem?
A: These terms are frequently confused with each
other but have important distinctions.
The roentgen is defined as radiation exposure, specifically the
quantity of x-radiation or gamma radiation that produces 1
electrostatic unit of charge per cubic centimeter of air at standard
temperature and pressure. In the International System of Units (SI),
radiation exposure is expressed in terms of coulombs per kilogram
(C/kg). One roentgen is equal to 2.58 × 10–4 C/kg air.
A rad, or the radiation absorbed dose, is the traditional unit of
absorbed dose equal to the absorption of 100 ergs of energy per gram
of absorbing material. The gray (Gy) is the unit of absorbed dose in
the SI system; 1 Gy = 100 rads.
The unit rem is an acronym for roentgen equivalent man. The rem is
calculated by multiplying the absorbed dose in rads by a factor to
correct for the relative biological effectiveness (RBE) of the type of
radiation in question. In the SI system, 1 sievert (Sv) = 100 rem.
Q: Which is more penetrating in soft tissues—alpha or beta
particles of the same kinetic energy?
A: Alpha particles have very low penetration in soft
tissue because of their rapid loss of kinetic energy
through the interaction of their electrical charge
with electrons in the tissues. Beta particles of the
same respective kinetic energy of alpha particles
have higher velocity, lower mass, and a single
negative charge. They demonstrate considerably
greater penetration in soft tissues, although
penetration still is typically measured in
millimeters.
Q: Define the two systems for expressing radioactive decay.
A: The traditional unit of radioactive decay is the curie
(Ci). One curie is equal to 3.7 × 1010 disintegrations
per second (dps). This number was derived from
the decay rate of 1 g of radium. (Modern
measurements indicate that the actual decay rate for
1 g of radium is 3.6 × 1010 dps.) In the SI system,
decay is expressed in becquerels (Bcq). One
becquerel equals 1 disintegration per second; 1 mCi
= 37 MBq.
Q: How are the half-life and the decay constant related?
A: The physical half-life (T1⁄2) of a radionuclide is
defined as the time for half the atoms in a sample to
decay. The T1⁄2 is expressed in units of time, typically
seconds, minutes, hours, days, or years. The decay
constant indicates the fraction of the sample
decaying in a unit of time. The units of the decay
constant are “per unit time” (per second, per hour).
Mathematically, the T1⁄2 and the decay constant (λ)
are related by the following equation:
Q: After a photon has undergone Compton scattering, how does
the energy of the scattered photon compare to the original
photon energy?
A: In Compton scattering, the photon gives up energy
to a recoil or Compton electron. The “scattered”
photon has correspondingly lower energy. The
amount of energy lost increases as the angle of
scattering increases.
Q: What factors speed up or slow down radioactive decay?
A: Unlike chemical reactions, radioactive decay is a
physical constant that cannot be sped up or slowed
down by heating or cooling or by applying other
physical or chemical influences.
Q: What special term is used to designate the electrons in the
outermost shell of an atom?
A: They are called valence electrons and are
responsible for many of the chemical characteristics
of the element.
Q: What is the binding energy of an electron?
A: Binding energy refers to the amount of energy
required to remove that electron from the atom.
Electrons in shells close to the nucleus have higher
binding energy than electrons farther from the
nucleus. This energy is typically expressed in terms
of electron volts (eV). The binding energy for each
electron shell and subshell is characteristic for the
respective element; the higher the atomic number of
the element, the greater is the binding energy for
