Oncology: Positron Emission Tomography
Q: What is the difference in uptake mechanism between glucose
and F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)?
A: After initial cellular uptake via glucose
transporters, both are phosphorylated by
hexokinase. Unlike glucose-6-phosphate, F-18 FDG-
6-phosphate does not undergo further metabolism
and is trapped within cells. Also unlike glucose, F-
18 FDG is cleared by the kidneys.
Q: The sensitivity of FDG PET is high for detection of many
malignancies. For which tumors is the sensitivity of FDG PET
often not as high?
A: FDG PET has poor sensitivity for primary
hepatocellular carcinoma, renal carcinoma, and
prostate cancer. This is less true of metastatic
disease than primary tumors.
Pearl
For thyroid cancer imaging, I-131 or I-123 is more sensitive than F-18
FDG for the detection of well-differentiated papillary or follicular thyroid
carcinoma. In patients who have been treated with I-131 and have a
negative I-131 whole-body scan on follow-up evaluation but have an
elevated serum thyroglobulin value, F-18 FDG PET has good sensitivity
for the detection of malignancy. The reason is that the tumor has
dedifferentiated into a higher-grade malignancy.
Pearl
With positron emission tomography with computed tomography
(PET/CT), misregistration caused by patient or respiratory motion or
organ
movement
(bowel)
can
introduce
potential
false-positive
interpretations. PET/CT is usually acquired during tidal volume
breathing. Still, there may be artifacts resulting from errors in anatomical
registration and attenuation correction.
Q: What are some limitations of FDG PET in tumor staging?
A: PET imaging does not detect microscopical
metastases, tumor involvement in local lymph
nodes may be obscured by activity in an adjacent
tumor, concurrent infection/inflammatory processes
may cause false-positive results, and the sensitivity
for intracranial metastases is low.
Q: What are limitations of tumor restaging by FDG PET?
A: Posttherapy inflammatory effects of surgery,
chemotherapy, and especially radiation therapy
may cause increased F-18 FDG uptake, which can be
confused with tumor uptake. Even patients
scheduled for imaging after an appropriate delay
after therapy may require further follow-up
imaging. If activity is diminishing, this helps
confirm a benign process.
Pearl
The usual recommended FDG PET/CT imaging time to evaluate response
to therapy is 3 weeks after chemotherapy, but for radiation therapy, at least
2 and preferably 3 months. It is not always possible from a clinical
standpoint to follow these guidelines, but an awareness of the potential
problem is critical for interpretation.
Pearl
FDG PET/CT can help direct biopsy to the most metabolically active area
of a mass to help avoid sampling areas of necrosis.
Q: Which is the most accurate method for the detection of
osseous metastases?
A: It depends. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
highly sensitive and often detects lesions not seen
on bone scan because it can visualize changes in the
bone marrow and does not depend on secondary
reactive cortical bone changes to develop. Bone
scintigraphy has the advantage that it routinely
images the whole body. It is particularly helpful for
sclerotic (blastic) metastases. FDG PET scanning is
more sensitive than bone scan for detection of lytic
tumors. At times, the modalities complement each
other by detecting different lesions in the same
patient. F-18 sodium fluoride PET is a very sensitive
bone scan agent but at the expense of specificity.
PET/CT improves the specificity.
Q: What are some differences between nonattenuation-corrected
and attenuation-corrected FDG PET images?
A: The noncorrected image has an appearance quite
different from that of the corrected image. Without
attenuation, structures near the surface appear more
intense because fewer photons are attenuated before
hitting the detector. This explains why the skin
looks like it is outlined with a charcoal pencil. The
air-filled lungs are also intense. Because fewer
counts are seen in central areas, lesions may be
missed. However, this is a preferable way to detect
skin lesions. For accurate quantification (standard
uptake value [SUV]), attenuation corrected images
must be used.
