Endocrine
Q: What is the origin of lingual and sublingual thyroid tissue?
A: The main thyroid anlage begins as a down-growth
from the foramen cecum. Thyroid tissue may be
seen anywhere along the tract of the thyroglossal
duct from the foramen cecum to the usual location
of the gland. However, with lingual thyroid tissue,
usually a failure of normal development occurs,
with no tissue in the normal location of the thyroid.
Q: What is the difference in mechanism of thyroid uptake
between Tc-99m pertechnetate and radioiodine?
A: Radioiodine is taken up or extracted (trapped) by
the thyroid follicular cell and organified, binding to
tyrosine residues on thyroglobulin, and stored in
the colloid of the follicle. Tc-99m pertechnetate is
trapped but not organified.
Q: What has happened to the range for normal percent thyroid
uptake of radioiodine in the United States over the last 50 or
more years?
A: The normal range has dropped significantly as a
result of iodination of salt and the use of iodine in
foods. The normal 24-hour range was 20% to 45% in
the 1960s but is now 10% to 30%.
Pearl
Radioiodine is administered orally. Tc-99m pertechnetate is administered
intravenously.
Pitfall
A potentially serious pitfall is to confuse microcuries with millicuries.
Pearl
The following are the approximate adult doses of iodine-123 and iodine-
131 used for uptakes, scans, and therapy. Serious consequences can result
from confusing these doses, particularly if a therapeutic dose is
administered instead of a diagnostic dose.
I-123 uptake (50–100 microcuries [μCi])
I-123 scan (200–400 μCi)
I-131 uptake (10 μCi)
I-131 scan substernal goiter (50 μCi)—however, I-123 has
replaced I-131 for this indication
I-131 therapy for Graves disease (7–15 millicuries [mCi])
I-131 therapy for thyroid cancer (30–200 mCi)
Q: What is the normal distribution of radioiodine and Tc-99m
pertechnetate?
A: Radioiodine is taken up by the thyroid, salivary
glands, and stomach and excreted by the kidneys.
Tc-99m pertechnetate has identical uptake and
clearance, except that because it is not organified, it
remains in the thyroid and salivary glands for a
much shorter time.
Pearl
After injection of the radiopharmaceutical, Tc-99m pertechnetate scans are
acquired at 15 to 20 minutes. Routine I-123 thyroid scans after oral
ingestion are acquired at 4 hours. The delayed imaging for I-123 is to allow
background clearance. Tc-99m is not organified like I-123; thus, it must be
imaged earlier because of the rapid thyroid washout.
Q: What are common causes of falsely low thyroid uptakes?
A: Patients taking thyroid hormones, iodine-
containing drugs, organification blockers such as
propylthiouracil or methimazole, and recent
administration of intravenous iodine-containing
radiographic contrast are common causes.
Pearl
A thyroid scan should not be performed within 6 to 8 weeks of the patient
receiving a CT scan with intravenous iodine contrast.
Q: How does the methodology differ for a thyroid scan and
thyroid uptake?
A: A thyroid uptake is a nonimaging study using a
gamma-detector counting probe, whereas a thyroid
scan results from gamma camera imaging.
Pearl
Swallowed activity from salivary secretions on Tc-99m pertechnetate or
radioiodine scans occasionally remains in the esophagus and can confuse
interpretation. The nature of the activity can be determined by having the
patient drink water, followed by reimaging of the neck.
Q: How can a thyroid uptake test differentiate the two most
common causes of thyrotoxicosis, Graves disease, and
subacute thyroiditis? Why?
A: In the initial phase of subacute thyroiditis, thyroid
hormones are released from the inflamed gland,
causing thyrotoxicosis. Both radioiodine and Tc-
99m uptake require thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) stimulation for uptake. As a result of
pituitary feedback of elevated serum thyroid
hormones, TSH is suppressed. Thus, the uptake of
radioiodine or Tc-99m pertechnetate is suppressed.
With Graves disease, although TSH is suppressed,
the gland is autonomous, and the uptake is high.
Q: What is the mechanism of action of antithyroid drugs
propylthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole (Tapazole)?
A: Both are thiourea antithyroid drugs that block the
organification of iodine.
Q: What medical conditions are associated with an increased
incidence of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas?
A: Both forms of multiple endocrine neoplasia type II
are associated with pheochromocytoma, as are von
Hippel–Lindau disease and neurofibromatosis.
Pitfall
Autonomous nodules are not synonymous with toxic nodules. Patients
with small autonomous nodules (<2.5 cm in diameter) are often euthyroid.
They do not produce enough thyroid hormone to suppress TSH.
Pearl
The incidence of thyroid cancer in a patient with a single cold nodule is
approximately 15%; a hot nodule, less than 1%.
Q: Which radiopharmaceutical is used most commonly to
localize a clinically diagnosed parathyroid adenoma? Describe
its characteristic and diagnostic pharmacokinetics.
A: Tc-99m sestamibi is taken up by both thyroid and
hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue; however, it
typically clears faster from the thyroid, thus the
rationale for early (15 minutes) and delayed (2 hour)
imaging. At early imaging, uptake in the thyroid is
dominant and hyperfunctioning parathyroid may or
may not be apparent as focal hot uptake. On
delayed imaging, thyroid uptake has usually mostly
washed out, leaving residual uptake in a
hyperfunctioning parathyroid.
Pearl
The most common false positive for parathyroid scanning is a thyroid
adenoma. Benign and malignant tumors are other potential causes for
false-positive scintigraphy.
