view are the photons desired in the image.
Intuitively, one may think of these as “good”
photons. All other photons are “bad” photons. The
good photons include (unscattered) photons that
arise in the object or organ of interest but travel “off
axis,” primary photons that arise in front of or
behind the organ of interest (background photons),
and all scattered photons.
Q: What is the purpose of the collimator?
A: The collimator defines the geometrical field of view
of the gamma camera crystal. Off-axis photons,
whether they are primary photons or scattered
photons, are absorbed in the septa of the collimator
and do not get to the crystal.
Pearl
Pinhole collimators allow resolution of objects below the spatial
resolution
of
the
gamma
camera
through
geometrical
magnification.
Q: What is the construction difference between a low-energy,
all-purpose collimator and a low-energy, high-resolution
collimator?
A: A high-resolution collimator has more holes that
are smaller and deeper.
Q: How does poor energy resolution degrade spatial resolution?
A: Gamma cameras with poor energy resolution have
reduced ability to reject scattered photons on the
basis of pulse-height analysis, as well as reduced
ability for accurate determination of x- and y-
coordinates for spatial localization of events.
Single-Photon Emission Computed
Tomography and Positron Emission
Tomography
Pearl
Most nuclear medicine imaging clinics use 180-degree single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) acquisition for cardiac studies
and 360 degrees for imaging most other organs, including the brain.
Pearl
For SPECT imaging, the highest-resolution collimator that provides
sufficient count rate should be selected, usually the high-resolution
parallel-hole collimator.
Pitfall
In addition to equipment factors, patient motion is the most important
cause of image degradation in SPECT and positron emission tomography
(PET) studies.
Q: What special importance does the biological half-life of a
radiotracer have in SPECT imaging?
A: In SPECT imaging, two-dimensional data are
acquired from sequential sampling angles. If
significant biological change in the distribution of a
radiopharmaceutical takes place between the start
of data acquisition and completion, the
reconstruction of tomographic images can be
significantly distorted.
Q: What is a filter?
A: Filters are special mathematical functions applied
to SPECT and PET data that enhance desired
characteristics in the image, such as background
subtraction, edge enhancement, and suppression of
statistical noise. A ramp filter is designed to
eliminate or reduce the star artifact during
reconstruction.
Pearl
With SPECT and PET, flexible reformatting of image data can be
performed in multiple image planes, typically transverse, coronal, and
sagittal. For cardiac imaging, short-axis, vertical long-axis, and horizontal
long-axis views of the heart are typically obtained.
Pearl
Two quick ways of assessing patient motion during SPECT imaging are to
view the projection images as a cinematic closed-loop display or to create
slice sinograms. In the cinematic display, patient motion is seen as a
change in position from one projection image to another. It best shows
vertical motion. On sinograms, patient motion is seen as a discontinuity
in the stacked projection profiles.
Pitfall
SPECT is subject to various artifacts. Field flood nonuniformity can result
in ring artifacts. Center-of-rotation misalignment results in loss of image
resolution and, if severe, also ring artifacts.
Pearl
The spatial resolution of PET is twice or greater than that of SPECT.
Pitfall
Spatial resolution in PET is limited by positron travel distance in soft
