Hepatobiliary
Q: What are the two Tc-99m hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid
(HIDA) analog radiopharmaceuticals approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in clinical use, and how
are they different?
A: Tc-99m DISIDA (disofenin) and Tc-99m
mebrofenin (Choletec) are the approved agents.
Mebrofenin has greater hepatic extraction, 98%
versus 88%, and less renal excretion, 1% versus 9%.
The higher extraction of mebrofenin is particularly
preferable in patients with hepatic insufficiency and
young children.
Pearl
Tc-99m HIDA is extracted by the same cellular mechanism as bilirubin,
but it is not conjugated. The radiopharmaceutical then follows the path of
bile through the biliary system into the bowel.
Pearl
The alternative route of excretion for Tc-99m HIDA radiopharmaceuticals
is via the kidneys. The amount of excretion is usually small but increases
with hepatic dysfunction.
Q: What is the most important question to ask a patient before
starting cholescintigraphy for suspected acute cholecystitis,
and why?
A: When did the patient last eat? If the patient has
eaten in the last 4 hours, the gallbladder may be
contracted secondary to endogenous stimulation of
cholecystokinin, and therefore radiotracer cannot
gain entry into the gallbladder. If the patient has not
eaten for more than 24 hours, the gallbladder may
not have had the stimulus to contract and may
contain thick, concentrated bile, which can prevent
tracer entry. Sincalide (of an analog cholecystokinin
[CCK]) is indicated to empty the gallbladder.
Pearl
If the patient receives sincalide before the study to empty the gallbladder,
the HIDA radiopharmaceutical should not be administered until at least
30 minutes later to allow time for the gallbladder to relax.
Q: What are other common indications for sincalide infusion
than mentioned previously?
A: Common indications are (1) to differentiate
common duct obstruction from functional causes, as
an alternative to delayed imaging, (2) to exclude
acute acalculous cholecystitis if the gallbladder fills
in a patient strongly suspected of having the disease
(a diseased gallbladder will not contract from either
acute or chronic disease), and (3) to confirm or
exclude chronic acalculous gallbladder disease
(gallbladder dyskinesia).
Q: Cholescintigraphy is a very sensitive and specific test for
acute cholecystitis. In what clinical settings can an increased
number of false-positive study findings for acute cholecystitis
be seen?
A: False positives may be seen in patients who have
fasted less than 4 hours or more than 24 hours,
those receiving hyperalimentation, and patients
who have chronic cholecystitis, hepatic dysfunction,
or a concurrent serious illness.
Q: What is the rim sign seen during cholescintigraphy, and what
is its significance?
A: The rim sign is increased activity in the liver
parenchyma adjacent to the gallbladder fossa. This
finding has been associated with severe acute
cholecystitis and an increased incidence of the
complications of perforation and gangrene.
Q: At what time after Tc-99m HIDA injection is nonfilling of the
gallbladder diagnostic of acute cholecystitis?
A: One hour is abnormal. However, the diagnosis of
acute cholecystitis cannot be made unless the
gallbladder does not fill by 3 to 4 hours after
radiopharmaceutical injection or 30 minutes after
morphine administration.
Pearl
The cause of delayed gallbladder visualization is most commonly chronic
cholecystitis. It may also occur with severe hepatic dysfunction because of
altered pharmacokinetics (i.e., delayed uptake and clearance).
Q: What is the mechanism of morphine-augmented
cholescintigraphy?
A: Morphine increases tone at the sphincter of Oddi,
producing increased intraductal pressure. This
results in bile flow preferentially through the cystic
duct, if patent.
Q: What is acute acalculous cholecystitis?
A: Acute acalculous cholecystitis occurs in sick
hospitalized patients who have sustained trauma,
burns, or sepsis or have other serious illness. It is
associated with high morbidity and mortality. The
cystic duct may be obstructed by debris or
inflammatory changes. In some cases, the acute
cholecystitis is caused by direct inflammation of the
gallbladder wall as a result of infection, ischemia, or
toxemia, without cystic duct obstruction.
Pearl
The sensitivity of cholescintigraphy for acute acalculous cholecystitis is
approximately 75% to 80% compared with 95% to 98% for acute
calculous cholecystitis.
Pearl
If the clinical suspicion for acute acalculous cholecystitis is high but the
gallbladder is visualized, sincalide can be helpful diagnostically.
Cholecystitis can be excluded if the gallbladder contracts. If it does not
contract, the cause could be either acute or chronic acalculous cholecystitis.
Q: The diagnosis of common duct obstruction is often made by
sonographic detection of a dilated common duct. In what
clinical situations would cholescintigraphy be diagnostically
helpful?
A: It is helpful in early acute obstruction before the
duct has had time to dilate (24–72 hours) and in
patients with previous obstruction who have
chronically dilated ducts.
Q: What are the cholescintigraphic findings of high-grade
common duct obstruction?
A: The findings include prompt hepatic uptake but a
persistent hepatogram without clearance into biliary
ducts. This is caused by high backpressure from the
obstruction.
Q: What are the cholescintigraphic findings of partial common
duct obstruction?
A: The findings include good hepatic uptake, delayed
biliary-to-bowel clearance, and poor ductal
clearance on delayed imaging or after sincalide.
Pearl
In patients with functional causes of delayed transit, administration of
sincalide will cause sphincter of Oddi relaxation, prompt biliary duct
clearance, and biliary-to-bowel transit. However, patients with partial
common duct obstruction usually do not respond to sincalide.
Pitfall
The methodology used for administering sincalide is important. A bolus
infusion may cause spasm of the neck of the gallbladder and ineffective
emptying. Similarly, 1- to 3-minute infusions often result in poor
contraction of the gallbladder in up to one-third of normal subjects. A
multicenter investigation comparing 15-, 30-, and 60-minute sincalide
infusion methods showed that 0.02 μg/kg infused over 60 minutes is the
optimal infusion methodology (abnormal is <38%). This method should be
used regardless of the indication.
Q: What ancillary maneuver increases the sensitivity of
cholescintigraphy for detection of biliary atresia?
A: The administration of phenobarbital for 5 days
before the HIDA study activates liver enzymes and
increases biliary excretion. A serum phenobarbital
level should be in the therapeutic range at the time
of imaging.
Q: How is the diagnosis of biliary atresia made with
cholescintigraphy?
A: No clearance of Tc-99m HIDA tracer is seen by 24
hours. The many causes of neonatal hepatitis
usually have clearance by that time, although not
always.
Pearl
Gallbladder filling has the same clinical significance and biliary-to-
bowel transit. It rules out biliary atresia.
Q: What is the postcholecystectomy syndrome, and what are
common causes for it?
A: In patients who have had a cholecystectomy, some
develop recurrent biliary, colic-like pain. Causes
include a retained or recurrent stone, inflammatory
stricture, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, or, very
rarely, an inflamed or obstructed cystic duct
remnant.
Pearl
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is a partial biliary obstruction at the level of
the sphincter without stone or stricture. Cholescintigraphy shows a
pattern of partial biliary obstruction. The diagnosis is ultimately made by
excluding
stones
or
stricture
with
endoscopic
retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
