Central Nervous System
Q: How is the diagnosis of brain death made?
A: Brain death is a clinical diagnosis, usually made in
a patient in a deep coma with a total absence of
brainstem reflexes and spontaneous respiration.
Reversible causes must be excluded (e.g., drugs,
hypothermia), the cause of the dysfunction must be
diagnosed (e.g., trauma, stroke), and the clinical
findings of brain death must be present for a
defined period of observation (6–24 hours).
Confirmatory tests such as electroencephalography
(EEG) and radionuclide brain perfusion imaging are
used to increase diagnostic certainty.
Q: Which radiopharmaceutical(s) are indicated to evaluate for
brain death?
A: Tc-99m HMPAO or Tc-99m ethyl cysteinate dimer
(ECD) is indicated. A flow study is optional.
Delayed images at 15 to 20 minutes are diagnostic.
Pearl
A “hot nose” may be seen on the flow-phase images and delayed images of
a brain death study as a result of shunting of blood from the internal to the
external carotid system supplying the face and nose.
Q: How can SPECT brain perfusion or FDG PET imaging be
useful in the differential diagnosis of dementia?
A: Such imaging is useful by noting the distribution
pattern. Multiinfarct dementia is characterized by
multiple areas of past infarcts, recognized as areas
of decreased uptake that correspond to vascular
distribution, as well as changes in the deep
structures, such as the basal ganglia and thalamus.
Alzheimer disease exhibits a characteristic pattern
of bitemporal and parietal hypoperfusion and
hypometabolism. Pick disease or frontal temporal
dementia has decreased frontal lobe and temporal
lobe uptake.
Pearl
Although Alzheimer disease has a characteristic bitemporal-parietal
pattern on perfusion imaging, it is often not symmetrical. Decreased
frontal lobe uptake may be seen in late-stage disease. Decreased uptake is
also characteristically seen in the posterior cingulate and precuneus
regions of the brain.
Pearl
F-18 florbetapir (Amyvid) was approved to estimate β-amyloid neuritic
plaque density in patients with cognitive impairment. A negative study
rules out Alzheimer’ disease as the cause. A study that is positive for
amyloid plaques is not diagnostic of Alzheimer’ disease because this may
be seen in normal individuals without dementia.
Q: What is the purpose of cerebral perfusion imaging in patients
with seizures? What is the expected PET or SPECT pattern?
A: Interictal studies performed with F-18 FDG PET
and Tc-99m HMPAO or ECD SPECT show
decreased metabolism on FDG PET and decreased
perfusion on SPECT. Increased activity is seen
during a seizure (ictal). The SPECT tracer must be
injected during the seizure. Imaging can be delayed
because the tracer is fixed. The logistics of FDG PET
make detection of a seizure focus unlikely.
