Pulmonary
Q: What are the two most commonly used radiopharmaceuticals
for ventilation imaging? What are their advantages and
disadvantages?
A: Xenon-133 and Tc-99m DTPA aerosol are
commonly used. Xe-133 demonstrates the
physiology of respiration and is very sensitive to the
detection of obstructive airway disease, as
manifested by delayed washout. The disadvantage
is the normally rapid washout, limiting the views
obtainable (with two-headed cameras, two views),
and its suboptimal image quality that is due to the
low photopeak (81 keV) and poor-count-rate
images. Tc-99m DTPA aerosol results in high-count
images in all projections; however, the images are
similar to those with Xe-133 only in the inspiratory
phase. With obstructive airway disease, particles
become impacted in the proximal bronchi, and
fewer get to the periphery of the lung, potentially
causing interpretation difficulties.
Pearl
Xe-133 is fat soluble and will be taken up and cleared slowly from livers
with fatty metamorphosis. This should not be confused with delayed
pulmonary washout.
Q: What is the minimum number of particles recommended for
pulmonary perfusion imaging?
A: At least 100,000 particles are required for a
statistically reliable image in normal adults; 300,000
to 400,000 particles are generally administered.
Q: What is the size range of macroaggregated albumin (MAA)
particles?
A: In commercial preparations, the majority of
particles are 20 to 40 μm (range, 10–90 μm).
Pitfall
Withdrawing blood into a syringe with Tc-99m MAA particles may result
in a small radioactive embolus that shows up as a hot spot or hot spots on
subsequent images. Failure to resuspend the Tc-99m MAA particles with
gentle agitation before administration may result in clumping of particles
together and the presence of hot spots on subsequent imaging.
Pearl
Tc-99m MAA is used to confirm a right-to-left shunt. Uptake in the
cerebral cortex is confirmatory. If no brain uptake is seen, no significant
right-to-left shunt exists. Free Tc-99m pertechnetate does not localize in
the brain cortex but, rather, in the thyroid, salivary glands, and stomach.
Q: What is the preferred patient position during administration
of Tc-99m MAA?
A: Administering Tc-99m MAA with the patient
supine results in a more homogeneous distribution
of particles in the lung than when the patient is
sitting or standing. Gravitational effects result in
more basilar distribution than when the injection is
accomplished with the patient upright.
Pitfall
In the analysis of perfusion scintigrams, failure to recognize the
significance of decreased versus absent activity is a potential pitfall. Not
every clot is 100% occlusive of the circulation. Diminished activity needs
to be recognized as one of the patterns caused by pulmonary emboli.
Pitfall
The pulmonary hili on lung scans are relatively photon-deficient
structures caused by the displacement of lung parenchyma by large
vascular and bronchial structures. Failure to remember this might result
in false-positive interpretations, especially for defects seen on posterior
oblique images.
Pitfall
If the patient is placed supine for ventilation–perfusion imaging but the
chest radiograph was obtained with the patient upright, it can make
correlation of the findings difficult. For example, free fluid may collect in a
subpulmonic location or obscure the lung base in the upright position.
With the patient supine, the fluid may layer out posteriorly or collect in
the fissures. Also, the apparent height of the lungs may be different, as may
the heart size. Ideally, imaging studies should be performed with the
patient in the same position for all examinations. On the other hand, if
significant pleural fluid is present, it may be desirable to image the patient
in more than one position to prove that a defect is caused by mobile fluid.
Q: What is the “stripe” sign?
A: The stripe sign refers to linear activity seen at the
pleural surface of a proximal perfusion defect.
Because pulmonary emboli are typically pleura
based, the stripe sign suggests another diagnosis,
often emphysema. Rarely, in the resolution of
pulmonary emboli, a stripe sign can be seen as
circulation is restored.
Q: What is the physiological basis for perfusion defects in areas
of poor ventilation?
A: The classic response to hypoxia at the alveolar level
is vasoconstriction. Shunting of blood away from
the hypoxic lung zone maintains oxygen saturation.
Q: What is the classic appearance of multiple pulmonary emboli
on lung ventilation–perfusion scintigraphy?
A: The classic appearance is multiple pleura-based,
wedge-shaped areas of significantly diminished or
absent perfusion. The size of the defects may vary
from subsegmental to segmental or may even
involve an entire lobe or lung. Ventilation is
mismatched. The chest radiograph is clear, without
infiltrates, atelectasis, or effusions in regions of
perfusion–ventilation mismatches.
APPENDIX 1
