similarly.
Pearl
In-111 ProstaScint is no longer commonly used for imaging metastatic
prostate cancer. F-18 fluciclovine (Axumin) PET, an amino acid analog,
has been approved for imaging of metastatic prostate cancer. Ga-68
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) and F-18 PSMA-targeted
radiopharmaceuticals are both PET tracers under active investigation for
imaging metastatic prostate cancer, and at least one is likely to be approved
in the near future. The target of these small-molecule radiopharmaceuticals
is the enzyme site in the extracellular domain. It is then internalized by
endocytosis. Image quality is clearly superior to ProstaScint and very
likely better than F-18 fluciclovine.
Gastrointestinal
Pearl
The radionuclide gastrointestinal reflux study (“milk study”) is a sensitive
method for the detection of reflux because of its rapid acquisition rate (5–
10 sec/frame). However, it is not particularly sensitive for aspiration
(<25%). A salivagram, essentially an esophageal transit scintigraphic
study where a small amount of activity is placed in the child’s mouth, is
much more sensitive for the detection of aspiration.
Q: What are the different functional roles of the proximal and
distal stomach?
A: The proximal stomach (fundus) undergoes
receptive relaxation and accommodation after
ingestion of a meal and is responsible for liquid
emptying. The distal stomach (antrum) grinds and
sieves solid food and is responsible for solid
emptying.
Q: Describe the difference in emptying patterns between solids
and liquids.
A: Liquids empty in an exponential pattern. Solid
emptying is biphasic, with an initial lag phase
before linear emptying begins. The lag phase is due
to the time required for food to be broken down into
small enough pieces to allow passage through the
pylorus.
Q: Which of these factors will affect the rate of gastric emptying:
meal content, time of day, position (standing, sitting, lying),
stress, exercise?
A: All. The gastric-emptying study should be
standardized for the size and contents of the meal,
time of day, patient position, acquisition method,
processing, and normal values. A standardized
meal has been recommended, with normal values
based on that method.
Q: What is the published recommendation for a standardized
solid gastric-emptying study?
A: The published consensus for a standardized
gastric-emptying study involves the ingestion of
specific amounts of an egg-white sandwich, jam,
and water. Images are acquired immediately after
ingestion and at 1, 2, and 4 hours in the anterior and
posterior view. Attenuation correction is performed.
Normal values are established for percent
emptying: >10% at 1 hour, >40% at 2 hours, and
>90% at 4 hours.
Pearls
Gastric emptying may be underestimated when an anterior acquisition
alone is obtained. The geometrical mean method is considered the standard
method for attenuation correction.
Q: What is the red blood cell labeling efficiency of these three
methods: in vivo, in vitro, and in vivtro labeling methods?
A: The efficiency is 75% for in vivo, 85% for modified
in vivo (in vivtro), and >97% for the in vitro method.
Pearl
An in vitro commercial kit method (Ultra-Tag) for labeling Tc-99m
erythrocytes is the method of choice today because of its high labeling
efficiency.
Q: What are the essential criteria needed to confidently diagnose
the site of active bleeding on a radionuclide gastrointestinal
bleeding study?
A: A radiotracer “hot spot” appears where there was
none, transit is in a pattern conforming to bowel
anatomy, the activity increases over time, and it
moves antegrade and or retrograde.
Pitfall
A poor label (free Tc-99m pertechnetate) for a gastrointestinal (GI)
bleeding study can result in activity that might be construed as GI
bleeding.
Pearl
Look for thyroid and salivary gland uptake when in doubt about the
presence of free Tc-99m pertechnetate. If the patient has recently had a
contrast CT scan, the thyroid may not be visualized.
Pearl
A lateral view or left anterior oblique (LAO) view of the pelvis at the end
of a GI bleeding study acquisition can help to differentiate bladder, rectal
bleeding, and penile activity.
Pitfall
Focal activity seen on a Tc-99m red blood cell (RBC) GI bleeding study
that does not move but remains fixed in position may be due to an
accessory spleen, hemangioma, varices, or aneurysm.
Pearl
The RBC gastrointestinal bleeding study can detect bleeding rates of
approximately 0.1 mL/min versus 1 mL/min for contrast angiography.
Pearl
This most common congenital anomaly of the gastrointestinal tract is a
