A: It depends. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
highly sensitive and often detects lesions not seen
on bone scan because it can visualize changes in the
bone marrow and does not depend on secondary
reactive cortical bone changes to develop. Bone
scintigraphy has the advantage that it routinely
images the whole body. It is particularly helpful for
sclerotic (blastic) metastases. FDG PET scanning is
more sensitive than bone scan for detection of lytic
tumors. At times, the modalities complement each
other by detecting different lesions in the same
patient. F-18 sodium fluoride PET is a very sensitive
bone scan agent but at the expense of specificity.
PET/CT improves the specificity.
Q: What are some differences between nonattenuation-corrected
and attenuation-corrected FDG PET images?
A: The noncorrected image has an appearance quite
different from that of the corrected image. Without
attenuation, structures near the surface appear more
intense because fewer photons are attenuated before
hitting the detector. This explains why the skin
looks like it is outlined with a charcoal pencil. The
air-filled lungs are also intense. Because fewer
counts are seen in central areas, lesions may be
missed. However, this is a preferable way to detect
skin lesions. For accurate quantification (standard
uptake value [SUV]), attenuation corrected images
must be used.
Oncology: Beyond Fluorodeoxyglucose
Q: Which of the following are true statements regarding indium-
111 OctreoScan (pentetreotide)?
a. It is a somatostatin receptor imaging agent.
b. The sensitivity for all neuroendocrine tumors is very high.
c. The highest uptake is seen in the spleen and kidneys.
d. Only neuroendocrine tumors have somatostatin receptors.
A: a, c. Although the sensitivity for the detection of
many neuroendocrine tumors is high (e.g.,
carcinoid), it has a poorer sensitivity for others (e.g.,
insulinomas and medullary carcinoma of the
thyroid). Somatostatin receptors are found on a
variety of nonneuroendocrine tumors, including
astrocytomas, meningiomas, malignant lymphoma,
and breast and lung cancer.
Pearl
Ga-68 dotatate PET/CT is now FDA approved for somatostatin imaging of
neuroendocrine tumors. It has superior image quality and higher
sensitivity for tumor detection than In-111 pentetreotide. As with other
PET studies, it is completed by 2 hours after injection, compared with 24-
hour imaging for In-111 pentetreotide.
Pearl
The sentinel node is the first lymph node draining a malignant tumor site
and the most likely one to have a metastatic tumor. Radionuclide
lymphoscintigraphy is commonly used to detect the sentinel node.
Surgeons sometimes use blue dye as well at the time of surgery.
Q: Which patients with malignant melanoma require sentinel
node lymphoscintigraphy?
A: Lymphoscintigraphy is indicated for patients with
primary lesions >1 mm and <4 mm thickness.
Patients with a primary lesion <1 mm in thickness
are at low risk for recurrence and have a good
prognosis. Patients with a primary lesion thickness
>4 mm are at high risk for metastatic regional and
distant metastases.
Q: What information does sentinel node lymphoscintigraphy
provide?
A: Lymphoscintigraphy can localize the sentinel node
for the surgeon, who can then detect it at surgery
with a gamma probe. After immunohistochemical
staining of tissue from this lymph node, the
presence of metastases can be determined. The
results will determine whether the patient requires
further dissection of the nodal bed. If the sentinel
node is negative, no further surgery is necessary.
Q: In what other malignant disease is sentinel node
lymphoscintigraphy commonly performed? What is the
method of injection?
A: Sentinel node lymphoscintigraphy is commonly
performed in breast cancer. The method of
radiopharmaceutical injection varies. At some
hospitals, it is injected intratumorally. Others inject
it subdermally, whereas still others inject in the
periareolar region. The rationale for the latter is that
all lymphatics drain to the areolar region before
further drainage to the axillary region.
Pearl
In patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and an
intracerebral mass, thallium-201 can differentiate malignancy, usually
lymphoma, from inflammatory causes, commonly toxoplasmosis. Tl-201 is
rarely taken up in inflammation but is taken up by many malignant
tumors. The predictive value is greater than 85%. F-18 FDG performs
