Infection and Inflammation
Q: Which photopeaks are used for In-111-leukocyte imaging,
and what is their abundance?
A: 173 keV (89%) and 247 keV (94%)
Q: Which collimator should be used for In-111 leukocyte
imaging?
A: Medium-energy collimator
Pearl
Characteristic scintigraphic patterns of uptake with sarcoidosis on Ga-67
imaging are (1) the “panda” sign, due to uptake in the salivary glands,
parotids, and nasopharyngeal region, and (2) the “lambda” sign, which
results from paratracheal and hilar lymph node uptake. The lambda sign is
also seen with FDG PET; however, the panda sign is not.
Q: Which leukocytes are labeled with In-111 oxine and Tc-99m
hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO)?
A: In-111 oxine binds to neutrophils, lymphocytes,
monocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets. Tc-99m
HMPAO binds only to neutrophils.
Q: Which of the following statements is true regarding In-111
oxine leukocytes?
a. They are useful for evaluating inflammatory lung disease.
b. They have a high sensitivity for detecting osteomyelitis of the
spine.
c. They should not be used when the peripheral leukocyte count
is less than 3000/mm3.
d. They are the radiopharmaceutical of choice for intraabdominal
infection.
A: c and d are true, with explanations as follows:
a. False. Ga-67 or F-18 FDG is a better choice for
inflammatory disease of the lung.
b. The sensitivity for vertebral osteomyelitis is poor, with a
40% false-negative rate. Ga-67 or FDG would be
preferable.
c. Fewer than 3000/mm3 leukocytes is inadequate for
radiolabeled leukocyte studies.
d. The lack of intraabdominal hepatobiliary and
genitourinary clearance makes In-111 leukocytes ideal for
detecting intraabdominal infection and superior to Tc-99m
HMPAO, which is cleared by both of these routes.
Pearl
Tc-99m HMPAO is the preferred agent for localizing infection in children
because In-111 leukocytes result in a high radiation dose to the spleen of 30
to 50 rads (15–20 rads in adults). Tc-99m HMPAO results in less than
2.2 rads to the spleen.
Q: What is the optimal imaging time for In-111 and Tc-99m-
HMPAO leukocytes?
A: In-111 leukocytes are usually imaged at 24 hours.
Imaging at 4 to 6 hours is less sensitive for detection
of infection. Tc-99m-HMPAO leukocytes should be
imaged by 2 hours for intraabdominal infection
before biliary and renal clearance occurs.
Extraabdominal infection can be imaged later,
usually at 4 hours, allowing time for background
clearance.
Pearl
An exception to 24-hour imaging for In-111 leukocytes is for inflammatory
bowel disease, in which imaging should be done at 4 hours because
intraluminal shedding of inflamed cells may result in inaccurate
localization at 24 hours.
Pitfall
Leukocytes may accumulate at the site of inflammation without infection
(e.g., intravenous catheters; nasogastric, endogastric, and drainage tubes;
tracheostomies; and colostomies). Leukocytes may accumulate at
postoperative surgical sites for 2 to 3 weeks, and low-grade uptake may be
seen at healing fracture sites. Accessory spleens could be misinterpreted as
infection, and renal transplants always accumulate leukocytes.
Pitfall
In a radiolabeled leukocyte study, intraluminal intestinal radioactivity can
result from swallowed or shedding cells from pharyngitis, sinusitis,
pneumonia, herpes esophagitis, or GI bleeding.
Pitfall
A radiolabeled leukocyte study for suspected osteomyelitis of the
extremities may have a false-positive result because of displaced bone
marrow. The addition of a bone marrow study (Tc-99m sulfur colloid) can
confirm or exclude the diagnosis. Osteomyelitis will show increased uptake
on the leukocyte study and normal or decreased uptake on the bone
marrow study. A similar distribution of the two radiopharmaceuticals is
negative for infection.
