Alzheimer disease exhibits a characteristic pattern
of bitemporal and parietal hypoperfusion and
hypometabolism. Pick disease or frontal temporal
dementia has decreased frontal lobe and temporal
lobe uptake.
Pearl
Although Alzheimer disease has a characteristic bitemporal-parietal
pattern on perfusion imaging, it is often not symmetrical. Decreased
frontal lobe uptake may be seen in late-stage disease. Decreased uptake is
also characteristically seen in the posterior cingulate and precuneus
regions of the brain.
Pearl
F-18 florbetapir (Amyvid) was approved to estimate β-amyloid neuritic
plaque density in patients with cognitive impairment. A negative study
rules out Alzheimer’ disease as the cause. A study that is positive for
amyloid plaques is not diagnostic of Alzheimer’ disease because this may
be seen in normal individuals without dementia.
Q: What is the purpose of cerebral perfusion imaging in patients
with seizures? What is the expected PET or SPECT pattern?
A: Interictal studies performed with F-18 FDG PET
and Tc-99m HMPAO or ECD SPECT show
decreased metabolism on FDG PET and decreased
perfusion on SPECT. Increased activity is seen
during a seizure (ictal). The SPECT tracer must be
injected during the seizure. Imaging can be delayed
because the tracer is fixed. The logistics of FDG PET
make detection of a seizure focus unlikely.
Cardiac
Pearl
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, whether performed with SPECT or
PET, is a “map” of relative blood flow to viable myocardium. That is, for
activity to be recorded in the image, it must be delivered (blood flow) and
taken up by a myocardial cell (viable myocardium).
Q: What percentage of Tc-99m sestamibi and Tc-99m
tetrofosmin localizes in the heart?
A: Tc-99 sestamibi, 1.5%; tetrofosmin, 1.2%
Q: What quality control should be routinely performed to detect
patient motion?
A: Review raw data in cinematic display. Review of
the sinogram can also confirm motion.
Pearl
The best method for correcting the problem of patient motion is to repeat
the study. If this is not possible, software motion-correction programs can
be used. However, the software usually corrects for motion only in one
axis, vertical. Motion typically occurs in multiple dimensions.
Pitfall
Attenuation of photons by soft tissue can result in decreased activity seen
in the myocardium, which might suggest myocardial infarction if seen on
both rest and stress or as ischemia if only apparent on the stress study.
With females, breast attenuation results in decreased activity of the
anterior, septal, or lateral wall, depending on their size, shape, and
position. Males characteristically have attenuation of the inferior wall, so-
called diaphragmatic attenuation.
Q: In what ways can the image interpreter determine whether
fixed myocardial decreased activity is pathological (i.e.,
infarction) or merely caused by attenuation?
A: Review the raw data in the cinematic display to
look for soft tissue attenuation. Review of the gated
SPECT can help determine whether ventricular wall
motion and thickening are present, which would
indicate that it is not an infarction but, rather, the
result of attenuation. Attenuation-correction
programs can be helpful in differentiating
attenuation from infarction.
Pearl
To correct for cardiac attenuation, a transmission map must be acquired.
This can be done by acquiring transmission counts from a gamma source
(e.g., gadolinium-153). Today, most commonly the CT portion of the
SPECT/CT examination is used for attenuation correction.
Q: What is the significance of exercise-induced dilation on
SPECT perfusion studies?
A: The normal heart dilates during exercise stress, but
gated SPECT images are acquired after stress, when
normal hearts should have returned to baseline size.
Poststress dilation suggests cardiac decompensation
and three-vessel disease.
Pearl
Patients with left bundle branch block (LBBB) may have exercise-stress-
inducible reversible hypoperfusion of the septum. Patients with true
ischemia do not typically have isolated septal involvement but also have
apical and anterior wall ischemia. This can be avoided by performing
pharmacological stress in patients with LBBB.
Pearl
The primary cause of a false-negative exercise study that results in the
diagnosis of coronary artery disease is a failure to achieve an adequate
exercise level.
Pearl
After exercise stress, significant uptake in the liver usually indicates a
poor exercise level was achieved. At peak exercise, blood flow is diverted
from the splanchnic circulation.
Q: What is the mechanism of action of dipyridamole and
regadenoson?
A: Dipyridamole inhibits the reuptake of adenosine
deaminase and thus augments the effects of
endogenous adenosine. Regadenoson is a selective
A2A coronary receptor.
Q: What effect can a cup of coffee have on pharmacological
stress?
A: The types of caffeine in coffee, tea, soft drinks, or
foods such as chocolate are chemically related and
can block the effect of pharmacological stress
testing.
Q: What percentage of stenosis at rest is necessary in the
coronary arteries for resting blood flow to be affected?
A: Coronary artery stenosis greater than 85% to 90% is
required before flow is diminished at rest. Not all
stenoses are created equal. Long, irregular stenotic
segments have more effect than discrete, short-
segment stenoses.
Q: Why is imaging delayed for 30 to 60 minutes after
administration of Tc-99m sestamibi or Tc-99m tetrofosmin?
A: Although myocardial uptake is rapid with both Tc-
99m sestamibi and Tc-99m tetrofosmin, the lungs
