CHAPTER 28  PHARYNX AND ESOPHAGUS

SARA MOSHIRI AND WILLIAM E. BRANT

Imaging Methods                                                  Esophagitis
Anatomy                                                          Esophageal Stricture
Normal Swallowing and Motility                                   Enlarged Esophageal Folds
Motility Disorders                                               Mass Lesions/Filling Defects
Outpouchings                                                     Esophageal Perforation and Trauma

          IMAGING METHODS                                        function is entirely respiratory, and the nasopharynx is not
                                                                 considered further in this chapter. The oropharynx is posterior
The upper gastrointestinal (UGI) series, also called a barium    to the oral cavity and extends from the soft palate to the hyoid
meal, is a barium examination of the alimentary tract from the   bone. The hypopharynx (laryngopharynx) extends from the
pharynx to the ligament of Treitz. A barium swallow or           hyoid bone to the cricopharyngeus muscle. The base of the
esophagram is a study more dedicated to evaluation of swal-      tongue forms the anterior boundary of the oropharynx. The out-
lowing disorders and suspected lesions of the pharynx and the    line of the surface of the tongue is nodular because of the pres-
esophagus. Barium sulfate preparations are ingested orally,      ence of lymphoid tissue forming the lingual tonsils and the
and filming is performed during fluoroscopy. The fluoroscopic    circumvallate papillae, which contain taste buds. The lingual
examination is commonly videotaped or digitally stored to        tonsils may hypertrophy and mimic a neoplasm. The epiglottis
allow for more detailed review of swallowing dynamics and        and aryepiglottic folds separate the larynx from the orophar-
motility. Double-contrast techniques using mucosal coating       ynx and the hypopharynx. The valleculae are two symmetrical
with barium combined with luminal distension are preferred       pouches formed in the recess between the base of the tongue
for mucosal detail. Distension of the pharynx is provided by     and the epiglottis. They are divided medially by the median
having the patient phonate. Distension of the esophagus is       glossoepiglottic fold and bounded laterally by the lateral glos-
attained by having the patient ingest gas-producing crystals.    soepiglottic folds. The piriform sinuses are deep, symmetrical,
Full-column, or single-contrast, technique uses barium sus-      lateral recesses formed by the protrusion of the larynx into the
pension alone to fill and distend the esophagus. Mucosal relief  hypopharynx.
views are collapsed views of the barium-coated esophagus.
                                                                     The esophagus extends from the cricopharyngeus muscle
    Cross-sectional imaging techniques are used to stage malig-  at the level of C5-6 to the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ).
nancies of the pharynx and esophagus and to clarify findings     The esophagus is a muscular tube formed by an outer lon-
seen with other imaging methods (1). CT complements barium       gitudinal muscle layer and an inner circular muscle layer
studies and endoscopy of the esophagus by demonstrating the      lined by stratified squamous epithelium. The esophagus lacks
esophageal wall and adjacent structures to determine extent of   a serosal layer, which allows the rapid spread of tumor into
disease (2). CT is poor at evaluating the mucosa and generally   adjacent tissues. The proximal one-third of the esophagus is
cannot differentiate inflammatory and neoplastic conditions.     predominantly striated muscle, whereas the distal two-thirds,
MR is preferred over CT for evaluation of the nasopharynx        below the level of the aortic arch, is predominantly smooth
and is an alternative to CT for demonstrating the extent of      muscle. Normal extrinsic impressions on the esophagus are
esophageal disease. The clear depiction of blood vessels by      made by the aortic arch, the left mainstem bronchus, and the
MR is useful in confirming the presence of varices and in        left atrium. The normal esophageal mucosa is smooth and
evaluating mediastinal vascular anatomy. Endoscopic sonog-       featureless when fully distended on air-contrast barium stud-
raphy is useful for demonstration of tumor penetration of the    ies (3). With partial collapse, multiple longitudinal folds, 1 to
esophageal wall.                                                 2 mm in thickness, become evident. Multiple regular, trans-
                                                                 verse folds, 1-mm thick, result from contraction of the longi-
    This chapter reviews the pharynx as studied as part of a     tudinal fibers in the muscularis mucosa. This pattern is called
barium examination and for assessment of swallowing dis-         feline esophagus because it is typical of a normal esophagus
orders. Cross-sectional imaging of the neck and pharynx is       in cats. In humans, it may be an early sign of dysmotility or
reviewed in Chapter 9.                                           esophagitis (see Fig. 28.21).

                 ANATOMY                                             On cross-sectional imaging, the esophagus appears as an
                                                                 oval of soft tissue density usually surrounded by fat. In most
The pharynx extends from the nasal cavity to the larynx and is   cases (>60%), the esophagus is collapsed and contains no air
arbitrarily divided into three compartments (Fig. 28.1). The     (2). Normal air or contrast within the lumen of the esopha-
nasopharynx extends from the skull base to the soft palate. Its  gus is located centrally within its lumen. Eccentric contrast or
                                                                 air should be considered abnormal. Distension of the upper
734
                                                                       Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus                         735

A                                                              B

                                                               FIGURE 28.1. Double-Contrast Pharyngogram. Three radio-

                                                               graphs of the pharynx coated with barium demonstrate nor-

                                                               mal anatomic structures: (A) nondistended lateral view;

                                                               (B) distended lateral view, obtained by having the patient pho-

                                                               nate "eee..."; and (C) frontal (anteroposterior) view. The

                                                               nasopharynx (NP) extends from the skull base to the soft pal-

                                                               ate. The oropharynx (OP) spans from the soft palate to the

                                                               hyoid bone (HB). The hypopharynx (HP) extends from the

                                                               hyoid bone to the cricopharyngeus muscle (C5-6), which

                                                               demarcates the pharynx and the esophagus. The epiglottis (e)

                                                               closes during swallowing to protect the larynx (L) from aspi-

                                                               ration. The cricoid cartilage makes a prominent impression

                                                               on the hypopharynx (long white arrows). The base of the

                                                               tongue (T) has a normal lobulated appearance due to nodular

                                                               lymphoid tissue. The valleculae (V) are recesses between the

                                                               tongue and the epiglottis, bordered by the median glossoepi-

                                                               glottic fold (thick white arrow) and the lateral glossoepiglot-

                                                               tic folds (black arrowheads). The piriform recesses (P) extend

                                                               laterally and posterior to the larynx. The piriform recesses are

                                                               commonly slightly asymmetric in size. The laryngeal ventricle

                                                               (white arrowhead) is faintly visualized outlined by air

                                                               between the false vocal cords above and the true vocal cords

C                                                              below.

esophagus more than 10 mm or the lower esophagus more              Anatomy of the esophagogastric region is complex (4) (Fig.
than 20 mm is abnormal (2). Air-fluid levels in the esophagus  28.2). The length of the esophagus is tubular, and its termina-
are always abnormal. The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) is   tion is saccular. The saccular termination is called the esopha-
normally closed. The wall of the distended esophagus should    geal vestibule. The tubulovestibular junction is formed by a
not exceed 3 mm in thickness.                                  symmetrical muscular ring called the A ring. The B ring is an
736  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

A    B                                                           FIGURE 28.2. Anatomy of the Gastroesopha-
                                                                 geal Junction. Radiographs from a double-
                                                                 contrast barium study (A) and a single-
                                                                 contrast barium study (B) demonstrate the
                                                                 physiologic and anatomic landmarks of the
                                                                 gastroesophageal junction. The Z line (Z, red
                                                                 arrowheads), seen best on the double-contrast
                                                                 study, marks the junction of the squamous
                                                                 epithelium of the esophagus (E) and the
                                                                 columnar epithelium of the stomach (S). The
                                                                 single-contrast study demonstrates the esoph-
                                                                 ageal vestibule (V) demarcated by the muscu-
                                                                 lar A ring (A, white arrowheads) and the
                                                                 mucosal fold of the B ring (B, red arrow-
                                                                 heads). The vestibule marks the location of
                                                                 the lower esophageal sphincter. The Z line and
                                                                 the B ring are markers of the gastroesophageal
                                                                 junction. Their location relative to the esopha-
                                                                 geal hiatus in the diaphragm varies with swal-
                                                                 lowing and other physiologic motions. The
                                                                 double-contrast study shows the featureless
                                                                 mucosal pattern of the well-distended normal
                                                                 esophagus.

asymmetrical mucosal ring or notch that occurs at the junction   depresses to accommodate the bolus and channel it into the
of esophageal squamous epithelium with gastric columnar epi-     oropharynx. The oropharynx and the hypopharynx receive
thelium. This squamocolumnar junction is also marked by          the bolus and conduct it to the esophagus. Breathing is halted
the Z line, a thin ragged line of demarcation seen on double-    while the larynx elevates, the laryngeal vestibule closes, and
contrast views of the lower esophagus. The B ring and the Z      the epiglottis and aryepiglottic folds close over the opening
line are considered to be radiographic markers of the GEJ.       into the larynx and deflect the bolus through the lateral piri-
The LES is a physiologic rather than an anatomic structure. It   form recesses.
is a 2- to 4-cm-long high-pressure zone located in the esopha-
geal vestibule. It is defined manometrically but is without a        The functional upper esophageal sphincter (UES), formed
distinct anatomic correlate. At rest, the LES is tightly closed  by the cricopharyngeus and other pharyngeal muscles, opens
with a pressure higher than gastric pressure to prevent reflux   to receive the bolus. Peristalsis conveys ingested material
of gastric contents into the esophagus. Malfunction of the LES   through the tubular esophagus to the stomach. Primary peri-
results in gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The act       stalsis is composed of a rapid wave of inhibition that opens
of swallowing generates peristalsis in the esophagus, which      the sphincters, followed by a slow wave of contraction that
results in relaxation of the LES allowing passage of swallowed   moves the bolus. Normal peristalsis will clear the esophagus
liquids and solids into the stomach (4).                         completely with each swallow. Radiographically, primary
                                                                 peristalsis appears as a stripping wave that traverses the entire
    The esophageal hiatus is an angled opening in the dia-       esophagus from top to bottom. Secondary peristalsis is ini-
phragm, formed by the edges of the diaphragmatic crura. On       tiated by distension of the esophageal lumen. The peristaltic
CT and MR, the crura appear as often prominent, teardrop-        wave starts in the midesophagus and spreads simultaneously
shaped structures of muscle density. With normal breathing,      up and down the esophagus to clear reflux or any part of a
the proximal vestibule and A ring lie in the thorax. The mid-    bolus left behind. Secondary waves have the same radio-
vestibule is in the esophageal hiatus, and the distal vestibule  graphic appearance as primary waves except that they start
and B ring are in the abdomen. With swallowing, the vestibule    at the point of the retained barium bolus. Tertiary waves are
opens and moves upward, and the B ring may be seen 1 cm          nonproductive contractions associated with motility disorders.
above the diaphragm.                                             Irregular contractions follow one another at close intervals
                                                                 from the top to the bottom of the esophagus. These nonperi-
       NORMAL SWALLOWING                                         staltic contractions cause a corkscrew or beaded appearance
              AND MOTILITY                                       of the esophageal barium column. The functional LES at the
                                                                 level of the esophageal vestibule relaxes and opens in response
The normal process of swallowing can be divided into oral,       to swallowing, primary peristalsis, and proximal esophageal
pharyngeal, and esophageal phases. The oral stage involves       dilation.
the voluntary transport of a bolus from the oral cavity into
the pharynx. The soft palate elevates and the tongue                 Oral and pharyngeal swallowing are evaluated fluoroscopi-
                                                                 cally with the patient in an upright position simulating nor-
                                                                 mal eating. The lateral projection is most useful. Studies are
                                                                 videotaped or digitally stored for subsequent detailed study.
                                                                 Esophageal motility is evaluated by observing fluoroscopically
                                                                  Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  737

at least five separate swallows of barium with the patient in
a prone oblique position. The patient must be instructed to
swallow only once, as continuous swallowing distends the
esophagus and makes the evaluation of primary peristalsis
impossible.

        MOTILITY DISORDERS                                        FIGURE 28.3. Aspiration on a Barium Swallow. Frontal radiograph
                                                                  taken during a barium swallow examination demonstrates the appear-
Difficulty with swallowing has an increasingly high prevalence    ance of aspiration. Barium coats the surface of the false cords (F), the
with age. Symptoms of abnormal oral or pharyngeal swallow-        intervening laryngeal ventricle (arrowhead), and the true vocal cords
ing include difficulty initiating swallowing, globus sensation    (T). Barium coating to this level would be diagnostic of laryngeal pen-
(lump in throat), cervical dysphagia, nasal regurgitation,        etration. However, barium coating is seen in the proximal trachea
hoarseness, coughing, or choking. Symptoms suggesting             (arrows) indicating that aspiration has occurred. Barium is also seen
esophageal dysfunction include heartburn, dysphagia, "indi-       pooling in the piriform recesses (P). This is a normal finding.
gestion," and chest pain. Dysphagia is defined as the aware-
ness of swallowing difficulty during the passage of solids or     piriform sinuses (5). Laryngeal penetration is defined as entry
liquids from mouth to stomach. Patients complain of food          of barium into the laryngeal vestibule without passage below
"sticking in the throat" and of painful swallowing (odynopha-     the vocal cords. Aspiration implies barium passage below the
gia). These symptoms may be caused by anatomic abnormali-         vocal cords (Fig. 28.3). Any of these findings may precipitate a
ties, tumors, or motility disorders. The patient's subjective     cough. Laryngeal penetration and tracheobronchial aspiration
assessment of the location of the abnormality is not reliable.    are associated with increased risk of developing pneumonia
Detailed dynamic barium studies of the entire oropharyngeal-      especially in hospitalized patients. Nasal regurgitation occurs
esophageal pathway with videofluoroscopy are needed for           when the soft palate does not make a good seal against the
complete evaluation. Motility disorders that may cause dys-       posterior pharyngeal wall. Causes include neurologic impair-
phagia or aspiration are reviewed in this section. Radiographic   ment, muscular dystrophies, and structural defects in the pal-
findings of functional abnormalities of the pharynx and the       ate. The major causes of pharyngeal dysfunction are listed in
esophagus increase in prevalence with age, may not correlate      Table 28.1.
with specific symptoms, and must be interpreted with caution.
                                                                      Cricopharyngeal achalasia is attributable to failure of
    Signs of Pharyngeal Dysfunction. Pharyngeal stasis, indic-    complete relaxation of the UES, commonly resulting in dys-
ative of impaired pharyngeal transport, is seen as increased      phagia and aspiration. Barium swallow demonstrates a shelf-
residual volume of swallowed material filling the valleculae and  like impression (cricopharyngeal bar) on the barium column
                                                                  at the pharyngoesophageal junction at the level of C5-6. The
 TABLE 28.1                                                       pharynx is distended, and barium may overflow into the lar-
                                                                  ynx and trachea. Because some normal individuals have a
CAUSES OF PHARYNGEAL SWALLOWING                                   prominent cricopharyngeal impression, controversy exists as
DYSFUNCTION                                                       to how prominent the impression must be to be considered
                                                                  significant. Narrowing of the lumen greater than 50% is gen-
  Aging (primary presbyphagia)                                    erally accepted as a definite cause of dysphagia. Cricopharyn-
                                                                  geal dysfunction is commonly associated with neuromuscular
  Neurological disease                                            disorders of the pharynx.
     Cerebrovascular accident
     Multiple sclerosis                                               Achalasia of the esophagus is a disease of unknown eti-
     Movement disorders                                           ology characterized by (1) absence of peristalsis in the body
     Neurodegenerative diseases                                   of the esophagus, (2) marked increase in resting pressure of
     CNS infections                                               the LES, and (3) failure of the LES to relax with swallowing

  Muscle disease
     Muscular dystrophies
     Myasthenia gravis

  Structural abnormalities
     Pharyngeal webs
     Zenker diverticulum
     Tumors

  Medications

  Radiation

  Gastroesophageal reflux

  Trauma

  Postsurgical changes

  Malignancy
     Oral cavity
     Pharynx
     Larynx
738  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

FIGURE 28.4. Primary Achalasia. Spot radiograph from double-          evaluated radiographically in all patients because of delayed
contrast barium study shows 1-cm-long smooth, tapered narrowing       emptying of barium from the esophagus. Therefore, it is
(arrow) of distal esophagus with uniform dilation of the esophagus.   important to be aware of the limitations of barium studies in
Note standing column of barium on this upright view. Short length of  evaluating the cardia and fundus in patients with suspected
narrowed segment is characteristic of primary achalasia.              achalasia (6).

                                                                          Peptic strictures are usually associated with normal pri-
                                                                      mary peristalsis. A hiatal hernia is usually present.

                                                                          Diffuse esophageal spasm is a syndrome of unknown cause
                                                                      characterized by multiple tertiary esophageal contractions
                                                                      (Fig. 28.6), thickened esophageal wall, and intermittent dys-
                                                                      phagia and chest pain. Primary peristalsis is usually present,
                                                                      but the contractions are infrequent. Most patients are middle-
                                                                      aged. The LES is frequently dysfunctional and the condition
                                                                      commonly improves with injection of Clostridium botulinum
                                                                      toxin at the GEJ or with endoscopic balloon dilatation of the
                                                                      LES. Diffuse esophageal spasm is characterized on barium
                                                                      studies by intermittently absent or weakened primary esopha-
                                                                      geal peristalsis with simultaneous, nonperistaltic contractions
                                                                      that compartmentalize the esophagus, producing a classic
                                                                      corkscrew appearance. CT reveals circumferential thickening
                                                                      (5 to 15 mm) of the wall of the distal 5 cm of the esophagus in
                                                                      20% of patients (7).

                                                                          Neuromuscular disorders are a common cause of abnor-
                                                                      malities of the oral, pharyngeal, or esophageal phases of swal-
                                                                      lowing. The most common cause of neurologic dysfunction is
                                                                      cerebrovascular disease and stroke. Additional causes include
                                                                      Parkinsonism, Alzheimer disease, multiple sclerosis, neo-
                                                                      plasms of the CNS, and posttraumatic CNS injury. Diseases of
                                                                      striated muscle, such as muscular dystrophy, myasthenia gra-
                                                                      vis, and dermatomyositis, predominantly affect the pharynx
                                                                      and proximal third (striated muscle portion) of the esophagus.

(4). The abnormal peristalsis and LES spasm result in a fail-         FIGURE 28.5. Secondary Achalasia--Carcinoma of Esophagus. Spot
ure of the esophagus to empty. Pathologically, cases show a           radiograph from double-contrast barium study shows 4-cm-long
deficiency of ganglion cells in the myenteric plexus (Auerbach        tapered narrowing of distal esophagus with esophageal diameter
plexus) throughout the esophagus. The clinical presentation           proximally of 4 cm. Endoscopy and biopsy showed carcinoma of the
is insidious, usually at age 30 to 50 years, with dysphagia,          esophagus.
regurgitation, foul breath, and aspiration. Radiographic
signs include (1) uniform dilatation of the esophagus, usu-
ally with an air-fluid level present; (2) absence of peristalsis,
with tertiary waves common in the early stages of the disease;
(3) tapered "beak" deformity at the LES because of failure
of relaxation (Fig. 28.4); (4) findings of esophagitis including
ulceration; and (5) increased incidence of epiphrenic diver-
ticula and esophageal carcinoma. Treatment of achalasia is
balloon dilation or Heller myotomy. Diseases that may mimic
esophageal achalasia include the following.

    Chagas disease is caused by the destruction of ganglion
cells of the esophagus due to a neurotoxin released by the
protozoa, Trypanosoma cruzi, endemic to South America,
especially eastern Brazil. The radiographic appearance of the
esophagus is identical to achalasia. Associated abnormalities
include cardiomyopathy, megaduodenum, megaureter, and
megacolon.

    Carcinoma of the GEJ may mimic achalasia but tends
to involve a longer (>3.5 cm) segment of the distal esopha-
gus, is rigid, and tends to show more irregular tapering of
the distal esophagus and mass effect (Fig. 28.5). When find-
ings of achalasia are present on barium studies, it is impor-
tant to evaluate the gastric cardia and fundus to rule out an
underlying malignant tumor at the GEJ as the cause of these
findings. The cardia and fundus is however not adequately
                                                                    Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  739

FIGURE 28.6. Diffuse Esophageal Spasm. Image from a barium          FIGURE 28.7. Scleroderma. Double-contrast esophagram in a
esophagram demonstrates numerous ineffective tertiary contractions  patient with scleroderma demonstrates a stiff esophagus with peristal-
throughout the esophagus. The lower esophageal sphincter was dys-   sis. The gastroesophageal junction (curved arrow) is gaping and free
functional, not opening appropriately on fluoroscopic examination.  gastroesophageal reflux was observed. Reflux esophagitis has resulted
                                                                    in mild stricturing (white arrows) of the esophagus and focal ulcers
    Scleroderma is a systemic disease of unknown cause              (black arrowhead).
characterized by progressive atrophy of smooth muscle and
progressive fibrosis of affected tissues. Women are most com-       abdominal pressure. As a result, increases in intra-abdominal
monly affected, usually aged 20 to 40 years at the onset of         pressure exceed LES pressure, and gastric contents are allowed
disease. The esophagus is affected in 75% to 80% of patients.       to reflux into the esophagus. GERD is classified as a spectrum
Radiographic findings (Fig. 28.7) include (1) weak to absent        of conditions: nonerosive reflux disease, erosive esophagitis,
peristalsis in the distal two-thirds (smooth muscle portion) of     and Barrett esophagus. Symptoms of GERD include substernal
the esophagus; (2) delayed esophageal emptying; (3) a stiff         burning pain ("heartburn"), postural regurgitation (in supine
dilated esophagus that does not collapse with emptying; and         position), and development of reflux esophagitis, dysphagia,
(4) wide gaping LES with free gastroesophageal reflux. Despite      and odynophagia. Complications of GERD include reflux
free reflux, tight strictures of the distal esophagus are uncom-    esophagitis, stricture, and development of Barrett esophagus.
mon.                                                                The radiographic diagnosis of GERD may be difficult because
                                                                    20% of normal individuals show spontaneous reflux on UGI
    Postoperative states, including surgery for malignancy of       examination, and patients with pathologic GERD may not
the tongue, larynx, and pharynx, commonly impair swallow-           demonstrate reflux without provocative tests. Findings asso-
ing function as well as alter the morphology. Surgical resection    ciated with GERD on barium esophagrams include (1) hia-
is aimed at providing at least a 1-cm margin free of tumor and      tal hernia, associated with presence of reflux esophagitis;
often results in removing large blocks of tissue and function-      (2) shortening of the esophagus, a finding of importance to
ally altering the structures that remain.                           treating GERD surgically; (3) impaired esophageal motility;
                                                                    (4) gastroesophageal reflux, often demonstrated by provoca-
    Esophagitis frequently results in abnormal esophageal           tive maneuvers such as Valsalva, leg raising, and cough; and
motility and visualization of tertiary esophageal contractions.     (5) prolonged clearance time of refluxed gastric contents. Low
                                                                    volume reflux that clears rapidly is not considered a significant
    Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a major health        finding (8). Monitoring of esophageal pH for 24 hours in an
problem in the United States. GERD occurs as a result of            ambulatory patient is the most sensitive means of diagnosing
incompetence of the LES. The resting pressure of the LES is         abnormal GERD. GERD is managed medically with agents
abnormally decreased and fails to increase with raised intra-       that inhibit gastric acid production or surgically with fundo-
                                                                    plication.

                                                                        Hiatus hernia is often considered synonymous with
                                                                    GERD. Most patients with hiatus hernia do not have
740  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

A                                                                B

FIGURE 28.8. Sliding Hiatus Hernia. A. CT demonstrates a 26-mm gap between the crura (arrowheads) of the diaphragm. The normal esopha-
geal hiatus should not exceed 15 mm. The stomach (S) extends through the hiatus and is positioned both above and below the diaphragm. The
gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) was seen at a higher level in the thorax. B. Radiograph from a barium swallow examination shows a small slid-
ing hiatus hernia (H) with gastric folds extending to the level of the B ring marking the gastroesophageal junction (arrowheads). The GEJ is well
above the level of the left hemidiaphragm (curved arrow).

gastroesophageal reflux or evidence of esophagitis. Hiatus       FIGURE 28.9. Paraesophageal Hiatal Hernia. Radiograph from an
hernia is therefore not likely as a primary cause of reflux.     upper GI series shows the characteristic findings of paraesophageal
However, up to 90% of patients with GERD have a hiatus           hiatal hernia. The gastroesophageal junction (arrow) and fundus (F) of
hernia. The presence of hiatus hernia delays the clearance       the stomach are below the diaphragm while a portion of the body (B)
of reflux and promotes development of RE (4). An area of         of the stomach herniates through the esophageal hiatus into the chest
controversy is the definition of hiatus hernia and the criteria  and then doubles back into the abdomen.
used for diagnosis. The simplest definition is protrusion of
any portion of the stomach into the thorax. Using that defini-
tion, hiatus hernia is highly prevalent affecting 40% to 60%
of adults. Three types of hiatal hernia are described (9). The
most common (95%) is the sliding hiatus hernia, with the
GEJ displaced more than 1 cm above the hiatus. The esopha-
geal hiatus is often abnormally widened to 3 to 4 cm (Fig.
28.8). The upper limit of normal hiatal width is 15 mm, most
easily measured by CT. The gastric fundus may be displaced
above the diaphragm and present as a retrocardiac mass on
chest radiographs. The presence of an air-fluid level in the
mass suggests the diagnosis. Small, sliding hiatus hernias
commonly reduce in the upright position. The mere presence
of a sliding hiatus hernia is of limited clinical significance
in most cases. The function of the LES and the presence of
pathologic gastroesophageal reflux are the crucial factors in
producing symptoms and causing complications. Much less
common is the paraesophageal hiatus hernia, in which the
GEJ remains in normal location, while a portion of the stom-
ach herniates above the diaphragm (Fig. 28.9). The mixed or
compound hiatal hernia is the most common type of para-
esophageal hernia (Fig. 28.10). The GEJ is displaced into the
thorax with a large portion of the stomach, which is usually
abnormally rotated. Paraesophageal hernias, especially when
large with most of the stomach in the thorax, are at risk for
volvulus, obstruction, and ischemia.
                                                                        Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  741

FIGURE 28.10. Compound Hiatus Hernia. Left posterior oblique            FIGURE 28.11. Zenker Diverticulum. Barium swallow examination
view from an upper GI series demonstrates a large hiatus hernia. The    demonstrates the characteristic barium-filled outpouching indicating a
fundus (F) of the stomach (S) extends well above the level of the left  Zenker Diverticulum (ZD) at the junction of the hypopharynx (HP)
hemidiaphragm (curved arrow). The widened (6 cm) esophageal hia-        and cervical esophagus (CE). Note that the neck of the diverticulum
tus makes an impression (arrowheads) on the body of the stomach.        (arrowhead) is at a more cephalad location than its base, encouraging
The gastroesophageal junction (black arrow) is 5 cm above the left      the trapping of food and liquid. TE, thoracic esophagus.
hemidiaphragm. The distal esophagus is bowed around the herniated
stomach. The right hemidiaphragm projects well above the left hemi-
diaphragm on this view.

             OUTPOUCHINGS                                               FIGURE 28.12. Killian-Jamieson Diverticulum. Spot radiograph
                                                                        obtained with patient in frontal position shows a left-sided Killian-
Lateral pharyngeal diverticula are protrusions of pharyngeal            Jamieson diverticulum (arrow) with wide neck.
mucosa through areas of weakness of the lateral pharyngeal
wall, most common in the region of the tonsillar fossa and the
thyrohyoid membrane. They reflect increased intrapharyngeal
pressure and are seen most commonly in wind instrument
players.

    Zenker diverticulum arises in the hypopharynx just proxi-
mal to the UES. It is located in the posterior midline at the
cleavage plane, known as Killian dehiscence, between the cir-
cular and the oblique fibers of the cricopharyngeus muscle.
The diverticulum has a small neck that is higher than the sac,
resulting in food and liquid being trapped within the sac (Fig.
28.11). The distended sac may compress the cervical esopha-
gus. Symptoms include dysphagia, halitosis, and regurgitation
of food.

    Killian-Jamieson diverticula originate on the anterolat-
eral wall of the proximal cervical esophagus in a gap just
below the cricopharyngeus and lateral to the longitudinal
tendon of the esophagus (i.e., the Killian-Jamieson space)
(10). Killian-Jamieson diverticula are less common and
considerably smaller than Zenker diverticulum and appear
on pharyngoesophagography as persistent left-sided or, less
frequently, bilateral outpouchings from the proximal cer-
vical esophagus below the cricopharyngeus (Fig. 28.12).
Killian-Jamieson diverticula also are less likely to cause
symptoms and are less likely to be associated with overflow
aspiration or gastroesophageal reflux than is Zenker diver-
ticulum (11).
742  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

FIGURE 28.13. Pulsion Diverticulum. A barium swallow examina-        FIGURE 28.14. Traction Diverticulum. Double-contrast esophagram
tion demonstrates a persistent mucosal outpouching (arrow) in the    shows a small traction diverticulum (arrow) caused by a mediastinal
midesophagus. The patient was asymptomatic. Pulsion diverticula are  mass extending from the midesophagus.
formed when the mucosa and the submucosa herniate through the
muscularis.

    Midesophageal diverticula may be pulsion or traction             FIGURE 28.15. Epiphrenic Diverticula. A stricture (arrowhead) of
diverticula. Pulsion diverticula occur as a result of disordered     the distal esophagus has resulted in the formation of two pulsion
esophageal peristalsis (Fig. 28.13). Traction diverticula occur      diverticula (arrows). The filling defects (curved arrow) in the barium
because of fibrous inflammatory reactions of adjacent lymph          column are caused by retained boluses of meat proximal to the stric-
nodes and contain all esophageal layers (Fig. 28.14). Most           ture.
midesophageal diverticula have large mouths, empty well, and
are usually asymptomatic.

    Epiphrenic diverticula occur just above the LES, usually on
the right side. They are rare and usually found in patients with
esophageal motility disorders (Fig. 28.15). Because of a small
neck, higher than the sac, they may trap food and liquids and
cause symptoms.

    Sacculations are small outpouchings of the esophagus that
usually occur as a sequela of severe esophagitis (Fig. 28.16).
They are thought to result from the healing and scarring of
ulcerations. Sacculations tend to change in size and shape dur-
ing fluoroscopic observation. Smooth contours help to differ-
entiate sacculations from ulcerations.

    Intramural pseudodiverticula are the dilated excretory
ducts of deep mucous glands of the esophagus (12). They
appear as flask-shaped barium collections that extend from
the lumen or as lines and flecks of barium outside the esopha-
geal wall. They tend to occur in clusters and in association
with strictures. Liner tracks of barium ("intramural tracking")
commonly bridge adjacent pseudodiverticula.

               ESOPHAGITIS

Esophagitis is a common disease with many causes. Radiologic
evaluation will detect most cases of moderate to severe esoph-
                                                                      Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  743

                                                                      has symptoms of reflux rather than severe odynophagia.
                                                                      Reflux esophagitis is the most common cause of esophageal
                                                                      ulcerations. The ulcers appear as discrete linear, punctate,
                                                                      or irregular collections of barium, usually surrounded by a
                                                                      radiolucent mound of edema. Prominence of the ulcerations
                                                                      in the distal rather than proximal or midesophagus is the
                                                                      key to differentiating reflux esophagitis ulcers from those of
                                                                      herpes or drug-induced esophagitis. Complications of reflux
                                                                      esophagitis include ulceration, bleeding, stricture, and Bar-
                                                                      rett esophagus.

                                                                          Barrett esophagus is an acquired condition of progressive
                                                                      columnar metaplasia of the distal esophagus caused by chronic
                                                                      gastroesophageal reflux. Columnar rather than squamous epi-
                                                                      thelium lines the distal esophagus. The prevalence of Barrett
                                                                      esophagus in patients with RE is about 10%, but increases to
                                                                      37% in patients with scleroderma. It is premalignant, with a
                                                                      30- to 40-times increased risk of developing adenocarcinoma,
                                                                      resulting in a 15% prevalence of adenocarcinoma in patients
                                                                      with Barrett esophagus. Clinical presentation is usually indis-
                                                                      tinguishable from reflux esophagitis. Adenocarcinoma may
                                                                      develop at any age. The characteristic radiographic appearance
                                                                      of Barrett esophagus is a high (midesophageal) stricture or deep
                                                                      ulcer in a patient with GERD (Fig. 28.17). A reticular mucosal
                                                                      pattern of the esophageal mucosa, resembling areae gastricae
                                                                      of the stomach, is also suggestive. The diagnosis is confirmed
                                                                      by endoscopy and biopsy.

                                                                          Infectious esophagitis is found most commonly in patients
                                                                      with compromised immune systems. It is increasingly common

FIGURE 28.16. Reflux Esophagitis--Sacculations. A barium esopha-
gram demonstrates stiffness and narrowing of the distal esophagus
just above the level of the diaphragm (curved arrow). Several promi-
nent sacculations (arrows) are present, indicating long-standing and
severe esophagitis. E, esophagus; S, stomach.

agitis but will demonstrate less than half the cases of mild          FIGURE 28.17. Barrett Esophagus. Double-contrast esophagram
esophagitis. Attention to excellent technique and use of              shows a focal area of moderate narrowing in the midesophagus with
double-contrast studies are essential. Radiographic signs of          distinctive reticular pattern that is thought to result from intestinal
esophagitis include (1) thickened esophageal folds (>3 mm),           metaplasia in Barrett mucosa.
(2) limited esophageal distensibility (asymmetric flattening),
(3) abnormal motility, (4) mucosal plaques and nodules, (5)
erosions and ulcerations, (6) localized stricture, and (7) intra-
mural pseudodiverticulosis (barium filling of dilated 1 to 3
mm submucosal glands). Ulcers are a hallmark finding of
esophagitis. Small ulcers (<1 cm) are found with reflux esoph-
agitis, herpes, acute radiation, drug-induced esophagitis, and
benign mucous membrane pemphigoid. Larger ulcers (>1 cm)
are characteristic of cytomegalovirus, HIV, Barrett esophagus,
and carcinoma. CT usually reveals nonspecific findings of
thickening of the wall (>5 mm) and target sign with hypoat-
tenuating thickened wall and high attenuation enhancing
mucosa (13).

    Reflux esophagitis is the result of esophageal muco-
sal injury owing to exposure to gastroduodenal secretions.
The severity depends on the concentration of caustic agents
including acid, pepsin, bile salts, caffeine, alcohol, and aspi-
rin, as well as the duration of contact with the esophageal
mucosa. The findings of reflux esophagitis are always most
prominent in the distal esophagus and GEJ (Fig. 28.16). Early
changes of RE include mucosal edema, which is manifest as
a granular or nodular pattern of the distal esophagus. In
contrast to the distinct borders of Candida plaques and nod-
ules, reflux esophagitis nodules have poorly defined borders.
Inflammatory exudates and pseudomembrane formation may
mimic fulminant Candida esophagitis; however, the patient
744  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

                                                                   FIGURE 28.19. Cytomegalovirus Esophagitis. A large flat mucosal
                                                                   ulcer (arrow) in the distal esophagus is characteristic of cytomegalovi-
                                                                   rus esophagitis in a patient with AIDS.

FIGURE 28.18. Candida Esophagitis. Barium esophagram in an             Cytomegalovirus is a cause of fulminant esophagitis in
immunocompromised patient on chemotherapy demonstrates             patients with AIDS. Cytomegalovirus esophagitis is character-
"shaggy" esophageal mucosa caused by multiple confluent plaques    istically manifest as one or more large, flat mucosal ulcers (Fig.
and shallow ulcers (arrowheads) produced by Candida albicans       28.19). Endoscopic biopsy or culture confirms the diagnosis.
esophagitis.
                                                                       HIV esophagitis causes giant ulcers and severe odynopha-
because of the use of steroids and cytotoxic drugs and because     gia. Electron microscopy reveals HIV particles in the ulcers.
of the increasing prevalence of AIDS.                              The ulcers are large, flat, and usually in the midesophagus.

    Candida albicans is by far the most common cause of                Tuberculosis. The esophagus is the least common portion
infectious esophagitis and is highly prevalent in patients         of the GI tract to be involved by tuberculosis. Manifestations
with AIDS. Additional risk factors include malignancy, radi-       include ulceration, stricture, sinus tract, and abscess formation
ation, chemotherapy, and steroid treatments. Candida of            (Fig. 28.20).
the oropharynx (thrush) is commonly present and is usually
evident on physical examination. Odynophagia is a promi-               Drug-induced esophagitis is the result of intake of oral
nent symptom. Discrete plaque-like lesions demonstrated by         medications that produce a focal inflammation in areas of con-
double-contrast esophagrams are most characteristic (Fig.          tact with the mucosa. Drugs that cause this condition include
28.18). The plaques appear as longitudinally oriented lin-         tetracycline, doxycycline, quinidine, aspirin, indomethacin,
ear or irregular discrete filling defects etched in white with     ascorbic acid, potassium chloride, and theophylline. The
intervening normal-appearing mucosa. The lesions may be            radiographic appearance may be identical to herpes esopha-
tiny and nodular or giant and coalescent with pseudomem-           gitis, with discrete ulcers separated by normal mucosa in the
branes. Ulcers tend to be small (<1 cm) and may be punc-           midesophagus (Fig. 28.21). The diagnosis is suggested by a
tate, round, oval, or linear. Fulminant disease produces the       history of recent drug ingestion. Healing usually occurs within
"foamy esophagus" with a pattern of tiny bubbles at the top        7 to 10 days of discontinuing the offending medication.
of the barium column.
                                                                       Corrosive ingestion usually occurs as an accident in chil-
    Herpes simplex esophagitis begins as discrete vesicles that    dren or a suicide attempt in adults. Alkaline agents (liquid
rupture to form discrete mucosal ulcers. The ulcers may be         lye) produce deep (full-thickness) coagulation necrosis. Acid
linear, punctate, or ring-like and have a characteristic radiolu-  agents tend to produce more superficial injury. Ulceration,
cent halo. Discrete ulcers on a background of normal mucosa        esophageal perforation, and mediastinitis may complicate the
involving the midesophagus are most characteristic of herpes.      acute injury. Late complications are fibrosis and long or mul-
Nodules and plaques are usually absent.                            tiple strictures.

                                                                       Crohn disease may rarely manifest as discrete aphthous
                                                                   ulcers in the esophagus. Involvement of the small or large
                                                                   bowel by Crohn disease is virtually always present. Crohn dis-
                                                                   ease of the esophagus should not be considered unless Crohn
                                                                   disease of the bowel is already evident.
                                                                          Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  745

                                                                              Radiation esophagitis occurs in patients with a history of
                                                                          thoracic radiation therapy for malignant disease. Acute radia-
                                                                          tion may cause shallow or deep ulcers in the area of involve-
                                                                          ment. With the development of fibrosis, the peristaltic wave is
                                                                          interrupted and a long smooth stricture may develop within
                                                                          the radiotherapy field. Higher radiation dose in the range of
                                                                          4500 to 6000 R is associated with development of strictures.
                                                                          Simultaneous radiotherapy and doxorubicin hydrochloride
                                                                          (Adriamycin) chemotherapy greatly accentuates esophageal
                                                                          inflammation. UGI shows a variable length segment of esoph-
                                                                          ageal narrowing multiple discrete ulcers or a granular mucosal
                                                                          pattern within the radiation field.

FIGURE 28.20. Tuberculous Esophagitis. Tuberculosis in an immu-                 ESOPHAGEAL STRICTURE
nocompromised patient has ulcerated the esophagus and causes a
periesophageal abscess (arrow).                                           Strictures are defined as any persistent intrinsic narrowing of
                                                                          the esophagus (12). The most common causes are fibrosis
FIGURE 28.21. Drug-Induced Esophagitis. Air-contrast esophagram           induced by inflammation and neoplasm. Because radiographic
demonstrates discrete shallow ulcers en face (red arrow) and in profile   findings are not reliable in differentiating benign from malig-
(arrowhead). The ulcers were caused by stasis of tetracycline capsules    nant strictures, all should be evaluated endoscopically (14).
in the esophagus. Multiple regular, thin, transverse folds (white arrow)  Distal esophageal strictures are caused by GERD, sclero-
in the distal esophagus are typical of feline esophagus, a finding sug-   derma, and prolonged nasogastric intubation. Upper and mid-
gestive of esophagitis.                                                   dle esophageal strictures most commonly results from Barrett
                                                                          esophagus, mediastinal radiation, caustic ingestion, and skin
                                                                          diseases associated with mucosal ulceration such as pemphi-
                                                                          goid, erythema multiforme, and epidermolysis bullosa dystro-
                                                                          phica. Benign strictures typically show smoothly tapering
                                                                          concentric narrowing (Fig. 28.18). Malignant strictures are
                                                                          characteristically abrupt, asymmetric, eccentric narrowings
                                                                          with irregular, nodular mucosa (Fig. 28.19). Tapered margins
                                                                          may occur with malignant lesions because of the ease of sub-
                                                                          mucosal spread of tumor (15).

                                                                              Esophagitis. Chronic inflammation induces progressive
                                                                          fibrosis that eventually narrows the esophageal lumen. Acute
                                                                          and chronic findings of esophagitis commonly overlap.

                                                                              Reflux esophagitis (GERD) is the most common cause of
                                                                          esophageal stricture. Reflux strictures are usually confined to
                                                                          the distal esophagus and may be tapered, smooth, and circum-
                                                                          ferential (the classic appearance) (Fig. 28.22) or asymmetric
                                                                          and irregular. Small smooth sacculations and fixed transverse
                                                                          folds are characteristic and caused by scarring. Long-segment
                                                                          stricture may be induced by long-term nasogastric intubation
                                                                          (Fig. 28.23). Nasogastric tubes prevent closure of the LES,
                                                                          resulting in continuous bathing of the distal esophagus with
                                                                          acid reflux from the stomach. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome can
                                                                          lead to severe reflux esophagitis because of the high acid con-
                                                                          tent of refluxed gastric contents. A Schatzki ring is a patho-
                                                                          logic ring-like stricture at the level of the B ring, caused by
                                                                          reflux esophagitis.

                                                                              Barrett esophagus strictures tend to be high in the mid-
                                                                          esophagus and may be smooth and tapered or ring-like
                                                                          narrowings. The high position is because of a tendency for
                                                                          strictures to occur at the squamocolumnar junction, which has
                                                                          been displaced to a position well above the GEJ.

                                                                              Corrosives strictures are long and symmetrical. They com-
                                                                          monly develop years after the initial injury.

                                                                              Alkaline Reflux Esophagitis may occur in patients who
                                                                          have undergone partial or total gastrectomy. Reflux of bile or
                                                                          pancreatic secretions into the esophagus results in the develop-
                                                                          ment of severe alkaline reflux esophagitis and distal esopha-
                                                                          geal strictures whose length and severity increase rapidly over
                                                                          a short period of time. Performing a Roux-en-Y reconstruc-
                                                                          tion at the time of the surgery helps prevent reflux of bile and
                                                                          pancreatic secretion into the esophagus. An alkaline reflux
                                                                          stricture should be suspected when barium examination per-
                                                                          formed in patients who have undergone partial or total gas-
                                                                          trectomy or gastrojejunostomy reveals a long stricture in the
                                                                          distal esophagus (12).
746  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

FIGURE 28.22. Benign Stricture Resulting from Reflux Esophagitis.
A short, narrowed area (arrows) of the distal esophagus extends to the
top of a hiatus hernia (H) in this patient with chronic gastroesopha-
geal reflux. Note the tapered margins and concentric shape of the
stricture typical for a benign stricture.

    Eosinophilic esophagitis is an increasingly common diag-            FIGURE 28.23. Nasogastric Intubation Stricture. Double-contrast
nosis made most often in young men with a history of allergies          esophagogram shows a long segment of narrowing in the distal esoph-
(16). Some have a peripheral eosinophilia. Patients present             agus. This stricture developed 4 months after prolonged nasogastric
with a long-standing history of dysphagia and food impaction.           intubation.
Barium studies demonstrate smooth long-segment narrowing
of the esophagus or a series of ring-like strictures, called the            Extrinsic Compression. Malignancy or inflammation in
"ringed esophagus." Biopsy reveals eosinophilic infiltration of         the mediastinum may encase the esophagus and narrow its
the wall of the esophagus. The cause may be related to ingested         lumen. Causes include lung carcinoma, lymphoma, metastasis
food allergens. Treatment is steroids.                                  to mediastinal nodes, tuberculosis, and histoplasmosis.

    Radiation strictures are confined to the radiotherapy field.         ENLARGED ESOPHAGEAL FOLDS
They are smooth and tapered and usually in the upper or mid-
esophagus.                                                              Esophagitis. Thick folds occur most commonly with reflux
                                                                        esophagitis. Additional findings associated with esophagitis,
    Neoplasm. An irregular, ulcerated, circumferential narrow-          such as ulcerations and nodules, are commonly present.
ing with nodular shoulders is most typical of malignant stric-
ture (Fig. 28.24). Infiltrative tumors may cause smooth, rigid              Varices appear as serpiginous filling defects (Fig. 28.27) that
narrowing of the esophagus without a clear zone of transition.          change in size with changes in intrathoracic pressure and that
The mucosa may not be altered until tumor spread is substan-            collapse with esophageal peristalsis and distension. They are
tial. Because longitudinal spread of tumor along the length             best demonstrated on UGI with mucosal relief views. CT with
of the esophagus is typical, long-segment strictures caused by          bolus contrast enhancement demonstrates varices as enhanc-
carcinoma are common (Fig. 28.25).                                      ing vascular structures within and adjacent to esophageal wall
                                                                        near the GEJ. MR is also effective in demonstrating varices
    Webs are thin (1 to 2 mm), delicate membranes that sweep            as vascular spaces, with signal void because of flowing blood.
partially across the lumen (Fig. 28.26). They occur in both
the pharynx and the esophagus and are commonly multiple.                    Uphill varices refer to the portosystemic collateral veins
Pharyngeal webs arise most commonly from the anterior wall              that enlarge because of portal hypertension. Coronary vein
of the hypopharynx. Esophageal webs may occur anywhere,                 collaterals connect with gastroesophageal varices that drain
but they are most common in the cervical esophagus just distal          into the inferior vena cava through the azygos system. Uphill
to the cricopharyngeus impression. Most are incidental find-            varices are usually only present in the distal esophagus.
ings; however, they occasionally cause sufficient obstruction to
result in dysphasia.
                                                                        Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  747

                                                                                                 FIGURE 28.26. Esophageal Web. Lateral oblique view from a bar-
                                                                                                 ium esophagram reveals a thin membrane (arrow) that extends across
                                                                                                 the lumen of the proximal esophagus, leaving only a narrow lumen
                                                                                                 for passage of food. The esophagus is dilated proximal to the web.

FIGURE 28.24. Malignant Stricture. A squamous cell carcinoma of
the midesophagus causes an abrupt narrowing with irregular mucosa.
The prominent sh oulders (arrows) are characteristic of tumor.
Differential diagnosis of strictures of the upper and midesophagus
includes Barrett esophagus, mediastinal irradiation, caustic ingestion,
and drug-induced esophagitis.

FIGURE 28.25. Long Stricture Resulting From Esophageal                  FIGURE 28.27. Varices. A single-contrast barium esophagram dem-
Carcinoma. A long-segment stricture (arrows) of the distal esophagus    onstrates sinuous tubular and nodular filling defects (arrowheads) in
(E) is apparent on this barium esophagram. The column of barium is      the esophagus. This patient has cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and a
abruptly narrowed to a thin markedly irregular channel. Differential    history of upper GI bleeding.
diagnosis of long-segment strictures of the esophagus includes reflux
esophagitis, caustic ingestion, complicated scleroderma, and radiation
esophagitis. S, stomach.
748  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

    Downhill varices are formed as a result of obstruction of
the superior vena cava with drainage from the azygous system
through esophageal varices to the portal vein. Downhill vari-
ces usually predominate in the proximal esophagus.

    Lymphoma may infiltrate the submucosa and thicken the
folds. Lymphoma rarely involves the esophagus directly and is
virtually never primary in the esophagus.

    Varicoid carcinoma causes thick, tortuous, longitudinal
folds that resemble varices but are rigid and persistent.

 MASS LESIONS/FILLING DEFECTS                                           FIGURE 28.29. Adenocarcinoma in Barrett Esophagus. A tumor in
                                                                        the distal esophagus (E) forms nodular (arrows) narrowing of the
Pharyngeal carcinomas are well demonstrated by double-con-              barium column. Endoscopy confirmed adenocarcinoma arising in
trast pharyngography. Barium studies may detect tumors dif-             Barrett esophagus. S, stomach.
ficult to visualize endoscopically. Radiographic signs include
(1) intraluminal mass seen as a filling defect, abnormal lumi-              Esophageal carcinoma is squamous cell carcinoma in
nal contour, or focal increased density; (2) mucosal irregular-         85% to 90% of cases, and the remainder are adenocarci-
ity owing to ulceration or mucosal elevations; and (3)                  noma arising in Barrett esophagus (Fig. 28.29), undifferenti-
asymmetrical distensibility due to infiltrating tumor or extrin-        ated, or miscellaneous cell types (1). Because of rapid spread
sic nodal mass. Most pharyngeal tumors are squamous cell                to adjacent structures, esophageal carcinoma is deadly, with
carcinomas that may arise on the base of the tongue, palatine           a 5-year survival of only 5% for advanced disease. Early-
tonsil, posterior pharyngeal wall, or the piriform sinus (Fig.          stage disease treated surgically has a 5-year survival of 50%
28.28). Laryngeal tumors may impress on the pharynx or                  to 80%. The tumor assumes four basic radiographic pat-
extend into it. Staging is best performed by CT or MR.                  terns. An annular constricting lesion, appearing as an irregu-
                                                                        lar ulcerated stricture, is most common (Figs. 28.24, 28.25).
    Pharyngeal retention cysts are benign lesions that typi-            The polypoid pattern causes an intraluminal filling defect
cally involve the valleculae and should not be mistaken for             (Fig. 28.30). The infiltrative variety grows predominantly
pharyngeal neoplasms (17). They appear as small, smooth,                in the submucosa and may simulate a benign stricture. The
well-defined, round or oval filling defects best appreciated            least common pattern is that of an ulcerated mass. Risk fac-
on frontal views. They arise from dilatation of mucus glands            tors include cigarette and alcohol abuse, corrosive ingestion,
caused by chronic inflammation. They are never malignant.               and carcinoma of the head and neck. The typical patient is a
                                                                        65-year-old man.
    Lymphoma of the pharynx is usually manifest as a large,
bulky tumor of the lingual or palatine tonsils. Lymphoma con-               The tumor spreads quickly by direct invasion into adjacent
stitutes 15% of oropharyngeal tumors.                                   tissues because of the lack of a serosal covering on the esopha-
                                                                        gus. Lymphatic spread may go to nodes in the neck, medias-
FIGURE 28.28. Carcinoma in the Piriform Recess. Frontal view from       tinum, or below the diaphragm, depending on the location of
a barium swallow examination demonstrates a mass mostly filling the     the primary tumor in the esophagus. Hematogenous spread is
left piriform recess (red arrow) and bulging into the hypopharynx       to lung, liver, and adrenal gland.
(arrowhead). The right piriform recess (P) has a normal appearance.
The presence of the mass has caused aspiration. Barium is seen filling      CT and endoscopic US are used primarily to define the
the larynx (black curved arrow) and extending into the trachea (black   extent of disease and determine surgical resectability (Fig.
arrow).                                                                 28.31). Findings include irregular thickening of the esopha-
                                                                        geal wall (>5 mm), eccentric narrowing of the lumen, dilation
                                                                        of the esophagus above the area of narrowing, invasion of
                                                                        periesophageal tissues, and metastases to mediastinal lymph
                                                                        nodes and the liver. Obliteration of the fat space between the
                                                                        aorta, esophagus, and vertebral body is highly predictive of
                                                                        invasion of the aorta. PET-CT is useful for demonstration of
                                                                        distant metastases but is not useful in tumor detection or pri-
                                                                        mary staging (1).

                                                                            Gastric adenocarcinoma spreads from the fundus and
                                                                        GEJ into the distal esophagus. Adenocarcinoma of the distal
                                                                        esophagus may be either primary gastric or primary esopha-
                                                                        geal, arising in Barrett esophagus (Fig. 28.29).

                                                                            Leiomyoma, while rare, is still the most common benign
                                                                        neoplasm of the esophagus, accounting for 50% of all benign
                                                                        esophageal neoplasms. GI stromal tumors (GISTs) are rare
                                                                       Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  749

                                                                       mass of uniform soft tissue density. The esophageal wall is
                                                                       eccentrically thickened. Leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus is
                                                                       exceedingly rare, accounting for less than 1% of esophageal
                                                                       malignancy. Malignant lesions are typically heterogeneous
                                                                       with a large exophytic component.

                                                                           Polyp. Fibroepithelial or fibrovascular polyps are a rare
                                                                       cause of esophageal filling defect. They appear as large ovoid
                                                                       or elongated intraluminal masses in the upper esophagus.

                                                                           Esophageal duplication cysts are congenital abnormalities
                                                                       that are usually incidental findings presenting without symp-
                                                                       toms. Most (60%) occur in the lower esophagus (Fig. 28.32).
                                                                       CT shows a well-defined cystic mass. Barium examination will
                                                                       show extrinsic or intramural compression due to close contact
                                                                       with the esophagus. Differential diagnosis include broncho-
                                                                       genic and neurenteric cyst.

                                                                           Extrinsic lesions may invade the esophagus or simulate an
                                                                       esophageal mass or filling defect. Causes include mediastinal
                                                                       adenopathy, lung carcinoma, and vascular structures.

                                                                           Aberrant right subclavian artery arises from the aorta distal
                                                                       to the left subclavian artery. To reach its destination, it must
                                                                       cross the mediastinum behind the esophagus. It causes a char-
                                                                       acteristic upward-slanting linear filling defect on the posterior
                                                                       aspect of the esophagus (Fig. 28.33).

FIGURE 28.30. Polypoid Squamous Cell Carcinoma. This esopha-               ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION
geal carcinoma appears as a polypoid mass (arrows) in the midesoph-                  AND TRAUMA
agus on this barium esophagram. Barium outlines the lobulations in
the tumor.                                                             Esophageal perforation is a life-threatening event requiring
                                                                       prompt diagnosis and treatment (18). More than half the
                                                                       cases are related to esophageal instrumentation. Bleeding can
                                                                       be profuse, and infection is a great risk. Conventional radio-
                                                                       graphs demonstrate subcutaneous, cervical, or mediastinal

in the esophagus. The tumor is firm, well-encapsulated, and
arises in the wall. Ulceration is rare. Most cause no symp-
toms and are discovered incidentally. Men aged 25 to 35 years
are affected most commonly (male-to-female ratio = 2:1).
On UGI, most appear as smooth, well-defined wall lesions,
although rarely they may be pedunculated or polypoid. Coarse
calcifications are occasionally present and strongly indica-
tive of leiomyoma. CT demonstrates a smooth, well-defined

FIGURE 28.31. Value of CT in Esophageal Adenocarcinoma. CT             FIGURE 28.32. Esophageal Duplication Cyst. Double-contrast
image shows the extent of disease in this patient with adenocarcinoma  esophagram demonstrates a smooth indentation (arrows) on the distal
in Barrett esophagus. The wall (fat arrow) of the esophagus is asym-   esophagus consistent with a benign extrinsic mass. CT confirmed an
metrically thickened markedly narrowing the esophageal lumen           esophageal duplication cyst.
marked by air. A metastatic subcarinal lymph node (skinny arrow) is
evident. The tumor extends outside of the esophagus (arrowhead) to
involve the thoracic aorta.
750  Section Seven: Gastrointestinal Tract

FIGURE 28.33. Aberrant Right Subclavian Artery. Frontal view from      FIGURE 28.34. Esophageal Perforation. CT scan through the lower
a barium esophagram reveals an aberrant right subclavian artery that   thorax shows bubbles of air and fluid in the mediastinum (arrow-
arises from the aortic arch distal to the left subclavian artery and   heads) and around the thoracic aorta (A). Air and contrast distend the
crosses behind the esophagus, causing a tubular extrinsic impression   esophagus (e). Air has dissected into the subcutaneous tissues (fat
(arrows) on the esophagus slanting upward and to the patient's right.  arrows). Bilateral pleural effusions (pe) are also evident. Esophageal
The normal smooth impression of the left atrium (arrowheads) on the    perforation occurred during endoscopic esophageal stenting.
esophagus is also evident.
                                                                       Meat impacts in the distal or midesophagus. Perforation occurs
                                                                       in only 1% of cases, but the risk increases if impaction per-
                                                                       sists more than 24 hours. Bones in the pharynx are difficult to
                                                                       differentiate from calcification of the thyroid and cricoid carti-
                                                                       lages. Contrast studies show nonopaque foreign bodies as filling

emphysema within 1 hour of perforation. Chest radiographs              FIGURE 28.35. Food Impaction. Single-contrast esophagram shows
may show a widened mediastinum and pleural effusion or                 a polypoid filling defect (arrow) representing a bolus of food just
hydropneumothorax. Contrast studies should be performed                proximal to a stricture (arrowhead) in the distal esophagus.
initially with low-osmolar water-soluble agents and, if nega-
tive, followed by repeating the study with barium (19). The
key finding is focal or diffuse extravasation of contrast outside
the esophagus. CT demonstrates fluid collections, extra-lumi-
nal contrast, and air in the mediastinum (Fig. 28.34).

    Trauma. Endoscopy, esophageal dilation procedures, or
any type of instrumentation may perforate the esophageal
wall. Knife and bullet wounds may perforate the esophagus.
Blunt trauma may tear the esophagus by an explosive increase
in intraesophageal pressure.

    Boerhaave syndrome refers to rupture of the esopha-
geal wall as a result of forceful vomiting. The tear is virtu-
ally always in the left posterior wall near the left crus of the
diaphragm. Esophageal contents usually escape into the left
pleural space or into the potential space between the parietal
pleura and the left crus. Tears may result in intramural dissec-
tions and hematomas in the wall of the esophagus.

    Mallory-Weiss tear involves only the mucosa and not the full
thickness of the esophagus. The tears are usually caused by vio-
lent retching. Endoscopy usually identifies the lesion. The lesion
is commonly missed on UGI. When seen, the tear appears as a
longitudinally oriented barium collection, 1 to 4 cm in length, in
the distal esophagus. It may be a cause of copious hematemesis.

    Foreign body impaction in adults is usually attributable
to bones or boluses of meat. Children may ingest any foreign
object including toys, coins, and jewelry. Bones usually lodge
in the pharynx, most often near the cricopharyngeus muscle.
                                                                                 Chapter 28: Pharynx and Esophagus  751

defects (Fig. 28.35). Impacted foreign bodies may be removed                      8. Baker ME, Einstein DM, Herts BR, et al. Gastroesophageal reflux disease:
by use of a Foley balloon catheter or wire basket or by gaseous                       integrating the barium esophagram before and after antireflux surgery.
distension of the esophagus with gas-producing crystals. CT                           Radiology 2007;243:329-339.
demonstrates the nature of the foreign body and frequently any
associated pathology that predisposed to impaction (18).                          9. Abbara S, Kalan MMH, Lewicki AM. Intrathoracic stomach revisited.
                                                                                      AJR Am J Roentgenol 2003;181:403-414.
                       References
                                                                                 10. Ekberg O, Nylander G. Lateral diverticula from the pharyngoesophageal
   1. Kim JTJ, Kim HY, Lee KW, Kim MS. Multimodality assessment of esopha-            junction area. Radiology 1983;146:117-122.
       geal cancer: preoperative staging and monitoring of response to therapy.
       Radiographics 2009;29:403-421.                                            11. Rubesin SE, Levine MS. Killian-Jamieson diverticula: radiographic find-
                                                                                      ings in 16 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2001;177:85-89.
   2. Schraufnagel DE, Michel JC, Sheppard TJ, et al. CT of the normal esopha-
       gus to define the normal air column and its extent and distribution. AJR  12. Luedtke P, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al. Radiologic diagnosis of benign
       Am J Roentgenol 2008;191:748-752.                                              esophageal strictures: a pattern approach. Radiographics 2003;23:897-
                                                                                      909.
   3. Gore RM, Ghahremani GG, Miller FH. Mucosal features of the alimen-
       tary tract on double contrast barium studies. Radiologist 1995;2:283-     13. Berkovich GY, Levine MS, Miller WT Jr. CT findings in patients with
       295.                                                                           esophagitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2000;175:1431-1434.

   4. Chen MYM, Ott DJ. Esophagogastric region: anatomy, function, and           14. Karasick S, Lev-Toaff AS. Esophageal strictures: findings on barium radio-
       common disorders. Contemp Diagn Radiol 2002;25:1-6.                            graphs. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1995;165:561-565.

   5. Dodds WJ, Logemann JA, Stewart ET. Radiologic assessment of abnormal       15. Gupta S, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al. Usefulness of barium studies for
       oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing. AJR Am J Roentgenol                  differentiating benign and malignant strictures of the esophagus. AJR Am
       1990;154:965-974.                                                              J Roentgenol 2003;180:737-744.

   6. Woodfield CA, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al. Diagnosis of primary versus    16. White SB, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al. The small-caliber esophagus:
       secondary achalasia: reassessment of clinical and radiographic criteria.       radiographic sign of idiopathic eosinophilic esophagitis. Radiology
       AJR Am J Roentgenol 2000;175:727-731.                                          2010;256:127-134.

   7. Goldberg MF, Levine MS, Torigian DA. Diffuse esophageal spasm: CT          17. Woodfield CA, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al. Pharyngeal retention cysts:
       findings in seven patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008;191:758-763.              radiographic findings in seven patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol
                                                                                      2005;184:793-796.

                                                                                 18. Young CA, Menias CO, Bhalla S, Prasad SR. CT features of esophageal
                                                                                      emergencies. Radiographics 2008;28:1541-1553.

                                                                                 19. Swanson JO, Levine MS, Redfern RO, Rubesin SE. Usefulness of high-
                                                                                      density barium for detection of leaks after esophagogastrectomy, total gas-
                                                                                      trectomy, and total laryngectomy. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2003;181:415-
                                                                                      420.
