10              Evaluation and
                Management of the
                Nose--External Conditions

NASAL FRACTURE

Figure 1.7:     The nasal bones are the most commonly fractured bones of the face. Mismanagement
External nose.  of nasal fractures can lead to both aesthetic and functional deformities.

                       It is important to know the structural anatomy of the nose to help differentiate
                between bony or cartilaginous fractures. The nose is supported by cartilage anteriorly
                and inferiorly and by bone posteriorly and superiorly.

                       High impact frontal forces can lead to a nasal orbital ethmoid fracture, which is a
                fracture of the nasal bones associated with damage to the supporting orbital structures,
                adjacent facial bones, and possibly damage to the cribriform plate and/or intracranial
                injury. These patients can have visual changes and neurological complaints.

                       Children's noses are mostly cartilaginous and their nasal bones are softer and
                more compliant, absorbing little of the energy from the force of trauma. However, they
                are still susceptible to nasal fractures. If a child is involved in a nasal trauma, consider
                the possibility of a septal hematoma because the cartilage of the child's nose tends to
                buckle rather than fracture and in some cases, produces a separation between the per-
                ichondrium and the cartilage, resulting in a hematoma.

                       Failure to identify and treat a septal hematoma can result in the following:

                 Infection
                 Abscess formation
                 Septal perforation
                 Saddle deformity

                       Nasal fractures can be open, closed, or both. A fractured nose is considered
                "open" if a laceration of the overlying skin exposes the underlying nasal bones.

History

                A detailed history should include the following:

                 Mechanism of trauma: What was the direction of the force and the nature of the
                   striking object?

                 Was there associated epistaxis at the time of the trauma? NOTE: History of epistaxis
                   at the time of the injury gives rise to the suspicion of an open fracture; however, most
                   nasal fractures include an episode of epistaxis.

                 History of previous facial trauma or surgery
                 Other than swelling, is the nasal appearance different than before the trauma?
                 Does the patient perceive a functional impairment in breathing compared to before

                   the trauma? If so, which nostril is impaired?
                 NOTE: Ask--Is the nasal fracture related to an assault or motor vehicle accident? If

                   so, there may be medical-legal aspects to address including documentation of nasal
210  10. NOSE--EXTERNAL CONDITIONS

                        fracture through ordering a facial x-ray or CT scan, although clinical management of
                        nasal fractures is the same.

Symptoms and Physical Examination Findings

                   These can include the following:

                    Epistaxis
                    Edema
                    Nasal obstruction
                    Ecchymosis
                    Subconjunctival hemorrhage
                    Olfactory disorders. NOTE: Suspect injury to the cribriform plate if anosmia exists.
                    Crepitus
                    Obvious nasal deformity
                    Depression or concavity of the nasal bones
                    Mucosal lacerations
                    A bluish or reddish fluctuant swelling along the septal wall may suggest a hematoma

                          Push the tip of the nose upward to check for integrity of the septal support system.
                          If there is bone depression, displacement, or mobility, this can confirm the diag-
                   nosis of a nasal fracture.
                          Ondik, Lipinski, Dezfoli, and Fedok (2009) classified nasal and septal fractures into
                   the following types (NOTE: Most nasal fractures in the office setting are type I, II, or III):

Type  Description                   Characteristics
I     Simple straight
                                    Unilateral or bilateral displaced fracture without
II    Simple deviated                  resulting midline deviation

III   Fracture of nasal             Unilateral or bilateral displaced fracture with
                                       resulting midline deviation
      bones
                                    Bilateral nasal bone fracture and crooked septum
IV    Severely deviated                with preservation of midline septal support;
                                       septum does not interfere with bony reduction
      nasal and septal
                                    Unilateral or bilateral nasal fractures with severe
      fractures                        deviation or disruption of nasal midline,
                                       secondary to either severe septal fracture or
V     Complex nasal and                septal dislocation. May be associated with
                                       fracture of the nasal bones and septum, which
      septal fractures                 interfere with reduction of fractures

                                    Severe injuries including lacerations and soft tissue
                                       trauma, acute saddling of nose, open compound
                                       injuries, and avulsion of tissue

Nasal Endoscopy

                   Intranasal examination with a nasal endoscopy is not entirely necessary; however, it
                   may provide additional information on the extent of nasal obstruction and rule out the
                   following:

                    Mucosal tears
                    Lacerations
                                             NASAL FRACTURE  211

Imaging   Ecchymosis
          Hematoma

         When an uncomplicated nasal fracture is suspected, plain x-ray films are rarely indi-
         cated. X-rays can be helpful in some cases, but cause confusion in most cases. In addi-
         tion, plan x-rays will not identify cartilaginous disruptions. If cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
         rhinorrhea is suspected, a CT scan is warranted to rule out associated maxillofacial
         trauma. NOTE: CSF leaks are rare and are associated with a fracture of the cribriform
         plate or posterior wall of the frontal sinus. The leak may not be apparent for several days
         after injury.

Management Including Surgical Options

                  Septal Hematomas
                   Septal hematomas have high risk of complications if left untreated. Needle drainage as
                   soon as possible is indicated for all nasal septal hematomas. Prophylactic treatment with
                   an antibiotic (e.g., augmentin or clindamycin) is recommended. If left untreated, septal
                   hematoma abscesses can result in the spread of bacteria into the paranasal and intracranial
                   structures leading to intracranial abscess, cavernous sinus thrombosis, or meningitis.

                  Nasal Fractures
                   If there is a nondisplaced or minimally displaced fracture that is cosmetically accept-
                   able, it is appropriate to wait and observe as the swelling diminishes before consider-
                   ing if surgery is needed.

                          Surgical management of nasal fractures is divided into closed reduction (CR)
                   and open reduction (OR). The window of opportunity to obtain the best result in early
                   reduction of the nasal fracture is to do the CR in the office within 2 to 3 hours before
                   the onset of significant edema. The second best window of opportunity is 5 to 10 days
                   after injury. If the patient presents after 2 weeks, it is best to delay at least 2 to 3 months
                   to allow fracture lines to stabilize and the swelling to resolve and then consider a sep-
                   toplasty, rhinoplasty, or septorhinoplasty.

         Closed Reduction                    Open Reduction

          Closed reduction (CR) involves      Open reduction (OR) may include a range
            manipulation of the nasal           of techniques including septoplasty,
            bones without incisions and is      osteotomies (bone is cut to shorten or
            generally the preferred choice      change its alignment), or a septorhinoplasty.
            for treating nasal fractures.
                                              Septorhinoplasty: Combines both a
          CR generally produces                 septoplasty and a rhinoplasty.
            acceptable cosmetic and              Septoplasty: Focuses on correcting the
            functional results and restores         deviation of the septum
            the position to its preinjury        Rhinoplasty: Performed for cosmetic or
            state.                                  functional reasons to reshape the nose

          CR is done under general           NOTE: Not all otolaryngologists are trained to
            anesthesia in the operating      do both procedures.
            room.
                                              OR is considered for extensive dislocation of the
                                                septum, the presence of a septal hematoma,
                                                and in instances in which it is impossible to
                                                achieve optimal reduction with CR.
212  10. NOSE--EXTERNAL CONDITIONS

SADDLE NOSE DEFORMITY

Figure 10.1:  A saddle nose deformity can occur when there is a loss of dorsal septal cartilage. On
Saddle nose   physical examination, there is marked "saddle" or "dipping" of the external structures
deformity.    between the nasal bones and nasal tip. This results in an upward tilting of the nasal tip.
              This can collapse the nasal valve area, leading to complaints of nasal congestion. Docu-
              mentation on physical examination should include classification of deformity, status
              of the internal and external nasal valves, and the structural integrity of the support
              structures. Surgical management of saddle nose deformity involves reconstruction of
              the septal cartilage and/or bridge of the nose to provide improved appearance and
              function. However, persons with a disease that can destroy the septal cartilage are at
              risk for continuing damage despite surgery.

Classification of Saddle Nose Deformity

                    1  2                          3  4  5

              Type     Anatomical Deficits
              1
              2        Minor supratip or nasal dorsal depression, with a normal projection of lower
              3        third of the nose
              4
                       Depressed nasal dorsum (moderate to severe) with relatively prominent
                       lower third

                       Depressed nasal dorsum (moderate to severe) with loss of tip support and
                       structural deficits in the lower third of the nose

                       Catastrophic (severe) nasal dorsal loss with significant loss of the nasal
                       structures in the lower and upper thirds of the nose

              FIGURE 10.1 Saddle nose deformity.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  213

Causes of Saddle Nose Deformity

                    Untreated or expanding septal hematoma
                       Can lead to avascular necrosis of the nasal cartilage, which causes collapse of the
                         septum and a loss of dorsal support leading to depression of the nasal bridge and
                         subsequent saddle nose deformity

                    Nasal surgeries including septoplasty, rhinoplasty, or both
                    Trauma
                    Diseases that destroy septal cartilage

                       Wegener's granulomatosis: Necrotizing granulomas and vasculitis leads to septal
                         cartilage destruction

                       Relapsing polychondritis: Autoimmune cartilage inflammation and destruction
                         results in damage to the septal cartilage

                    Large septal perforation
                    Cocaine use

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Kucik, C. J., & Clenney, T. (2004). Management of acute nasal fractures. American Family Physician, 70(7),
                   1315-1320. Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/2004/1001/p1315.html.

            Murakami, C., & Guida, R. Saddle nose deformity. The face. Retrieved from http://www.drguida.com/
                   wp-content/uploads/2012/08/Saddle_Nose_Deformity.pdf.

            Ondik, M. P., Lipinski, L., Dezfoli, S., & Fedok, F. (2009). The treatment of nasal fractures: A changing
                   paradigm. Archives of Facial Plastic Surgery, 11(5), 296-302. Retrieved from http://fhs.mcmaster.ca/
                   otolaryngology/documents/november_journal1.pdf.

            Pribitkin, E. A., & Ezzat, W. H. (2009). Classification and treatment of the saddle nose deformity. Otolar-
                   yngologic Clinics of North America, 42(3), 437-461.

            Ridder, G. J., Boedeker, C. C., Fradis, M., & Schipper, J. (2002). Technique and timing for closed reduc-
                   tion of isolated nasal fractures: A retrospective study. Ear, Nose and Throat Journal, 81(1), 49-54.

            Rohrich, R. J., & Adams, W. P. Jr. (2000). Nasal fracture management: Minimizing secondary nasal defor-
                   mities. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 106(2), 266-273.

            Rubinstein, B., & Strong, E. B. (2000). Management of nasal fractures. Archives of Family Medicine, 9(8),
                   738-742.

            Staffel, J. G. (2002). Optimizing treatment of nasal fractures. Laryngoscope, 112(10), 1709-1719.
            Yabe, T., Tsuda, T., Hirose, S., & Ozawa, T. (2012). Comparison of pediatric and adult nasal fractures.

                   Journal of Craniofacial Surgery, 23(5), 1364-1366.
