11            Evaluation and
              Management of
              the Nasal Cavity and
              Paranasal Sinuses

NASAL POLYPS

Figure 11.1:  Nasal polyposis (NP) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the nasal and paranasal
Nasal polyp.  sinus mucosa. This leads to the development of smooth, pale, nonneoplastic masses.
              Polyps are commonly found at the outflow tract of one or more of the sinuses, usually
              the ethmoid sinus or middle meatus.

Etiology

               The exact etiology remains unclear. Theories propose that NP arise as a consequence
                 of conditions that cause chronic inflammation in the nose and paranasal sinuses.

               There is a consensus that the following factors play a role in the development of
                 NP:
                  Allergies
                  Asthma
                  Aspirin sensitivity
                  Cystic fibrosis. NOTE: Children below 10 years of age with NP should be evaluated
                     for cystic fibrosis.

                  Chronic sinusitis. Obstruction due to NP may be the underlying cause of chronic
                    sinusitis.

                  Ciliary dyskinesia syndromes
               There is an association between polyps and allergic fungal sinusitis, which is diag-

                 nosed by the presence of positive allergy testing to fungus, NP, sinus CT scan find-
                 ings of hyperdense material in the sinus cavity, and confirmation of fungus in the
                 sinus mucosa. The precise reason for the relationship of fungi in the pathogenesis of
                 NP remains unclear.
               Eosinophils are the most common inflammatory cells of NP.

Differential Diagnosis

                    Inverted papilloma (IP)
                    Mucocele
                    Hypertrophic turbinates
                    Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
216  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                                  Nasal Polyp

              LEFT MIDDLE TURBINATE

                                               FIGURE 11.1 Nasal polyp.

Figure 11.2:   Antrochoanal polyp: A benign lesion that arises from the mucosa of the maxillary or
Antrochoanal     ethmoid sinus and grows into sinus and reaches out to the choana. Unilateral nasal
polyp.           obstruction is the main presenting symptom.

                     The antrochoanal polyp shown in Figure 11.2 was unusual because it arose from
              the right middle turbinate.

              BEFORE EXCISION

                        Middle                 Antrochoanal Polyp
                        Turbinate

              AFTER EXCISION

Symptoms FIGURE 11.2 Antrochoanal polyp.

                    Nasal obstruction: Can vary depending on the site and size of the polyps
                    Anosmia/hyposmia: Usually responsive to steroid therapy
                               NASAL POLYPS  217

                  Rhinorrhea
                  Postnasal drainage
                  Headaches
                  Facial pain (less common)
                  Sleep disorders (related to obstruction)
                  Samter's triad: Nasal polyps associated with asthma and aspirin allergy. Makes up

                    almost 10% of cases of NP

Physical Examination Findings

                  Most of the time NP are bilateral. They can also be unilateral. If unilateral, exclude
                    other pathologies such as an IP or SCC.

                  NP are mobile, nontender, gray, pale or yellow, smooth, glistening, and semitranslu-
                    cent masses in the nasal cavity (in contrast to pink or erythematous adjacent mucosa)
                    that rarely bleed.

                  Usually originates in the ethmoid sinuses or middle meatus and prolapse into the
                    nasal cavity

                  NOTE: An IP is a benign tumor often misdiagnosed as a NP. It is important to make the

                    correct diagnosis because 10% to 15% of IP will transform into SCC.

Imaging

Figure 11.3:      Sinus CT scans without contrast is helpful to determine the extent of the disease and in
Mucous              planning the surgical approach, but they should not be relied on to make the diagnosis
retention cyst.     of NPs, which is better done with thorough nasal and sinus physical examination.

                  Mucous retention cysts (MRCs) and NP are very common and often indistinguish-
                    able on imaging studies. A MRC is just a benign cyst along the sinus lining that is a
                    fluid-filled sac, that does not expand and push into surrounding structures or cause
                    problems in the majority of cases. Approximately 30% to 40% of people who have
                    a CT scan done incidentally can have MRC of the sinuses with absolutely no com-
                    plaints of sinus problems.

                  Bone remodeling on sinus CT scan may be found in patients with NPs.

                                                                             Left Maxillary Mucous
                                                                             Retention Cyst

                                                                                               FIGURE 11.3 Mucous
                                                                                                          retention cyst.

Management With Pharmacotherapy
                    Goal: Eliminate or significantly reduce the size of the NP resulting in relief of nasal
                      obstruction, improvement in sinus drainage, and restoration of olfaction.
218  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                  Steroids
                    Steroids remain the cornerstone of medical therapy for NP.
                    Steroids can be delivered systemically orally or locally via topical washes and

                      sprays.
                    Topical nasal steroids are the treatment of choice for long-term management of NPs.

                      They decrease polyp size, nasal congestion, and rhinorrhea and also increase nasal
                      airflow.
                    Short courses of oral steroids may be needed to reduce polyp size followed by main-
                      tenance therapy with intranasal steroids. This can be done as primary treatment
                      and/or as postoperative prophylaxis against recurrence.
                    Initial oral steroid therapy followed by topical steroid therapy seems to be more
                      effective than topical steroid therapy alone in decreasing polyp size and improving
                      olfaction in patients with moderate NPs.
                      NOTE: Caution with the use of corticosteroids in patients with diabetes mellitus,
                        uncontrolled hypertension, and peptic ulcer disease. Risk of complications generally
                        increases with higher doses and/or longer therapies.

                  Other Therapy Considerations
                    In addition to steroids as a form of management, it is important to not forget to con-

                      trol any underlying existing condition such sinusitis or allergies.
                    Antibiotics should be prescribed if an acute exacerbation of an underlying chronic

                      rhinosinusitis (RS) exists.
                    Saline irrigation rinses are important to improve nasal mucociliary clearance and

                      should be used prior to topical medications.
                    Oral or topical antihistamines can have significant reduction in symptoms associ-

                      ated with NP.
                    Leukotriene receptor antagonists (i.e., Singulair) have been shown to be effective in

                      combination treatment of symptoms associated with NP.
                    Aspirin desensitization may decrease the requirement for future polypectomies and

                      sinus surgery in patients with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease.

Management With Surgery

                    Surgery benefits are short-lived if medical therapy is not initiated to control the
                      patient's inflammation.

                    Polyps that obstruct the airway and sinus ostia require surgical removal; however,
                      surgical therapy is reserved for cases refractory to medical treatment.

                                              POSTSURGICAL CHANGES

                                              Bilateral Ethmoidectomies with
                                        patency of the frontoethmoid recesses.

                                            Postsurgical changes from      FIGURE 11.4 Postsurgical
                                        bilateral antral window creation.  changes.

Moderate dependent mucosal
thickening within the right
maxillary sinus.
                                                                      INVERTED PAPILLOMA  219

Figure 11.4:   Endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) is the mainstay of treatment for NP. ESS restores
Postsurgical     sinus drainage by removing NP or other soft tissue obstructing the natural sinus
changes.         ostia.

Recurrence

               Recurrence of NPs is quite common with severe disease in 5% to 10% of patients, and
                 particularly in patients with asthma or aspirin intolerance.

INVERTED PAPILLOMA

Figure 11.5:  Inverted papilloma of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses is a rare epithelial tumor
Inverted      that arises from the sinonasal mucosa. Most of the time these tumors are benign. They
papilloma.    do have the potential to be malignant.

              INVERTED PAPILLOMA

                                  LEFT MIDDLE TURBINATE               FIGURE 11.5 Inverted
                                                                      papilloma.

Etiology and Disposition

                    The exact etiology is unknown.
                    IPs tend to have a destructive pattern to their growth.
                    IPs tend to recur and occasionally are associated with malignancy.
                    The chance of carcinoma in patients with sinonasal IP is approximately 11% and the

                      associated malignancy is predominantly SCC (But-Hadzic et al., 2011).
                    IPs have been associated with human papilloma virus (HPV). The presence of HPV

                      in IP has been associated with higher chance of recurrence and malignant transfor-
                      mations.

Differential Diagnosis

                    Same as with nasal polyps

Symptoms

                    Progressive unilateral nasal obstruction
                    Blood mixed nasal discharge (usually unilateral)
                    Headache
220  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                    Facial pain
                    Anosmia/hyposmia
                    Chronic sinusitis

Physical Examination Findings

                    Pinkish, polypoidal smooth or lobulated mass with papillary surface
                    IP site of origin is the lateral wall of the nasal cavity, then medial wall of maxil-

                      lary sinus. Less commonly, IPs arise from the ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal
                      sinuses.

Imaging

          Sinus CT scan is helpful to determine the extent of the disease and in planning the
            surgical approach.

          CT scanning can detect intratumoral calcification, thinning, bowing, and erosion of
            bone.

          A CT scan is not helpful in differentiating an IP from other soft tissue lesions (such
            as polyps).

Krouse Staging System for Inverted Papilloma

                     NOTE: Staging does not have clinical significance in predicting patient outcomes.

                    Stage I disease: Limited to the nasal cavity alone
                    Stage II disease: Limited to the ethmoid sinuses and medial and superior portions

                      of the maxillary sinuses
                    Stage III disease: Involves the lateral or inferior aspects of the maxillary sinuses or

                      extension into the frontal or sphenoid sinuses
                    Stage IV disease: Involves tumor spread outside the confines of the nose and sinuses,

                      as well as any malignancy

Management With Surgery

                    In IPs, whether or not associated with SCC, complete surgical removal of the tumor
                      is advocated as the treatment of choice.

                    Wide excision of the tumor with normal surrounding tissue is necessary to prevent
                      recurrence of IP.

                    ESS is an effective treatment method for excising the IP.
                    Radiation therapy is reserved for IPs associated with SCC. Radiotherapy can also be

                      considered to successfully treat patients with incompletely resectable IPs.

Recurrence

                    High rate of recurrence, as high as 75% (Lalwani, 2008)
                    Recurrent IP tends to behave more aggressively and has a higher postoperative

                      recurrence rate than the primary lesion.
                    Although the HPV vaccine Gardasil has been found to be effective against HPV

                      types 6, 11, and 18, there are no studies in the literature describing the use of these
                      treatments for sinonasal IP.
          MUCOCELE  221

MUCOCELE

                   Mucoceles are benign, expanding, and locally destructive lesions that occur when
                   entrapped mucosa secretes mucus into a confined space. They occur when there is
                   an obstruction of mucous outflow. It enlarges gradually, resulting in erosion and
                   remodeling of the surrounding bone. If left untreated, mucoceles can cause signifi-
                   cant bony destruction and potential erosion into the intracranial, intraorbital, and
                   subcutaneous spaces.

Etiology

           Conditions that tend to result in obstruction of mucous outflow and thus, mucocele
             formation, include the following:
              Frontal sinus fractures, trauma, surgery: Frontonasal recess obstruction leading to
                mucosa entrapment
              Chronic sinusitis: Due to obstruction of the sinus ostia secondary to inflammation
                and scarring
              Allergic sinonasal disease
              Radiotherapy--can cause significant scarring that can lead to mucocele
                formation

           Most commonly affected sinuses are the frontal sinus followed by the posterior
             ethmoid, maxillary, and sphenoid.

           A mucopyocele is an entrapped, static secretion within mucoceles that become
             infected.

Differential Diagnosis

                    Same as with NPs
                    When expansion and bone destruction are present, the differential diagnosis includes

                      benign and malignant lesions of the paranasal sinuses.

                  Mucocele Versus Mucous Retention Cyst
                    MRCs are benign cysts along the sinus lining. A fluid filled sac, it does not expand

                      and push into surrounding structures or cause problems like a mucocele can.
                      Approximately 30% to 40% of people who have a CT scan done incidentally can
                      have MRC of the sinuses with absolutely no complaints of sinus problems.
                    MRCs are common on the floor of the maxillary sinus. They are thought to form
                      due to obstruction of the ducts of mucous glands in the sinus lining. MRCs are thin-
                      walled and develop under the mucous membrane of the sinus.
                    Mucoceles usually obstruct the duct or natural ostium of the sinus and grow under
                      the periosteum.

Symptoms

                    Related to the expansion and, subsequently, to pressure and obstruction of surround-
                      ing structures leading to the following:
                       Headache
                       Facial pressure and swelling
                       Dental pain (if maxillary sinuses are involved)
                       Ophthalmic manifestations (if frontal or ethmoid sinuses are involved): Proptosis,
                         periorbital pain, impaired ocular mobility, blurry vision
222  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

Physical Examination Findings
                    Mucoceles are usually discovered on imaging studies.

Imaging

           Sinus CT scan without contrast is the imaging study of choice. It may show areas of
             thinned bone or herniation into adjacent structures.

           MRI is not the best imaging choice for diagnosing mucoceles; however, it does allow
             for differentiation of mucoceles from solid components of tumors.

Management With Surgery

                    Surgical treatment is absolutely necessary as mucoceles will continue to grow and
                      expand and may cause irreversible damage.

OSTEOMAS

                   An osteoma is a new piece of bone that usually grows on another piece of bone. Sinus
                   osteomas are benign, slow-growing bone tumors seen mostly in the frontal sinus. They
                   are very rare to see in the nasal cavity.

Etiology

           Exact cause is unknown. Some theories propose embryological, traumatic, or infec-
             tious reasons as a cause.

Symptoms

                    Progressive headache is the most common symptom.
                    Facial pain and infection due to obstructed nasofrontal ducts can occur as well.

Physical Examination Findings
                    Osteomas are usually discovered on imaging studies.

Imaging

           Sinus CT scan is the imaging study of choice.
           Osteomas appear as well-defined bony lesions within the sinus cavity.

Management With Surgery

                    Surgical removal is done if the osteoma:
                       Extends beyond the boundaries of the sinus
                       Continues to enlarge
                       Is in the region adjacent to the nasofrontal duct
                       Contributes to recurrent sinusitis
              NASAL SEPTUM: DEVIATED SEPTUM, SEPTAL SPUR, AND SEPTAL PERFORATION  223

NASAL SEPTUM: DEVIATED SEPTUM, SEPTAL SPUR,
AND SEPTAL PERFORATION

Deviated Septum and Septal Spur

Figure 11.6:  Anteriorly, the nasal septum is made up of nasal septal cartilage (termed the caudal
Nasal septum  septum), and posteriorly by the vomer and the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid,
anatomy.      and anteroinferiorly by the maxilla. The septum is the wall dividing the nasal cavity
              into two halves. The ideal nasal septum is midline; however, more than 80% or more
              of all nasal septums are deviated. The most common deviation of the nasal septum is
              a caudal deformity involving the anterior cartilaginous septum. There can even be a
              spur projecting off the septum, further obstructing the nasal passageway.

                     Nasal obstruction or complaints of nasal congestion is the most common symp-
              tom of a deviated septum. Septal deviation can also impair the normal flow of sinus
              and nasal secretions. A septoplasty is done to correct the septal deformity and is the
              preferred treatment of choice to correct a deviated septum. The procedure is usually
              done entirely through the nose with no external incisions or changes to the outside
              appearance or structure of the nose. When a septoplasty is combined with a rhino-
              plasty, the external appearance of the nose is altered.

              Frontal sinus      Cribriform plate
                                 of ethmoid bone
            Nasal bone
      Perpendicular                                Sphenoid
   plate of ethmoid                                sinus

Septal cartilage                                   Pharyngeal
                                                   tonsil
Vomeronasal
      cartilage

              Maxilla                   Palatine
                                          bone
                                 Vomer

FIGURE 11.6 Nasal septum anatomy.

           Associated Symptoms and Conditions Related
           to a Septal Deviation
             Blockage of one or both nostrils leading to nasal congestion. NOTE: It is important to

                 prescribe a nasal steroid trial for a 4- to 6-week duration to maximize the reduction of
                 turbinate hypertrophy, thus contributing to the severity of the blockage.
             Epistaxis related to dryness of the septal wall due to airflow disturbance
             Obstruction of the airway contributing to obstructive sleep apnea
             Sluder's headache, Sluder's neuralgia, or contact point headache: Thought to be
               caused by nerve compression between two different structures in the nose--often a
               septal spur that is in constant contact with one of the turbinates
224  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                  Physical Examination
                    Anterior and posterior rhinoscopy is helpful in diagnosing the location and sever-

                      ity of the septal deformity. NOTE: Be sure to fully decongest the nasal cavity with a
                        vasoconstricting nasal spray (Afrin, for example) first to see the maximum benefit of
                        turbinate reduction and its role in airway obstruction related to the septal deformity.
                    Document the size of the inferior turbinates during inspection. NOTE: Septoplasty is
                        often combined with turbinate reduction.

                  Imaging
                    Plan films are not indicated because the cartilaginous portion of the septum is not

                      easily visible.
                    CT scans are usually done for other reasons such as evaluating sinus disease but are

                      not indicated for the sole purpose of evaluating for a septal deviation. Direct exami-
                      nation is always best.

                  Clinical Indicators for Septoplasty
                   Obtained from the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery:

                    Nasal airway obstruction (unilateral or bilateral) causing any of the following, which
                      is unresponsive to medical treatment:
                       Mouth breathing
                       Snoring
                       Nasal congestion
                       Sleep apnea

                    Frequent nosebleeds, unresponsive to medical management and for which deviation
                      is a causative factor

                    Atypical facial pain of nasal origin
                       Positive response to topical anesthetic, where deformed septum contacts a tur-
                         binate or lateral wall)
                       Asymptomatic deformity that prevents surgical access to other intranasal or para-
                         nasal areas (sinuses, turbinates)

                  Septoplasty Surgical Risks and Complications
                   Rare, but include the following:

                    Septal perforation
                    Septal hematoma
                    Failure to improve breathing
                    Postoperative bleeding
                    Nasal crusting or scarring
                    Infection
                    Cerebrospinal fluid leak
                    Cosmetic nasal deformity
                    Anosmia

                  Postoperative Expectations After a Septoplasty
                    Narcotic pain medication is prescribed as needed for significant discomfort.
                    Nasal packing is usually in place after surgery; however, it is removed on the first or

                      second postoperative day.
                    It is important to keep the nasal passages moist and clean by using a saline mist

                      spray to clear the nasal passages. Usually a triple antibiotic ointment (such as Neo-
                      sporin or Bacitracin) is applied inside each nostril for the following 1 to 2 weeks.
                    Plastic splints are removed 7 to 10 days postoperatively. NOTE: At this time the sep-
                        tum can be evaluated for perforations or any persistent deviation.
                           NASAL SEPTUM: DEVIATED SEPTUM, SEPTAL SPUR, AND SEPTAL PERFORATION  225

Septal Perforation

                   Nasal septal perforation refers to a hole that has eroded in the central cartilage of the
                   septum. Septal perforations will never close on their own.

                  Etiology
                    Previous history of nasal surgery (most common)
                    Inhalation of toxic substance (cocaine, recreational chemicals)
                    Trauma
                    Septal hematoma
                    Inflammatory disease processes (Sarcoidosis, Wegner's granulomatosis, etc.)
                    Malignancy (T-cell lymphoma can present as a destructive nasal lesion). NOTE: For

                        this reason, all patients with a new diagnosis of a septal hematoma must be evaluated
                        to identify the potential cause.
                    Iatrogenic or idiopathic

                  Symptoms
                    The patient may be asymptomatic and the septal perforation may be first detected

                      on routine examination.
                    Symptoms can include the following:

                       Impairment of nasal airflow and pressure
                       Crusting
                       Bleeding
                       "Whistling" sound during inspiration and expiration (usually with small perfora-

                         tions, but not with larger perforations)

                  Physical Examination
                    Classify the size of the perforation:

                       "Micro" or small: Less than or equal to 0.5 cm
                       Medium: 0.5 to 2 cm
                       Large: Greater than 2 cm
                    Document if crusting exists along the margins or if epistaxis is present. NOTE:
                        Epistaxis related to a septal perforation may require bilateral nasal packing to control
                        the bleeding.

                  Medical Management
                    Moisturization is the key treatment measure.

                       Saline sprays, irrigation
                       Nasal lubrication with over-the-counter products such as the following:

                      · Vaseline (petroleum jelly)
                      · Ayr nasal gel or any other lubricating gel
                      · Ponaris nasal emollient: Contains pine, eucalyptus, peppermint, cajuput, and

                            cotton seed oils. There is a small amount of iodine in the preparation.
                    Topical antibiotic ointment (e.g., Neosporin or Bacitracin) can be used to control

                      crusting and/or minor bleeding around the perforation.

                  Surgical Management
                    Surgery is not recommended for perforations without patient complaints or a func-

                      tional disorder. In these cases, the perforation should just be monitored over time
                      and medical management with moisturization should be continued.
                    Contraindications for surgical management include underlying inflammatory pro-
                      cess (sarcoidosis, Wegener's granulomatosis, etc.). Medical management of the
                      underlying condition is the treatment of choice.
226  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

Epistaxis   Small and medium perforations are generally surgically successful. Large perfora-
              tions are more difficult to repair.

           Septal Buttons
            A silicone button can be used for small to medium size perforations to help stop the

              whistling. The buttons can be inserted in the office and can be shaped to the size of
              the perforation. For the most part, they are well tolerated.

           Repair of Septal Perforation
            Usually reserved for larger perforations (greater than 2-3 cm)
            Mainstay of the repair requires mucoperichondrial flaps to close the defect

           Epistaxis (nasal bleeding) can be anterior or posterior. The majority of the time the bleed-
           ing is anterior. Epistaxis is very common in its frequency and varied in its presentation.
           Regardless, the first priority in a patient who has a nosebleed is to visualize the bleeding
           site and, through whatever measures possible, stop the bleeding. Epistaxis can usually
           be managed in the office with chemical cautery (silver nitrate) or packs placed directly
           over the bleeding site. Further management of epistaxis involves not only identifying the
           location and controlling the bleeding, but also determining the etiology of the epistaxis.
           Deciding which method of epistaxis control to use (silver nitrate cauterization, nasal
           packing, endoscopic cauterization, and/or embolization or ligation) is based on the
           ongoing rate of bleeding, the location of the bleed, and the patient's risk factors.

           Location of Epistaxis
            Can be classified into anterior and posterior locations

           Anterior
            The most common anterior epistaxis location is the Kiesselbach's plexus area, also

              known as "Little's area." This is a region in the anteroinferior part of the nasal sep-
              tum where four arteries have anastomotic connections. The mucosa covering this
              area is thin and friable. Congestion of the vessels caused by conditions such as upper
              respiratory infection (URI) or drying of the mucosa from low environmental humid-
              ity makes this area susceptible to bleeding. The four arteries are:
               Branch of the sphenopalatine artery
               Anterior ethmoid arteries
               Greater palatine artery
               Branch of superior labial artery (from the facial artery)

           Posterior
            Posterior epistaxis location is bleeding that occurs from beyond the middle turbinate

              or at the posterior and superior aspects of the nasal cavity.
            The vessels most responsible for posterior epistaxis are branches of the sphenopala-

              tine artery and the anterior ethmoid artery.
            Posterior epistaxis is most commonly associated with arteriosclerotic disease.

           Etiologies of Epistaxis
           Most common etiologies of epistaxis (however, not entirely conclusive) include the
           following:

           Local Disorders
            Trauma (most common)

               Self-induced digital trauma
         NASAL SEPTUM: DEVIATED SEPTUM, SEPTAL SPUR, AND SEPTAL PERFORATION  227

    Fracture of nasal bone(s) or cartilage(s)
 Inflammatory reactions related to

    URI
    Low environmental humidity leading to dryness
    Allergic rhinitis or vasomotor rhinitis
    Sinusitis
    Granulomatosis disease such as sarcoidosis and Wegener's granulomatosis, and so

      on. NOTE: These inflammatory conditions can lead to crusting and friable mucosa.
 Septal deformities and perforations including septal spurs. NOTE: Disrupts the nor-

   mal nasal airflow, leading to dryness and epistaxis.
 Chemical contact

    Nasal sprays (both steroids and decongestants)
    Exposure to ammonia, gasoline, sulfuric acid, and so on
    Cocaine abuse
 Foreign body
 Surgical procedures (recent septoplasty, ESS, etc.). NOTE: Epistaxis can range from
   minor (due to mucosal laceration) to severe (due to transection of major vessel).

Tumor Disorders (Benign or Malignant)
 Polyps
 Inverting papilloma
 Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma
 SCC
 Esthesioneuroblastoma

Systemic Disorders
 Arteriosclerotic disease associated with hypertension. NOTE: Sustained arterial hyper-

   tension can contribute to refractory epistaxis. Proper blood pressure management is
   necessary for the prevention of persistent epistaxis.

Hematological Disorders
 Anticoagulant use (most common)
 Hemophilia
 Von Willebrandt disease
 Platelet defects (thrombocytopenia)
 Hepatic insufficiency and alcohol abuse

Genetic Disorder
 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT): Genetic disorder that leads to

   abnormal blood vessel formation (telangiectasias) and, because of this, may lead to
   chronic nosebleeds. NOTE: Usually the preferred management of HHT is regular laser
   treatments of all telangiectasias.

Other
 Pregnancy (related to increased blood supply)

History
The following questions are not conclusive in the full evaluation of the patient's
history:

 Important aspects of the patient's history:
    Is the bleeding primarily anterior or is the patient mainly coughing out or spitting
      up blood? NOTE: The latter may suggest a posterior bleed.
228  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                       Is the patient taking aspirin, warfarin, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAIDs)
                         medications?

                  Presentation
                    Anterior Epistaxis
                    Usually the blood exits almost entirely from the anterior portion of the nose.

                    Posterior Epistaxis
                    Most of the bleeding occurs in the nasopharynx and mouth, although some blood

                      can exit through the anterior nose as well.
                    Posterior epistaxis is often more severe and difficult to control.

                  Physical Examination
                    If the site of bleeding is not readily apparent on direct visual examination, then

                      a nasal endoscopy needs to be done to further evaluate the nasal cavity and
                      nasopharynx.

                  Labs
                    Routine coagulation lab work is not recommended. However, in patients with refrac-

                      tory epistaxis, consider lab work to see if bleeding times may be significantly pro-
                      longed, if anemia exists, or if there is an abnormal platelet count.
                       Prothrombin time (PT)
                       Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
                       International normalized ratio (INR)
                       Hemoglobin (Hgb)
                       Hematocrit (Hct)
                       Platelets (Plt)

                  Medical Management
                    Pharmacotherapy and Other Initial Measures
                    Application of topical vasoconstrictors (e.g., Afrin) in combination with anterior

                      nasal compression for 5 to 10 minutes can help to control anterior nasal bleeding.
                        NOTE: If the bleeding does not stop or nasal compression leads to persistent uncon-
                        trolled postnasal bleeding, nasal packing should be attempted.
                    Nasal antiseptic ointment (e.g., Neosporin and Bacitracin) in comparison to silver
                      nitrate cauterization were found to have similar outcomes in the treatment of recur-
                      rent epistaxis in children (Mudunuri & Murthy, 2012).
                       Nasal antiseptic ointment is also an appropriate treatment alternative in the adult

                         population with stable, uncomplicated epistaxis.
                    Other over-the-counter products and measures to help aid in moisturizing the nose

                      include the following:
                       Saline mist or irrigation
                       Saline nasal gel moisturizing swabs
                       Vaseline or petroleum jelly
                       Ponaris oil
                       Humidifier or vaporizer

                    Silver Nitrate Cautery
                    Most patients with epistaxis can be controlled with nasal cauterization. It is advo-

                      cated by most as the optimal management choice in adult epistaxis.
                    See Procedure Protocol: Silver Nitrate Cauterization for Epistaxis in the next

                      section.
         NASAL SEPTUM: DEVIATED SEPTUM, SEPTAL SPUR, AND SEPTAL PERFORATION  229

Nasal Packing
 See Procedure Protocol: Nasal Packing for Epistaxis in the next section.

Endoscopic Cauterization
 Endoscopic nasal cauterization or ligation is recommended as first-line treatment

   in all cases of uncontrolled posterior epistaxis. It can be done under local or general
   anesthesia. NOTE: For obvious reasons, most of the time, it is done in the operating
   room under general anesthesia.
 Under endoscopic guidance, the anterior ethmoid artery is ligated if the bleeding is
   anterior and high, and the sphenopalatine artery is ligated if the bleeding is posteri-
   orly located. Nasal packing is inserted after the procedure.

Embolization or Ligation
 Embolization or ligation is considered if the patient is a poor surgical candidate or as

   second-line treatment in those for whom surgery has failed.
    The average success rate for selective embolization was 88% (range: 71%-100%),

      with a complication rate of 12% (range: 0%-50%; Christensen, Smith, Barnwell, &
      Wax, 2005).
 This procedure is done in the hospital or outpatient facility by an interventional radi-
   ologist. It is performed under local anesthesia via transfemoral catheterization.
 Before the procedure is done, angiography is performed to check for any unsafe
   communications between the internal and external carotid systems.
 The major advantage of this procedure is that if the patient is actively bleeding at the
   time of the angiography, the embolization site can be targeted.
 Clotting material is injected into the site of bleeding (if discovered) and this occludes
   the artery.
 The most serious complication of this procedure involves migration of the emboliza-
   tion clotting material, which poses a risk of a stroke and ophthalmic artery occlu-
   sion, which can lead to blindness. NOTE: The anterior ethmoid artery supplies blood
   to the eye; therefore, embolization or ligation of this vessel is not the first treatment of
   choice for this bleeding site.
 The procedure can be repeated if hemorrhage recurs.

   PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: SILVER NITRATE CAUTERIZATION FOR
   EPISTAXIS

   Indications

    Anterior nosebleed from the Kiesselbach's plexus area

   Cautery

    If active bleeding is present, hemostasis must be achieved first by applying a
    topical vasoconstrictor (e.g., Afrin) in combination with anterior nasal compres-
    sion for 5 to 10 minutes to temporarily slow down anterior nasal bleeding. Usu-
    ally the Afrin is combined with a topical anesthetic (such as lidocaine).

           Using a silver nitrate applicator, the objective is direct cautery of the bleed-
    ing site, but initial circumferential contact may be done to facilitate control of
    the bleeding. The silver nitrate should be applied with firm pressure for 5 to

                                                                                                                          (continued)
230  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: SILVER NITRATE CAUTERIZATION FOR
EPISTAXIS (continued)

10 seconds. Only one side of the septum should be cauterized, as there is a small
risk of septal perforation resulting from decreased vascularization to the septal
cartilage. Bilateral cautery may also increase the risk of septal perforation. If cau-
tery needs to be done on the opposite side, it is suggested to leave a 4- to 6-week
interval between sides. Carefully remove the silver nitrate stick from the nasal
cavity in order to prevent staining of the vestibule or other surrounding areas.
If this occurs, the black stain can be removed by applying saline. Otherwise, the
stains usually resolve over a period of weeks.

       After the successful procedure is complete, the patient is instructed to use
saline spray and antibiotic ointment in the nose twice a day for 2 weeks and to
avoid strenuous activities for 7 to 10 days. If possible, the patient should not use
any aspirin or NSAIDs products for this duration of time.

PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: NASAL PACKING FOR EPISTAXIS

Nasal packing is generally reserved for those cases where external pressure and
cauterization fail to control the bleeding.

       First, try and effectively evacuate clots and pooled blood from the nasal
cavity with suction. There are two types of packing--anterior and posterior
nasal packing. Before inserting the pack into the nasal cavity, coat the product
with a topical antibiotic. In addition, consider spraying a topical vasoconstrictor
(Afrin) with a topical anesthetic (lidocaine) into the nasal cavity.

          TYPES OF PACKING USED FOR NASAL EPISTAXIS
                  (MOST COMMON PRODUCTS USED)

Anterior                                     Posterior

 Merocel nasal tampon or sponge              NOTE: Posterior packs are
   expands when saline is injected over          extremely uncomfortable.
   the sponge after it is inserted into
   the nasal cavity. It applies pressure      Inflatable balloon devices that
   over the bleeding point. However,            have an anterior balloon and a
   the pressure may or may not be               posterior balloon are the most
   adequate. Re-wet prior to removal.           commonly used packing devices.
                                                The balloons are inflated with
 Rapid rhino balloon tampon acts                saline. Examples include:
   as a platelet aggregator and forms            Storz epistaxis catheter
   a lubricant upon contact of the               Epistat balloon
   bleeding point. The balloon should
   be inflated with air. Deflate prior       NOTE: Inflate the balloon to
   to removal.                                   achieve hemostasis, but avoid
                                                 overinflating the balloons
 Epistat balloon pack applies pressure           because it can cause severe
   over the bleeding point. The balloon          pain, displacement of the soft
   should be inflated with saline.               palate, interfere with swallowing,
   Remove saline prior to removal.               and cause tissue necrosis.

                                                        (continued)
                  OVERVIEW OF THE NORMAL SINUS DRAINAGE PATHWAYS  231

                         Application of a procoagulant dressing prior to the insertion of the nasal
                  packing may be helpful. Examples include Surgicel Absorbable Hemostat, Fiber
                  Absorbable Hemostat, and so on. Floseal (a hemostatic collagen derivative seal-
                  ant) can be an alternative to nasal packing in some patients. These agents are
                  applied directly to the site of bleeding.

                         The packs stay in place for a minimum of 2 to 5 days. The patient is placed
                  on a prophylactic antistaphylococcal antibiotic for the duration the pack is in
                  place.

                  Complications of Anterior or Posterior Packing

                   Displacement of airway with nasal obstruction
                   Pressure necrosis of surrounding structures
                   Sinus infection
                   Toxic shock syndrome (rare): Caused by staphylococcal exotoxin and presents

                     with fever, diarrhea, hypotension, and a rash.

SINUSITIS: ACUTE AND CHRONIC

Figure 1.8:       Sinusitis is commonly termed "rhinosinusitis" because the mucous membranes of the
Paranasal         nose and sinuses are contiguous and subject to the same disease processes. Sinusitis with-
sinuses.          out rhinitis is rare. There are four different subtypes of RS--viral RS (VRS), acute bacterial
                  RS (ABRS); chronic RS (CRS) without NP and CRS with NP; and fungal RS (FRS).

                         This section expects the reader to have a basic understanding of how to obtain
                  a history, evaluate, and screen those suspected of having a sinus infection. There are
                  numerous guidelines available on this topic. This chapter specifically addresses impor-
                  tant clinical information that can aid the reader in understanding the disease process
                  and accurately diagnose and treat this condition.

Rhinosinusitis Guidelines

                    Infectious Disease Society of America. (2012). Clinical practice guidelines for acute bac-
                      terial rhinosinusitis in children and adults

                    Otolaryngology head and neck surgery. (2007). Clinical practice guideline: Adult sinusitis
                    American Academy of Pediatrics. (2001). Clinical practice guideline: Management of

                      sinusitis

OVERVIEW OF THE NORMAL SINUS DRAINAGE PATHWAYS

Figure 11.7:       Natural sinus ostia (holes/openings) exist for each of the paranasal sinuses and each
Obstructed           sinus has a specific route of drainage.
osteomeatal
complex            The middle meatus is a space under the middle turbinate. Within the middle meatus
bilateral; 11.8:     is the osteomeatal complex (OMC), which is the common pathway for the drainage
Obstructed           of the maxillary, frontal, and anterior ethmoid sinuses.
osteomeatal
complex           NOTE: The OMC region is very important in the overall management of recurrent acute
unilateral;       RS and CRS. A normal anatomical finding on a sinus CT scan includes a Haller cell;
11.9: Haller      however, this can narrow the OMC region. Another normal anatomical finding on a sinus
cell; and         CT scan include concha bullosa, which is an air-filled cavity within the nasal turbinate.
11.10: Concha
bullosa.
232  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                     Occasionally, large concha bullosa may obstruct the opening of adjacent sinuses, includ-
                     ing the OMC region.

R                       FIGURE 11.7 Obstructed
                        osteomeatal complex
           Haller Cell  bilateral. Moderate left and
                        right maxillary and ethmoid
                        sinus mucosal thickening.
                        Osteomeatal complex is
                        occluded bilaterally.

                        FIGURE 11.8 Obstructed
                        osteomeatal complex
                        unilateral. Complete
                        opacification of the right
                        maxillary sinus. Near-
                        complete opacification of
                        the anterior ethmoid air
                        cells. Right osteomeatal
                        complex is opacified. There
                        is also occlusion of the right
                        frontoethmoid recess.

                        FIGURE 11.9 Haller cell.
                     OVERVIEW OF THE NORMAL SINUS DRAINAGE PATHWAYS  233

                  Concha Bullosa

                                   FIGURE 11.10 Concha
                                   bullosa.

Frontal Sinuses

Figure 11.11:      The major drainage pathway of the frontal sinuses is via the ethmoid sinuses into the
Agger nasi cell.     maxillary sinus and then into the nasal cavity.

                  NOTE: If frontal sinusitis exists, it is usually related to an associated anterior ethmoid
                  infection (due to the drainage route). Agger nasi cells can also contribute to nasofrontal
                  duct obstruction and chronic frontal sinus disease.

                  Agger Nasi Cell

                                                                                               FIGURE 11.11 Agger nasi
                                                                                                          cell.

Ethmoid Sinuses
                    Drains directly via the middle meatus
                    May share a common drainage channel with maxillary sinuses

Sphenoid Sinuses
                    Behind the superior turbinate is the opening of the sphenoid sinus.
                    Sphenoid sinus drains both via posterior ethmoidal cells and directly into the
                      nasopharynx.
234  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

Maxillary Sinuses

                    The natural ostium of the maxillary sinuses is present in the medial wall of the max-
                      illary sinus cavity (which corresponds to the lateral wall of the nasal cavity).

Normal Sinus Health Cycle

                    Mucous composition is normal.
                    Mucous secretion are normal.
                    Host defenses resist infection.
                    Particulate matter and bacteria are removed by mucociliary clearance.
                    Mucociliary flow prevents local mucosal damage.
                    Ostia are open.

Impaired Sinus Health Cycle Leading to Rhinosinusitis

                    Mucosal congestion or anatomical obstruction blocks normal airflow and drainage.
                    Secretions thicken and stagnate.
                    Cilia and epithelium are damaged.
                    Change in host defenses creates culture medium for bacterial growth in a closed

                      sinus cavity.
                    Retained secretions cause tissue inflammation.
                    Bacterial infection develops in the sinus cavity.
                    Mucosal thickening creates further blockage.
                    Ostia are blocked or closed.

Overview of Each Category of Rhinosinusitis

                  Viral Rhinosinusitis
                    Viral upper respiratory-like symptoms lasting for less than 10 days

                  Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis
                    Symptoms not improving for 10 or more days, or worsening after 5 to 7 days

                  Chronic Rhinosinusitis With or Without Nasal Polyposis
                    Inflammatory condition of the sinuses and linings of the nasal passages that lasts for

                      12 or more weeks despite medical management.
                    Evaluate for aspirin sensitivity, especially in the presence of polyps and history of

                      asthma (Samter's triad).
                    Polyps can block the OMC and impair normal drainage pathways.

                  Fungal Rhinosinusitis
                    Mycetoma is a noninvasive fungal ball that causes complete or near-complete opaci-

                      fication of usually just one sinus cavity but without invasion.
                    Invasive fungal sinusitis (rare) can occur in patients who are immunocompromised

                      or have other comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus. This is a disease process that
                      causes bony destruction and extension into the surrounding soft tissues.
                    Allergic fungal rhinosinusitis (AFRS) mostly occurs in patients with nasal polyps
                      and who have positive findings of sensitivity to molds on allergy testing. It can
                      involve one or more of the sinus cavities. Aspergillus species is the most common
                      species found.
         OVERVIEW OF THE NORMAL SINUS DRAINAGE PATHWAYS  235

Contributing Factors

                    Upper respiratory tract infection
                    Chronic nasal allergies
                    Foreign bodies
                    Nasal septal deviation
                    Dental conditions
                    Maxillofacial deformity (e.g., cleft palate)
                    Facial fractures: Can cause mucociliary dysfunction and disturb the normal physi-

                      ological drainage of the sinuses
                    Sinusitis may follow recent nasal packing of the nose due to epistaxis
                    Immunodeficiency

Symptom Presentation

                    Individual sinus involvement will tend to produce symptoms (usually pressure
                      and/or pain) in the following locations correlated to the problematic region:
                       Maxillary: Anterior facial (cheek region) with radiation into teeth, orbital, and
                         malar areas
                       Ethmoid: Interocular with spread into frontal location
                       Frontal: Forehead, interocular, and temporal areas
                       Sphenoid: Retro-orbital and occasionally, the mastoid areas

                    Other associated symptoms can include (but are not limited to) the following:
                       Tenderness to pressure over the sinuses including numbness of cheek in some cases
                       Mucopurulent secretions
                       Nasal congestion
                       Hyposmia, anosmia
                       Headache
                       Halitosis
                       Dental pain
                       Cough
                       Fatigue
                       Ear pressure or pain
                       Fever

Physical Examination

                    Nasal endoscopic findings may reveal pus from the middle meatus or mucopurulent
                      secretions in the nasopharynx.

                    Look for rare signs of extrasinus involvement (orbital or facial cellulitis, orbital pro-
                      trusion, abnormalities of eye movement)

Imaging

          X-rays are generally not beneficial in the diagnosis.

         Sinus CT Scan
          Sometimes viral URIs are indistinguishable compared to ABRS. NOTE: This is why it

            is important to obtain imaging after an appropriate course of antibiotic therapy.
          Thickening of sinus mucosa termed "mucosal thickening" on the CT report is not

            specific for either acute or chronic inflammatory change. It cannot differentiate acute
            versus chronic disease.
236  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

           Long-standing CRS along with chronic inflammatory changes can cause bony
             changes of the sinus walls (bony thickening or bony erosion), which can be seen on
             a CT scan.

           CT scan of sinuses with mycetoma (noninvasive fungal ball) often shows a dense
             spot within the proposed fungus ball in one of the sinuses. It also usually con-
             tains calcification. There may be mild sclerosis of the surrounding bone, although
             the main differentiating factor is the hyperdense appearance and thickening of the
             sinus walls.

           CT scan of sinuses in patients with allergic fungal sinusitis can show a complete
             opacification suggestive of fungus and thick allergic mucin. This can invade, expand,
             and destroy the sinus wall.

Cultures

           A culture obtained directly with a nasopharyngeal swab into the nasal cavity is not
             recommended.

           If the patient failed to respond to first and second-line treatment antibiotic agents,
             cultures obtained via direct sinus aspiration are recommended. NOTE: This is pos-
             sible to do in a patient who underwent previous ESS.

           A positive fungal culture does not necessarily confirm the diagnosis of AFRS, nor
             does a negative culture exclude it.

Pharmacotherapy for Viral Rhinosinusitis

                    There is no place for antibiotics for the patient with clinically diagnosed VRS. Instead,
                      adjunctive therapies are recommended (listed below).

PHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT FOR ACUTE BACTERIAL
RHINOSINUSITIS AND CHRONIC RHINOSINUSITIS

High-Risk Categories for Antibiotic Resistance

                    Age less than 2 years or greater than 65 years
                    Child in daycare in the household of the person being treated
                    Recent antibiotic use in the past 4 to 6 weeks
                    Prior hospitalization in the past 5 days
                    Comorbities
                    Immunocompromised

Key Questions That Need to Be Answered Before Choosing an Antibiotic

                    Is the patient allergic to any antibiotics and what was their reaction? NOTE: Type I
                        hypersensitivity is history of anaphylaxis with that medication.

                    What are the likely pathogen(s) causing the problem? NOTE: Streptococcus pneu-
                        moniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis are the most common
                        pathogen(s).

                    Is the patient a smoker? NOTE: H. influenzae plays an important role in smokers.
                    Does the patient run a risk of being resistant to any pathogen(s)?
                                              TABLE 11.1 ANTIBIOTIC GUIDANCE FOR ABRS AND CRS

                                  Macrolidea  Standardb     Doxy-     Selected    Amoxicillin   Trimethoprim-  High Dose     Respiratory
                                  (Zpak,      Dose:         cyclinec  Cephalo-    with          sulfame-       Amoxicilline  Fluoro-
                                  Bioxin,     Amoxicillin   100 mg    sporin:     Clavulanate   thoxazoled     (3-4 g/day    quinolones
                                  Erythro-    1.5-4 g/day   BID       Ceftin 250  (Augmentin)   (Bactrim BID)  875 mg, two   (Levoquin,
                                  mycin)      (875 mg BID)            mg BID;     1.75-4 g/day                 tabs BID      Avelox)
                                                                      Omnicef     (875 mg BID)
                                                                      300-600
                                                                      mg BID

No antibio- No risk for DRSP      X           X             X         X           X

tics in        Risk for DRSP                                                      X                            X                                                              MANAGEMENT FOR ACUTE BACTERIAL AND CHRONIC RHINOSINUSITIS  237
4-6               has recurrent
weeks             ABRS Current

               smoker

               Beta-lactam                                  X                                   X

               Allergy

               (penicillin or

               cephalosporin)

               Symptoms worse                                                                                  X             X
                  after 72 hours

               Symptoms                                                                                                      X

               worse after 72

               hours beta-

               lactam allergy

               (penicillin or

               cephalosporin)

Prior          Symptoms worse                                                                                  X             X
   antibiotic     after 72 hours
   use (in
   the pase
   4-6
   weeks)

Note: ABRS, acute bacterial rhinosinusitis; BID, twice per day; DRSP, drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae.
aNot active against DRSP. Zpak rarely prescribed for sinusitis. bThis drug is inactivated by beta-lactamase. cNot active against DRSP and Pregnancy Category D. dOne in five
treatments risk failure with Streptococous pneumoniae and one in four treatments risk failure with Haemophilus influenzae. eConsider if risk for resistance (child in day
care/immunocompromised/advancing age, etc.),or risk for DRSP or current smoker.
238  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                    What were the names of the prior antibiotics given within the past year and their
                      duration for this condition?

Pharmacotherapy for Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis

                    Duration of antibiotic therapy for ABRS is 7 to 10 days.

                  Children With Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis (First-Line Therapy)
                    Amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin) rather than amoxicillin alone is recom-

                      mended.

                  Children or Adults With Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis
                  (Second-Line Therapy)
                    Macrolides (clarithromycin [Biaxin] and azithromycin [Zpak]) are not recommended

                      for empiric therapy due to high rates of resistance among S. pneumoniae.
                    Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX, Bactrim) is not recommended for

                      empiric therapy because of high rates of resistance among both S. pneumoniae and
                      H. influenzae.

                  Adults With Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis (First-Line Therapy,
                  Penicillin Allergic)
                    Either doxycycline (although Pregnancy Category D) or a respiratory fluoroqui-

                      nolone is recommended.

                  Children With Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis (First-Line Therapy,
                  Penicillin Allergic)
                    Type I hypersensitivity: Levofloxacin
                    Non-Type I hypersensitivity: Clarithromycin (Biaxin) or combination therapy with

                      clindamycin (Cleocin) plus a third-generation oral cephalosporin (cefixime [Suprax]
                      or cefpodoxime [Vantin]).

Pharmacotherapy for Chronic Rhinosinusitis With or Without Nasal Polyposis

                    Treatment considerations for oral antibiotic therapy are the same for ABRS; however,
                      they are given for a longer duration of time (usually 3 to 6 weeks).

                    Oral corticosteroid therapy may be given in conjunction with oral antibiotic
                      therapy.

                    For patients who have had previous ESS, intranasal antibiotic, antifungal, and anti-
                      inflammatory medications are available via:
                       Aerosolized therapy
                       Irrigation therapy
                       Atomized therapy

What to Do When a Patient Fails Therapy

                    Reassess the patient and confirm symptomatology. There possibly may be a nonin-
                      fectious etiology or a resistant pathogen.

                    Consider sinus CT scan to search for the origin of the problem.
                    Assess for factors that may modify management such as the following:

                       Allergic rhinitis
                MANAGEMENT FOR ACUTE BACTERIAL AND CHRONIC RHINOSINUSITIS  239

                 Anatomical variations
                 Immunocompromised
                 Comorbid conditions

Adjuvant Therapies and Recommendations

                    Intranasal saline irrigation
                    Intranasal corticosteroids
                    Topical or oral decongestants
                    Topical or oral antihistamines
                    Mucolytics
                    Allergy evaluation and immunotherapy if indicated
                    Smoking cessation should be strongly encouraged

Surgical Options in Chronic Rhinosinusitis With or Without Polyps

Figure 11.12:    Functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) or ESS is the primary surgical treatment
Sinus              option for recurrent ABRS or CRS with or without polyps refractory to medical treat-
ostia after        ment and adjunctive therapies.
endoscopic
sinus surgery.   The goal of FESS is to relieve obstruction, remove infectious material, minimize
                   mucosal injury (thus scarring), and obtain cultures when necessary.

                                        RIGHT MIDDLE TURBINATE

                RIGHT ETHMOID
                OSTIA

                 RIGHT MAXILLARY
                 OSTIA

                                                                                            FIGURE 11.12 Sinus
                                                                                                     ostia after endoscopic sinus
                                                                                                     surgery. View of the right
                                                                                                     ethmoid and maxillary ostia.

                Other Surgical Interventions
                 Septoplasty
                 Turbinate reduction
                 Polypectomy
                 Balloon sinuplasty

                    Endoscopic catheter-based surgical procedure for children and adults that
                      involves dilating previously blocked natural ostium without cutting nasal bone or
                      tissue

                    Can be done under local or general anesthesia
240  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

Surgical Options in Fungal Rhinosinusitis
                    Surgery is required to correct the obstruction and extract the fungus.
                    Recurrence after surgical removal is generally uncommon.

OROANTRAL FISTULA

Figure 11.13:  An oroantral fistula (OAF) is a fistulous communication between the floor of the max-
Oroantral      illary sinus cavity and the oral cavity. The most common cause occurs following den-
fistula.       tal extraction of an infected upper molar and/or premolar tooth. Other causes can
               include osteomyelitis, radiation therapy, or trauma. The patient usually presents with
               signs and symptoms of a maxillary sinus infection. A fistulous communication is usu-
               ally seen on physical examination within the oral cavity from which pus can be seen
               extruding.

               Oroantral Fistula  FIGURE 11.13 Oroantral
                                  fistula.

                       NOTE: A confirmatory test for OAF is done by asking the patient to pinch the nose

               closed and attempt to blow air through the closed nostrils with the mouth open. Air can

               usually be heard hissing out of the fistula. A sinus CT scan is the confirmatory diagnostic

               evaluation of choice.
                      Not all OAF need surgical closure. Some heal spontaneously. The first line of

               approach is to treat the underlying maxillary sinus infection. If surgery is needed, FESS
               is done to create a more permanent drainage pathway of the affected maxillary sinus,
               which can help to spontaneously heal the fistula. If the fistula does not close, then a
               palatal flap can be considered.

SILENT SINUS SYNDROME

Figure 11.14:  Silent sinus syndrome (SSS) is a rare disorder when the maxillary sinus, sinus
Silent sinus   ostium, and orbital floor collapse spontaneously because of negative pressure within
syndrome.      the affected maxillary sinus cavity. It usually causes painless enophthalmos (sunken
               eyeball) and inward retraction of the maxillary sinus wall. Sometimes the patient will
               complain of diplopia. The etiology is not well understood; however, it is possible that
                                                  CANCER OF THE NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES  241

                                                                 R

                   FIGURE 11.14 Silent sinus syndrome. Scan shows marked reduction in left maxillary
                     sinus volume. There is inferior bowing of the orbital floor with increased left orbital
                     volume and enophthalmos with an absence of the left maxillary ostium (compared to
                     the right) and complete opacification of the left maxillary sinus with occlusion of the left
                     osteomeatal complex (OMC). These findings are compatible with silent sinus syndrome.
                     Incidental note: There is a mucus retention cyst versus a polyp in the right maxillary sinus.
                     The right OMC is patent.

                   the obstruction of the maxillary ostium leading to negative pressure in the affected
                   maxillary sinus may play a role in the development of SSS. The diagnosis is con-
                   firmed with a noncontrast sinus CT scan. Treatment involves FESS to improve nor-
                   mal sinus drainage and enlarge the affected maxillary ostium. Usually this halts the
                   progress of maxillary sinus contraction but does not restore the sinus volume back to
                   its original state. Repair of the orbital floor with an implant may be needed.

CANCER OF THE NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

                   Malignant tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are rare. Malignant tumors
                   of the maxillary sinuses are more common than tumors of the ethmoid sinuses and
                   nasal cavity. Sphenoid and frontal sinus tumors are very rare. Exposure to chemicals,
                   fumes, and smoke inhalation over time can possibly be related to cancers of the para-
                   nasal sinus and nasal cavity.

Types of Tumors
                   This is not a conclusive list:
                    SCC (most common)
                    Adenocarcinoma (second most common)
                    Esthesioneuroblastoma (also known as olfactory neuroblastoma, originating from
                      the olfactory nerve)
                    Chondroma sarcoma: Soft tissue sarcoma
                    IP: Although a benign tumor, it still has a high recurrence rate with the ability to
                      convert to malignancy.
242  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

          Undifferentiated carcinoma
          Mucosal melanoma

Clinical Presentation

                   The patient may or may not present with the following symptoms:

                    Localized sinus pressure or pain
                    Nasal congestion or obstruction
                    Submucosal mass in palate
                    Swelling overlying maxillary sinus region
                    Cranial nerve (II) dysfunction
                    Proptosis/diplopia/extraocular muscle impairment
                    Loose teeth or ill-fitting dentures can suggest the presence of a sinonasal tumor.

Physical Examination Findings

                   The following symptoms may or may not be present:

                    Evaluate for lymphadenopathy, especially cervical.
                    Nasal endoscopy should be done to rule out extension of the tumor into the nasal

                      cavity.

Distant Metastasis
                    Regional and distant metastases are rare.

Imaging

          Sinus CT scan with contrast is essential for staging. Contrast evaluates tumor vascu-
            larity in relation to the carotid artery.

          MRI imaging can determine adjacent tumor from soft tissue.

Diagnosis  Requires a positive biopsy.

Treatment

                    Surgery resection is recommended.
                    Radiation therapy can be used alone or in combination as an adjunct to surgery.

         STAGING CRITERIA: HOW TO READ AND/OR DETERMINE
         CANCER STAGING

         Cancer staging is based on the TNM system, which describes the extent or sever-
         ity of a cancer diagnosis based on information about the tumor. This helps plan
         the treatment and estimate the outcome of the disease.

                                                                                                                              (continued)
                    CANCER OF THE NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES  243

                    TNM CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

T  The extent of the primary tumor

   TX   Primary tumor cannot be evaluated

   T0   No evidence of primary tumor

   Tis  Early cancer that has not yet spread to neighboring tissue

        (carcinoma in situ)

   T1   Size and/or extent of the primary tumor

   T2

   T3

   T4

N  The absence or presence and extent of regional lymph node metastasis

   NX   Regional lymph nodes cannot be evaluated

   N0   No cancer found in the regional lymph nodes

   N1   The extent of involvement and/or spread of regional lymph nodes

   N2

   N3

M  The absence or presence of distant metastasis

   MX   Distant metastasis cannot be evaluated

   M0   There is no distant metastasis

   M1   There is distant metastasis

Source: National Cancer Institute (2013).

STAGING CRITERIA

   TNM STAGING SYSTEM FOR THE NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

T  Primary tumor

   TX   Primary tumor cannot be assessed

   T0   No evidence of primary tumor

   Tis  Carcinoma in situ

   Maxillary sinus

   T1   Tumor is limited to maxillary sinus mucosa with no erosion or

        destruction of bone

   T2   Tumor causing bone erosion or destruction including extension into

        the hard palate and/or middle nasal meatus, except extension to

        posterior wall of maxillary sinus and pterygoid plates

                                                                       (continued)
244  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

STAGING CRITERIA (continued)

   TNM STAGING SYSTEM FOR THE NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

T  Primary tumor

   T3  Tumor invades any of the following: bone of the posterior wall of

       maxillary sinus, subcutaneous tissues, floor of medial wall of orbit,

       pterygoid fossa, ethmoid sinuses

   T4a Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades anterior orbital
                   contents, skin of cheek, pterygoid plates, infratemporal fossa,
                   cribriform plate, sphenoid, or frontal sinuses

   T4b Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades any of the following: orbital
                   apex, dura, brain, middle cranial fossa, cranial nerves other than
                   maxillary division of trigeminal nerve (V2), nasopharynx, or clivus

   Nasal cavity and ethmoid sinus

   T1  Tumor is restricted to any one subsite, with or without bony erosion

   T2  Tumor invading two subsites in a single region or extending to

       involve an adjacent region within the nasoethmoidal complex,

       with or without bony invasion

   T3  Tumor extends to invade the medial wall or floor of the orbit,

       maxillary sinus, palate, or cribriform plate

   T4a Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades any of the following:
                   anterior orbital contents, skin of nose or cheek, minimal extension to
                   anterior cranial fossa, pterygoid plates, sphenoid, or frontal sinus

   T4b Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades any of the following:
                   orbital apex, dura, brain, middle cranial fossa, cranial nerves other
                   than the maxillary division of trigeminal nerve (V2), nasopharynx, or
                   clivus

N  Regional lymph nodes

   NX  Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

   N0  No regional lymph node metastasis

   N1  Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, 3 cm or less in greatest

       dimension

   N2  Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, more than 3 cm but not

       more than 6 cm in greatest dimension; or in multiple ipsilateral

       lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in greatest dimension; or in

       bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in

       greatest dimension

       N2a Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node more than 3 cm
                       but not more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

       N2b Metastasis in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none more
                       than 6 cm in greatest dimension

                                                                       (continued)
                           BIBLIOGRAPHY  245

    N2c Metastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none
                    more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

N3  Metastasis in a lymph node, more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

M Distant metastasis

M0  No distant metastasis

M1  Distant metastasis

Note: Nonepithelial tumors such as those of lymphoid tissue, soft tissue, bone, and cartilage are not
included.
Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). (2010). TNM Staging System for the Nasal Cavity
and Paranasal Sinuses (7th ed.). New York: Springer.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            American Joint Committee on Cancer. (2010). Nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. In S. Edge, D. R. Byrd,
                   C. C. Compton, A. G. Fritz, F. L. Greene, and A. Trotti (Eds.), AJCC Cancer Staging Manual (7th ed.,
                   pp. 69-73). New York: Springer.

            Barnes, M. L., Spielmann, P. M., & White, P. S. (2012). Epistaxis: A contemporary evidence based
                   approach. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, 45(5), 1005-1017.

            Borgonovo, A., Berardinelli, F., Favale, M., & Maiorana, C. (2012). Surgical options in oroantral fistula
                   treatment. Open Dentistry Journal, 6, 94-98. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
                   articles/PMC3377926/.

            Brandt, M. G., & Wright, E. D. (2008). The silent sinus syndrome is a form of chronic maxillary atelecta-
                   sis: A systematic review of all reported cases. American Journal of Rhinology, 22(1), 68-73.

            Brook, I. (2013). Acute sinusitis in children. Pediatric Clinics of North America, 60(2), 409-424.
            But-Hadzic, J., Jenko, K., Poljak, M., Kocjan, B. J., Gale, N., & Strojan, P. (2011). Sinonasal inverted papil-

                   loma associated with squamous cell carcinoma. Radiology and Oncology, 45(4), 267-272.
            Cannady, S. B., Batra, P. S., Sautter, N. B., Roh, H. J., & Citardi, M. J. (2007). New staging system for

                   sinonasal inverted papilloma in the endoscopic era. Laryngoscope, 117(7), 1283-1287.
            Caylakli, F., Haluk, Y., Cagici, A., & Ozluoglu, L. (2006). Endoscopic sinus surgery for maxillary sinus

                   mucoceles. Head and Face Medicine, 2, 29. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
                   articles/PMC1570343/.
            Chow, A. W., Benninger, M. S., Brook, I., Brozek, J. L., Goldstein, E. J., Hicks, L. A., . . . Infectious Diseases
                   Society of America. (2012). IDSA clinical practice guideline for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in
                   children and adults. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 54(8), e72-e112. Retrieved from http://www.idso-
                   ciety.org/uploadedFiles/IDSA/Guidelines-Patient_Care/PDF_Library/IDSA%20Clinical%20
                   Practice%20Guideline%20for%20Acute%20Bacterial%20Rhinosinusitis%20in%20Children%20
                   and%20Adults.pdf.
            Christensen, N. P., Smith, D. S., Barnwell, S. L., & Wax, M. K. (2005). Arterial embolization in the man-
                   agement of posterior epistaxis. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American
                   Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 133(5), 748-753.
            Cingi, C., Demirbas, D., & Ural, A. (2011). Nasal polyposis: An overview of differential diagnosis and
                   treatment. Recent Patents on Inflammation and Allergy Drug Discovery, 5(3), 241-252.
            Clinical Indicators: Septoplasty. (2012). American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Sur-
                   gery. Retrieved from http://www.entnet.org/Practice/Septoplasty.cfm.
            Dalziel, K., Stein, K., Round, A., Garside, R., & Royle, P. (2003). Systematic review of endoscopic
                   sinus surgery for nasal polyps. Health Technology Assessment (Winchester, England), 7(17), iii,
                   1-159.
            DeMarcantonio, M. A., & Han, J. K. (2011). Nasal polyps: Pathogenesis and treatment implications.
                   Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, 44(3), 685-695, ix.
            Dosen, L. K., & Haye, R. (2011). Surgical closure of nasal septal perforation. Early and long term obser-
                   vations. Rhinology, 49(4), 486-491.
246  11. NASAL CAVITY AND PARANASAL SINUSES

            Edge, S. B., & Compton, C. C. (2010). The American Joint Committee on Cancer: The 7th edition of
                   the AJCC cancer staging manual and the future of TNM. Annals of Surgical Oncology, 17(6), 1471-
                   1474.

            Eggers, G., Mühling, J., & Hassfeld, S. (2007). Inverted papilloma of paranasal sinuses. Journal of Cranio-
                   Maxillo-Facial Surgery: Official Publication of the European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Sur-
                   gery, 35(1), 21-29.

            Fettman, N., Sanford, T., & Sindwani, R. (2009). Surgical management of the deviated septum: Tech-
                   niques in septoplasty. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, 42(2), 241-252, viii.

            Georgy, M. S., & Peters, A. T. (2012). Chapter 7: Nasal polyps. Allergy and Asthma Proceedings: The Official
                   Journal of Regional and State Allergy Societies, 33(Suppl 1), S22-S23.

            Habesoglu, T. E., Habesoglu, M., Surmeli, M., Uresin, T., & Egeli, E. (2010). Unilateral sinonasal symp-
                   toms. Journal of Craniofacial Surgery, 21(6), 2019-2022.

            Kalish, L., Snidvongs, K., Sivasubramaniam, R., Cope, D., & Harvey, R. J. (2012). Topical steroids for
                   nasal polyps. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 12, CD006549.

            Kowalski, M. (2011). Oral and nasal steroids for nasal polyps. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 11(3),
                   187-188. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3087876/.

            Krouse, J. H. (2000). Development of a staging system for inverted papilloma. Laryngoscope, 110(6),
                   965-968.

            Lalwani, A. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology--Head and neck surgery (Chapter 16:
                   Paranasal sinus neoplasm, p. 289). New York: McGraw-Hill.

            Lawson, W., & Patel, Z. M. (2009). The evolution of management for inverted papilloma: An analysis of
                   200 cases. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of Otolaryn-
                   gology--Head and Neck Surgery, 140(3), 330-335.

            Lee, T. J., Huang, S. F., Lee, L. A., & Huang, C. C. (2004). Endoscopic surgery for recurrent inverted
                   papilloma. Laryngoscope, 114(1), 106-112.

            Liu, Y., Zheng, C., Wei, W., & Liu, Q. (2012). Management of intractable epistaxis: Endoscopy or nasal
                   packing? Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 126(5), 482-486.

            Melia, L., & McGarry, G. W. (2011). Epistaxis: Update on management. Current Opinion in Otolaryngology
                   and Head and Neck Surgery, 19(1), 30-35.

            Mudunuri, R. K., & Murthy, M. A. (2012). The treatment of spontaneous epistaxis: Conservative vs
                   cautery. Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research: JCDR, 6(9), 1523-1524.

            National Cancer Institute. Cancer Staging Guide. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Retrieved
                   from http://www.nccn.com/understanding-cancer/cancer-staging.html. Accessed on April 7,
                   2013.

            National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guilde-
                   lines): Head and neck cancers. Version 1.2012. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/profession-
                   als/physician_gls/pdf/head-and-neck.pdf. Accessed on April 7, 2013.

            Newton, J. R., & Wong Ah-See, K. (2008). A review of nasal polyposis. Journal of Therapeutics and Clini-
                   cal Risk Management, 4(2), 507-512. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
                   PMC2504067/.

            Ozmen, S., & Ozmen, O. A. (2012). Is local ointment or cauterization more effective in childhood recur-
                   rent epistaxis. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 76(6), 783-786.

            Rosenfeld, R. M., Andes, D., Bhattacharyya, N., Cheung, D., Eisenberg, S., Ganiats, T. G., . . . Witsell, D.
                   L. (2007). Clinical practice guideline: Adult sinusitis. Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 137(3
                   Suppl), S1-S31. Retrieved from http://www.entnet.org/qualityimprovement/upload/Adult%20
                   Sinusitis%20Guideline.pdf.

            Stewart, R. A., Ram, B., Hamilton, G., Weiner, J., & Kane, K. J. (2008). Montelukast as an adjunct
                   to oral and inhaled steroid therapy in chronic nasal polyposis. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck
                   Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 139(5),
                   682-687.

            Stewart, M. G., Smith, T. L., Weaver, E. M., Witsell, D. L., Yueh, B., Hannley, M. T., & Johnson, J. T.
                   (2004). Outcomes after nasal septoplasty: Results from the Nasal Obstruction Septoplasty Effec-
                   tiveness (NOSE) study. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy
                   of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 130(3), 283-290.

            Strek, P., Zagólski, O., Skladzien, J., Kurzynski, M., & Dyduch, G. (2007). Osteomas of the paranasal
                   sinuses: Surgical treatment options. Medical Science Monitor: International Medical Journal of Experi-
                   mental and Clinical Research, 13(5), CR244-CR250.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  247

Supriya, M., Shakeel, M., Veitch, D., & Ah-See, K. W. (2010). Epistaxis: Prospective evaluation of
      bleeding site and its impact on patient outcome. Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 124(7),
      744-749.

Terakura, M., Fujisaki, R., Suda, T., Sagawa, T., & Sakamoto, T. (2012). Relationship between blood
      pressure and persistent epistaxis at the emergency department: A retrospective study. Journal of the
      American Society of Hypertension: JASH, 6(4), 291-295.

Thottam, P. J., Haupert, M., Saraiya, S., Dworkin, J., Sirigiri, R., & Belenky, W. M. (2012). Functional endo-
      scopic sinus surgery (FESS) alone versus balloon catheter sinuplasty (BCS) and ethmoidectomy: A
      comparative outcome analysis in pediatric chronic rhinosinusitis. International Journal of Pediatric
      Otorhinolaryngology, 76(9), 1355-1360.

Vaidyanathan, S., Barnes, M., Williamson, P., Hopkinson, P., Donnan, P. T., & Lipworth, B. (2011). Treat-
      ment of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis with oral steroids followed by topical steroids:
      A randomized trial. Annals of Internal Medicine, 154(5), 293-302.
