12                   Evaluation and
                     Management of
                     Nasopharynx Conditions

ADENOID HYPERTROPHY

Figure 12.1:  Adenoids are masses of soft tissue located in the posterior nasopharynx. Just like
Adenoid       lymph nodes, adenoids are part of the immune system and are made up of the same
hypertrophy.  lymphoid tissue. Adenoids typically start to shrink during adolescence. By adulthood,
              most of the tissue has disappeared. Their complete role is unknown.

                     Adenoids are reservoirs of viruses and bacteria. They are constantly exposed to
              viral and bacterial agents as well as allergens, and as a result inflammation (adenitis) and
              infection can exist. Recurrent infections may contribute to both eustachian tube dysfunc-
              tion (ETD) and tissue hypertrophy. Both child and adult adenoid hypertrophy (AH) are
              similar in terms of symptomatology and associated inflammation. However, children
              usually have more otitis media or otitis effusion occurrences than the adult population.

Associated Symptoms That May Suggest Adenoid Hypertrophy

                    Mouth breathing, which can lead to palatal and dental abnormalities
                    Nasal congestion
                    Hyponasal speech
                    Snoring
                    Halitosis
                    Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)

                       Behavioral and learning difficulties
                       Poor attention span
                       Hyperactivity
                       Growth failure
                    Chronic sinusitis
                    Recurrent otitis media
                    Chronic rhinitis

Associated Conditions Related to Adenoid Hypertrophy

                    OSA
                    Adenoiditis (allergic or infectious)
                    Chronic otitis media or effusion associated with ETD

Physical Examination

                    Document if adenoid facies exists, which is characterized by an open mouth appear-
                      ance accompanied with nasal congestion.
250  12. NASOPHARYNX CONDITIONS

                    AH is best diagnosed by clinical history and physical examination if possible.
                    In children, further assessment can be done by pinching the child's nose and asking

                      them to say "baseball" or "Mickey Mouse" with the nose pinched and unpinched.
                      Assess the degree of change and muffled (nasal) appearing sounds during speech.
                    Nasal endoscopy is the key diagnostic tool to detect both AH and adenoiditis.
                    It is important to eliminate other diagnoses such as a viral infection, bacterial adeni-
                      tis, sinusitis, and/or allergies.

               FIGURE 12.1 Adenoid
               hypertrophy blocking the
               posterior nasopharynx
               on nasal endoscopic
               examination.

Imaging

                Lateral x-ray view might be considered somewhat useful. However, when typical
                  signs and symptoms of AH are obvious, an x-ray is not necessary.

               Treatment Pharmacotherapy
                Allergic diseases cause an inflammatory state that influences AH. Therefore, allergy

                  management is crucial to the success and outcome.
                Nasal steroids may significantly improve nasal obstruction symptoms in children

                  with AH. This improvement appears to be associated with a reduction of adenoid
                  size.
                Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are not indicated for AH and should not be used.

Figure 12.2:   Treatment Surgery
Postop          Adenoidectomy is the typical management strategy for patients with AH when
adenoidectomy
scar.             medical therapy fails and the patient meets necessary criteria for removal.
                Adenoidectomy indications:

                   Enlargement causing nasal airway obstruction, which can result in obstructive
                     breathing, OSA symptoms, and chronic mouth breathing

                   Recurrent or persistent otitis media
                   Recurrent and/or chronic sinusitis

               Adenoidectomy Complications
                Bleeding (up to 7-10 days after procedure)--although a rare complication
                Pain (usually minimal)
                Infection
                Airway obstruction
                                                                  BENIGN NASOPHARYNGEAL TUMORS  251

           Velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI):
              The inability of the velopharyngeal sphincter (group of muscles attached to the
                soft palate [or velum] and the pharynx) to sufficiently separate the nasal cavity
                and oral cavity during speech and swallowing
              Characterized by hypernasal speech and, in some cases, regurgitation of fluids or
                food.
              NOTE: VPI may occur initially for a few weeks in the immediate postoperative period,
                 but permanent palatal incompetence is rare unless excessive adenoid resection is
                 performed.

                                                                                               FIGURE 12.2 Postop
                                                                                                          adenoidectomy scar as seen
                                                                                                          on nasopharyngoscopy
                                                                                                          examination.

CHOANAL ATRESIA

                   Choanal atresia (CA) is a rare congenital disorder where the back of the nasal passage
                   (choana) is blocked, usually by abnormal bony or soft tissue. Although it is rare, it is
                   the most common cause of nasal obstruction in neonates and young infants. It can be
                   unilateral or bilateral. When it is bilateral, it can cause immediate respiratory com-
                   promise in the newborn and is considered a medical emergency. The diagnosis can be
                   made on physical examination by trying to pass a small catheter through the patient's
                   nose. Surgery is the treatment of choice.

BENIGN NASOPHARYNGEAL TUMORS

                   Benign nasopharyngeal tumors are rare. Although they are benign, it is important to
                   differentiate them from other cancerous nasopharyngeal tumors, which may require
                   a biopsy. If the benign tumor is invading surrounding structures or causing nasal
                   obstruction, surgical excision is recommended. (The following list is not conclusive)

Teratoma

           One of the most common benign congenital lesions in neonates and infants. They are
             neoplasms that contain cells and elements derived from the germinal layers of the
             embryo. NOTE: This tumor would be in the differential in the neonate presenting with
             respiratory distress.
252  12. NASOPHARYNX CONDITIONS

Juvenile Angiofibroma

                    Common aggressive vascular tumor
                    May extend into the nasal cavity and adjacent sinuses
                    Angiography is usually done before surgical excision to embolize and block off the

                      major vessels leading to the tumor.
                     NOTE: If the patient presents with unilateral nasal obstruction associated with recurrent
                     bleeding, workup with a CT scan needs to be done to rule out this condition.

Hemangiomas

                    Vascular benign lesion in neonates and infants that can lead to respiratory distress
                      and airway obstruction if not surgically removed

CANCER OF THE NASOPHARYNX

                   Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is the most common cancer originating in the
                   nasopharynx often within the lateral nasopharyngeal recess (posterior to the entrance
                   of the eustachian tube opening). It differs significantly from other cancers of the head
                   and neck in its occurrence, causes, behavior, and treatment because it has the highest
                   chance to metastasize to distant sites. It is also an area that poses a high risk for local
                   recurrence even after radiation treatment.

Clinical Presentation

                   The patient may or may not present with the following:
                    Nasal congestion or nasal obstruction
                    Epistaxis
                    Ear fullness/pressure/pain, which may indicate ETD caused by tumor obstruc-

                      tion. NOTE: It is extremely important to evaluate via nasal endoscopy whether a
                        nasopharyngeal tumor exists in the presence of unilateral nasal obstruction, ETD with
                        or without otitis media despite initial treatment, especially in smokers, and/or the pres-
                        ence of cervical lymphadenopathy.
                    Tinnitus
                    Cranial nerves (II-IV or IX-XII) dysfunction

Physical Examination Findings

                   The following may or may not be present:
                    Cervical lymphadenopathy or neck mass (usually painless). NOTE: NPC has a high

                        propensity to metastasize to cervical lymph nodes.
                    Unilateral conductive hearing loss
                    On endoscopy, mass in the nasopharynx (usually unilateral) and most of the time

                      located in the lateral nasopharyngeal recess (posterior to the eustachian tube orifice)

Distant Metastasis

                    Uncommon
                    Sites where metastasis has been encountered: Lung, liver, and skeletal metastasis

                      to the vertebra
                                                   CANCER OF THE NASOPHARYNX  253

Imaging     CT scan can show tumor extension into the nasopharynx and laterally into the para-
Diagnosis     nasopharyngeal space.

            Requires a positive biopsy taken from the tumor in the nasopharynx

Treatment

                    Determined by the radiation/oncology specialist
                    Radiation therapy is usually the primary treatment choice. With advanced disease,

                      chemotherapy has been applied in conjunction with radiation therapy.

           STAGING CRITERIA

                   TNM STAGING SYSTEM FOR THE NASOPHARYNX

           T  Primary Tumor

              TX   Primary tumor cannot be assessed

              T0   No evidence of primary tumor

              Tis  Carcinoma in situ

              T1   Tumor is confined to the nasopharynx, or tumor extends to

                   oropharynx and/or nasal cavity without pharyngeal extension

              T2   Tumor with parapharyngeal extension--denotes posterolateral

                   infiltration of tumor

              T3   Tumor involves bony structures of skull base and/or paranasal sinuses

              T4   Tumor with intracranial extension and/or involvement of cranial

                   nerves, hypopharynx, orbit, or with extension to the infratemporal

                   fossa/masticator space

           N  Regional Lymph Nodes

              NX   Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

              N0   No regional lymph node metastasis

              N1   Unilateral metastasis in cervical lymph node(s), 6 cm or less in greatest

                   dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa, and/or unilateral or

                   bilateral, retropharyngeal lymph nodes, 6 cm or less, in greatest

                   dimension. (Midline nodes are considered ipsilateral nodes.)

              N2   Bilateral metastasis in cervical lymph node(s), 6 cm or less in greatest

                   dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa. (Midline nodes are

                   considered ipsilateral nodes.)

              N3   Metastasis in a lymph node(s). (Midline nodes are considered

                   ipsilateral nodes > 6 cm and/or to supraclavicular fossa.)

                   N3a       More than 6 cm in dimension

                                                                                 (continued)
254  12. NASOPHARYNX CONDITIONS

STAGING CRITERIA (continued)

    TNM STAGING SYSTEM FOR THE NASOPHARYNX

    N3b                          Extension to the supraclavicular fossa. Supraclavicular zone

                                 or fossa is relevant to the staging of nasopharyngeal

                                 carcinoma and is the triangular region originally described

                                 by Ho. It is defined by three points: (a) the superior margin

                                 of the sternal end of the clavicle; (b) the superior margin

                                 of the lateral end of the clavicle; and (c) the point where

                                 the neck meets the shoulder. Note that this would include

                                 caudal portions of levels IV and V. All cases with lymph

                                 nodes (whole or part) in the fossa are considered N3b.

M Distant Metastasis

M0  No distant metastasis

M1  Distant metastasis

Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). (2010). TNM staging system for the nasopharynx (7th
ed.). Nonepithelial tumors such as those of lymphoid tissue, soft tissue, bone, and cartilage are not included.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Ameli, F., Brocchetti, F., Tosca, M. A., Signori, A., & Ciprandi, G. (2013). Adenoidal hypertrophy and aller-
                   gic rhinitis: Is there an inverse relationship? American Journal of Rhinology and Allergy, 27(1), e5-e10.

            Blount, A., Riley, K. O., & Woodworth, B. A. (2011). Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma. Otolaryngo-
                   logic Clinics of North America, 44(4), 989-1004.

            Chadha, N. K., Zhang. L., Mendoza-Sassi, R. A., & Cesar, J. A. (2009). Using nasal steroids to treat nasal
                   obstruction caused by adenoidal hypertrophy: Does it work. Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,
                   140(2), 139-147.

            Edge, S. B., & Compton, C. C. (2010). The American Joint Committee on Cancer: The 7th edition of the
                   AJCC cancer staging manual and the future of TNM. Annals of Surgical Oncology, 17(6), 1471-1474.

            Feres, M. F., Hermann, J. S., Cappellette, M., & Pignatari, S. S. (2011). Lateral X-ray view of the skull for
                   the diagnosis of adenoid hypertrophy: A systematic review. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhi-
                   nolaryngology, 75(1), 1-11.

            Iqbal, F. R., Goh, B. S., & Mazita, A. (2012). The role of proton pump inhibitors in adenoid hypertrophy
                   in children. Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 147(2), 329-334.

            Marseglia, G. L., Caimmi, D., Pagelia, F., Matti, E., Labo, E., Licari, A., Salpietro, A., et al. (2010). Ade-
                   noids during childhood: The facts. International Journal of Immunopathology and Pharmacology, 24(4
                   Suppl), 1-5.

            National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guilde-
                   lines). (2012). Head and neck cancers. Version 1. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/profession-
                   als/physician_gls/pdf/head-and-neck.pdf. Accessed on April 7, 2013.

            Newman, J. R., Harmon, P., Shirley, W. P., Hill, J. S., Woolley, A. L., & Wiatrak, B. J. (2013). Operative
                   management of choanal atresia: A 15-year experience. JAMA Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,
                   139(1), 71-75.

            Scadding, G. (2010). Non-surgical treatment of adenoidal hypertrophy: The role of treating IgE-medi-
                   ated inflammation. Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, 21(8), 1095-1106.

            Strauss, M., Widome, M., & Roland, P. (1981). Nasopharyngeal hemangioma causing airway obstruc-
                   tion in infancy. Laryngoscope, 91(8), 1365-1368.

            Tiwari, L., Baijal, N., & Pullyel, J. M. (2009). Nasopharyngeal teratoma as a cause of neonatal stridor.
                   Indian Pediatrics, 46(12), 1097-1098.

            Yildirim, N., Sahan, M., & Karsliogiu, Y. (2008). Adenoid hypertrophy in adults: Clinical and morpho-
                   logical characteristics. Journal of International Medical Research, 36(1), 157-162.
