13                   Evaluation and
                     Management of
                     Oropharynx Disorders

APHTHOUS STOMATITIS

Figure 13.1:  Aphthous stomatitis or aphthous ulcer is one of the most common ulcerative lesions of
Aphthous      the oral mucosa. When recurrent (i.e., at least three attacks within the last 3 years), it is
ulcer.        termed recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS).

Etiology  The precise etiology and pathogenesis of RAS remains unclear.

              Potential Causes
               Trauma to the oral mucosa due to local anesthetic injections, sharp tooth, dental

                 treatments, and tooth brushing injury
               Stress may induce or predispose the patient to have habits such as lip or cheek biting

                 and this may result in ulceration.
               Nutritional deficiencies (vitamin B12, folate, iron)
               Hormonal alterations
               Immunological abnormalities

              Microorganisms Implicated
               Oral bacteria, Streptococcus sanguis, have been implicated to play a role in the patho-

                 genesis of these lesions.
               Helicobacter pylori have been suggested as one of the etiological agents.
               Various viruses including the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) have been implicated in RAS.

Symptoms

                   Symptoms may occur at the time of ulceration or may exist prior to the presence of the
                   lesions.

                    Pain and difficulty eating and drinking related to the pain
                    Tingling
                    Burning

Physical Examination

                    May be tender to palpation
                    Usually round or ovid, ulcerative appearing lesion(s) with central clearing and well-

                      circumscribed margins. May be surrounded by an erythematous halo
                    Solitary or multiple ulcers may be present
256  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

                                                     FIGURE 13.1 Aphthous
                                                     ulcer.

TABLE 13.1 TYPES OF APHTHOUS STOMATITIS

Minor (Most Common) Major                            Herpetiform

Less than 1 cm in              Greater than 1 cm     1-3 mm in diameter and
    diameter                       (usually 1-3 cm)      occurs in various sized
                                                         crops
 Lesions are often              Lesions are often
   solitary                       multiple            May have contiguous
                                                        areas of ulceration
                                Ulceration may be
                                  deeper              Lesions resemble a herpes
                                                        simplex lesion

                                                      Lesions are not caused by
                                                        the herpes virus

                                                      It is not contagious
                                                      They are usually very

                                                        painful

Generally affects:             Generally affects:    Generally affects:

 Labial mucosa                  Soft palate           Gingiva
 Buccal mucosa                  Tongue                Hard palate
 Lateral borders of             Tonsillar pillars     Vermillion border of the

   the tongue                                           lips
 Floor of mouth                                       Alveolar ridges

   (FOM)

Healing:                       Healing:              Healing:

 Usually in 7-10 days           Usually lasts 20-30   Usually within 2-3 weeks
 Leaves no scar                   days but can last   May leave a scar
                                  longer
   formation
                                May leave a scar

Workup  RAS is a clinical diagnosis and therefore, no specific workup is required.
                                                                                         APHTHOUS STOMATITIS  257

Treatment: Pharmacotherapy

                    There is no definitive curative treatment for RAS. Treatment is primarily aimed at
                      pain relief and the promotion of healing to reduce the duration of the disease or rate
                      of recurrence. A variety of topical and systemic therapies have been tried.
                       No single treatment has been determined to be the one treatment for all patients.
                         Individual drugs appear to work better for some than others.

TABLE 13.2 PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR APHTHOUS STOMATITIS

Topical

Pain reliever      Aphthasol (amlexanox oropharyngeal) 5% oral paste:
                      Apply as soon as possible after symptom onset. Apply 0.25
                         inch four times a day (following oral hygiene after meals
                         and at bedtime) up to 10 days.

                   Orabase or Zilactin (benzocaine) oropharyngeal liquid or gel:
                      Over-the-counter
                      Use as needed
                      Can relieve pain, itching, and burning associated with
                         these lesions. It can significantly reduce the size and
                         duration of the outbreak.

                  NOTE:The liquid form is nonfilm-forming.The gel provides an
                      occlusive film over the lesion(s) (which can last up to 6 hours).

Anti-              Kenalog (triamcinolone acetonide) oropharyngeal 0.1% paste
    inflammatory     (also called Kenalog in Orabase)

                  or

                  Lidex (fluocinonide) 0.05% topical ointment:
                      Apply 0.25 inch every night. Can apply two or three times a
                         day after meals if more severe lesions exist. Up to 7 days

Antiviral          Zovirax (acyclovir) topical 5% ointment
                      Apply six times per day × 7 days

                   Zovirax (acyclovir) topical 5% cream
                      Apply five times per day × 4 days

                   Xerese (acyclovir/hydrocortisone) topical 5% or 1% cream
                      Apply five times per day × 5 days

Combination        Cocktail mixtures of antibiotics, antifungals, steroids, and
    products         various "soothing" agents can be used. For example:
                     1. Canker Sore Mixture--contains Benadryl 100 mL,
                         dexamethasone 0.5 mg/5 mL (20 mL), Nystatin suspension
                         (60 mL), and tetracycline from capsule (1500 mg)
                          Swish, gargle, and swallow one teaspoon, six times per
                             day × 7-10 days.
                     2. Clacks Solution--contains Benadryl 12.5 mg/5 mL (60 mL),
                         hydrocortisone tablets (30 mg), Nystatin suspension 100,000
                         units (30 mL), doxycycline 500 mg, and distilled water
                          Swish, gargle, and swallow one to two teaspoons three
                             times a day × 7-10 days.

                  (continued)
258  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

           TABLE 13.2 PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR APHTHOUS
                                    STOMATITIS (continued)

Topical

                               3. Magic mouthwash mixture--contains diphenhydramine
                                   12.5 mg/5 mL (50 mL), viscous lidocaine 2% (50 mL),
                                   Maalox (50 mL), and Nystatin solution (30 mL)
                                   Swish, gargle, and spit one teaspoon, six times per day ×
                                      7-10 days.

Other                           Hydrogen peroxide and water (1:1 mixture) is helpful in

                                  debriding the region of the lesion and promoting healing.
                                Peridex (chlorhexidine) oropharyngeal 0.12% solution:

                                   15 mL swish/spit × 30 seconds BID/PRN
                                   Can help to reduce the duration of ulcer

Systemic

Antibacterial                   Tetracycline 200 mg/5 mL one teaspoon every 6 hours × 5-7
                                  days

Antiviral                       Valtrex (valacyclovir) 500 mg one tablet three times a day ×
                                  7 days

                                Famvir (famciclovir) 250 mg one tablet three times a day ×
                                  7 days

                                Zovirax (acyclovir) 200 mg one tablet five times per day × 10
                                  days

Other                           Recurrent aphthous stomatitis rarely is associated with

                                  vitamin B12 deficiency; however, vitamin B12 treatment may
                                  be beneficial
                                Cultured yogurt, cultured buttermilk, and Lactobacillus

                                  capsules have been recommended

Note: Systemic interventions are often reserved for those unresponsive to topical treatments.

Procedural Interventions

                    Biopsy lesion if it persists longer than 4 to 6 weeks despite treatment
                    Chemical cautery in selected cases. Silver nitrate is most commonly used. NOTE:

                        After cauterization, swab the area with sodium chloride. This will help prevent a deep
                        burn.
                    Surgical removal in selected cases

GLOSSODYNIA

                   Glossodynia, also termed burning mouth syndrome (BMS), is a chronic, idiopathic
                   intraoral mucosal pain condition that is not generally accompanied by clinical lesions
                   or systemic disease. It is usually associated with xerostomia (dry mouth) and dysgeu-
                   sia (taste disturbances). The condition may be a multifactorial disorder, which makes
                   evaluation and treatment difficult.
          GLOSSODYNIA  259

Etiology

           The precise etiology and pathogenesis of BMS is unknown. It is unclear as to why,
             but this condition usually affects postmenopausal women.

          Potential Causes
           There may be a neuropathic origin.
           Nutritional deficiencies may play a role.
           BMS symptoms can occur after radiation and chemotherapy.
           Anxiety is suggested to be associated with BMS.
           Certain medications may cause or aggravate: ACE-inhibitors (ACEI), angioten-

             sion receptor blockers (ARB), and/or antiretrovirals (for the treatment of HIV
             infection)
           Other causes can include overuse of mouth rinses, irritation from toothpaste or oral
             products, and alcohol or tobacco use.

          Microorganisms Implicated
           Microbial infections with or without visible lesions as a cause of BMS have been

             suggested.

Symptoms

                   Symptoms can be intermittent or continuous and may gradually increase throughout
                   the day.

                    Burning, scalding, or tingling
                    Typically bilateral and may involve the following: anterior two thirds of the tongue;

                      tip of tongue; anterior hard palate; lower lip
                    Oral pain
                    Xerostomia
                    Dysgeusia (usually described as bitter and/or metallic in quality)
                    Symptoms may be aggravated by spicy and/or acidic foods
                    During periods of increased stress or anxiety, the patient may report an exacerbation

                      of symptoms

Physical Examination

                    A thorough examination of the tongue and the mouth is of paramount importance.
                    Examination may reveal no visual abnormalities.
                    If abnormalities are present, there may be erythema, edema or swelling of the tongue,

                      papillary atrophy, and/or surface ulceration.

Workup

          Labs
           There is no one universal diagnostic test or lab study that can definitively diagnose

             or exclude BMS.
           Consider lab workup to rule out anemia and nutritional deficiencies:

              Complete blood count (CBC)
              Serum iron level
              Vitamin B12 level
              Folate level
260  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Treatment: Pharmacotherapy

                   No single treatment has been determined to be the one treatment for all patients. Indi-
                   vidual drugs may work better for some than others.

Antifungal     TABLE 13.3 PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR GLOSSODYNIA
                                      (BURNING MOUTH SYNDROME)

                      NOTE: Lesions may or may not be present on examination.
                       Mycelex (clotrimazole troches)
                       Nystatin 100,000 units/mL

Anti-                Kenalog (triamcinolone acetonide) oropharyngeal 0.1% paste (also called
    inflammatory       Kenalog in Orabase)

                     Lidex (fluocinonide) 0.05% topical ointment

Increases            Cevimeline
    salivary gland   Salagen (pilocarpine)
    secretion        NeutraSal
    (helps with
    xerostomia)

Neurologicals       SSRI (Selective  Antianxiety       TCA (Tricyclic          Other
                    Serotonin        (Benzodiazepine)  Antidepressant)         Neurologicals
                    Reuptake
                    Inhibitor)

                     Paxil            Ativan            Pamelor                 Neurontin
                       (paroxetine)     (lorazepam)       (nortriptyline)         (gabapentin)

                                      Klonopin
                                        (clonazepam)

Other               Antioxidants--alpha lipoic acid, for example
                    If vitamin deficiency is present, symptoms generally resolve with replacement

                        therapy

Referral  Consider consultation with an oral medicine specialist.

ORAL LICHEN PLANUS

Etiology    Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a chronic immunological (T-cell mediated) autoimmune
            disease. It is the counterpart of cutaneous lichen planus.

             OLP usually presents in adulthood.

            Associated Conditions
             Onset usually accompanied with stressful event.
             Hepatitis C virus may be an etiological factor in OLP.
             Can be associated with other autoimmune diseases (e.g., lupus)
          ORAL LICHEN PLANUS  261

Symptoms

                    OLP lesions can present alone or with concomitant skin lesions.
                    OLP lesions can be

                       Asymptomatic
                       Painful
                       Erosive. NOTE: If the OLP is erosive, there is a 10% to 15% chance of it developing

                            into squamous cell carcinoma (SCC; Lee, 2008).
                       Ulcerative

Physical Examination

                    Lesions have been described as reticular, plaque-like, atrophic, erosive, and bullous.
                    The reticular form is most common and it appears as a white to bluish lacy pattern,

                      striated, raised lesion(s).
                    May or may not be distributed symmetrically
                    Can affect the following:

                       Buccal mucosa
                       Tongue
                       Gingiva
                       Lips
                    The patient may have a superimposed Candida infection, which can mimic OLP.
                    Chronic ulcerative stomatitis can resemble OLP; however, ulcerative stomatitis does
                      not respond to corticosteroid therapy.

Workup

          Biopsy
           A biopsy is necessary to rule out premalignant or malignant disease.

Treatment

                    Observation without treatment is an option.
                    Wide spectrums of treatments are available.
                    Prescribe antifungal treatment in cases of a suspected coexisting oral Candida infection.

          Anti-Inflammatory Treatment Options
           Corticosteroids are the most common group of drugs used for the treatment of OLP.

              Kenalog (triamcinolone acetonide) oropharyngeal 0.1% paste (also called Kenalog
                in Orabase)

              Lidex (fluocinonide) 0.05% topical ointment
              Temovate (clobetasole 0.05% gel)

Referral

           If OLP is suspected, or once the diagnosis is confirmed with a biopsy, the patient
             should be referred to an oral medicine specialist (usually a dentist or oral surgeon)
             for further management of the chronic disease process. Other therapies that may be
             considered through the specialist may include the following:
              Immunosuppressive therapy
              Topical retinoids
              Ultraviolet light therapy
              Laser therapy
262  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

XEROSTOMIA

Etiology  Xerostomia, the subjective feeling of oral dryness, is an uncomfortable condition usu-
          ally related to salivary gland hypofunction (decreased salivary gland secretion). It is
          not a disease but may be a symptom of a disease or side effect of treatment. This condi-
          tion generally occurs in the older adult population.

           Medications (most common cause):
              Anticholinergics
              Antihistamines and decongestants
              Diuretics
              Opioids or analgesics
              Antinausea
              Antianxiety
              Steroids
              Antipsychotics
              Muscle relaxants
              Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
              Chemotherapy agents

           Water loss or dehydration
           Diabetes mellitus (likely a consequence of polyuria)
           Connective tissue, rheumatological, and/or autoimmune diseases (list not compre-

             hensive):
              Sjogren's (most common)
              Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
              Rheumatoid arthritis
              Mixed connective tissue disease
           Surgical excision of the major salivary glands (parotid and/or submandibular gland)
             is a rare cause of xerostomia due to the fact that despite surgical excision, the major-
             ity of saliva comes from the minor salivary glands.
           Complication of radiation therapy for head and neck cancer:
              The degree of dysfunction is related to the radiation dose and volume of tissue in

                the radiation field.

          NOTE: Xerostomia and decreased salivary gland secretion are among the most frequent
          and sometimes irreversible, long-term side effects of radiation therapy to the head and
          neck region.

Associated Complications and Symptoms

                   Saliva is necessary for the normal oral hygiene and also important to the functions of
                   taste, swallowing, and speech. Therefore, any of these areas can be directly impacted
                   and the following can coexist as a result:

                    Dental abnormalities. NOTE: The chance of having periodontal disease and/or dental
                        caries is higher in persons with xerostomia.

                    Difficulty with the use of dentures (related to the pain that occurs in denture wearers
                      with xerostomia)

                    Decreased appetite and risk for malnutrition and weight loss
                    Dysphagia
                    Hypogeusia (lowered taste sensation) or ageusia (inability to taste substances)
                                                                     XEROSTOMIA  263

         Changes in oral microflora that can predispose to the following types of oral infection:
            Candidiasis
            Bacterial (Staphylococcus aureus)
            Viral (herpes simplex virus [HSV])

Physical Examination

         Thorough intraoral and extraoral clinical examination is important.
         Document presence of the following:

            Inflammation/erythema
            Fissures or cracks
            Ulcerations or lesions
            White patches
            Degree of moisture, evidence of saliva, and type of saliva (thick, stringy, stagnant,

              etc.)
            Dental integrity including presence of gingivitis (tender, swollen gums)
         Physical examination findings may even be normal in a patient complaining of
           xerostomia

Workup

         After common etiologies have been ruled out, consider lab workup to evaluate for
           underlying connective tissue, rheumatological, and/or autoimmune diseases.

Pharmacotherapy Options

                    Includes symptomatic relief with saliva substitutes and/or saliva stimulants (sial-
                      ogogic agents)

                      TABLE 13.4 PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR XEROSTOMIA

        Salivary Substitutesa                  Salivary Stimulantsb

        OTC                    RX              OTC           RX

         Mouth Kote dry         NeutraSal       Sugar-free    Salagen (pilocarpine):
           mouth spray            (calcium        lozenges,     5 mg three times a
                                  phosphate       chewing       day. The dose can be
         Salivart artificial      rinse):         gum, and/     titrated to achieve
           saliva spray           Designed        or sour       optimal response.
                                  to replace      drops         This drug usually
         Moi-Stir mouth           the normal                    increases salivary
           moisturizer            ionic and                     flow within 30
                                  pH balance                    minutes after
         Biotene oral             in the oral                   taking it.
           balance products       cavity
           (toothpaste,                                      NOTE: This is the
           mouthwash,                                        only drug approved
           chewing gum)                                      by the FDA for the
                                                             use as a sialogogue.
         Thayers dry mouth                                   It also has a side
           spray and lozenges                                effect of increasing
                                                             perspiration.

        OTC, over-the-counter; RX, by prescription.
        a Helps to relieve discomfort by temporarily moistening the oral mucosa. b Helps to stimulate mucus
        production from the salivary gland and increase salivary flow moistening the oral mucosa.
264  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Strategies and Management

                    Encourage hydration with water.
                    Eliminate caffeinated products.
                    Tobacco, alcohol, and drug abuse worsens xerostomia and should be avoided.
                    Avoid mouthwashes containing alcohol.
                    Avoid spicy or acidic foods.
                    Eliminate medications, if possible, that may be contributing to the problem.
                    Recommend sips of fluid with each mouthful of food to aid in chewing and swallowing.

Referral

           Dental specialist for prevention and/or management of dental caries and periodon-
             tal disease

ORAL CANDIDIASIS

                   Candida (a fungus) is normally present in the oral flora. Oral candidiasis (OC) is a com-
                   mon infection of the oral cavity caused by an overgrowth of the Candida fungal species.
                   This condition can occur in all populations, but is most commonly seen in infants and
                   older people.

Etiology  Organism: Candida albicans (the most common Candida species implicated)

Predisposing Risk Factors

                   The following can contribute to oral mucosal breakdown and loss of the normal epithe-
                   lial barrier, predisposing to OC:

                    Antibiotic therapy (most common)
                    Steroid therapy: Systemic and inhaled
                    Systemic immunosuppressant therapy
                    Overuse of antiseptic or antibiotic mouthwashes
                    Radiation/chemotherapy
                    Ill-fitting dentures
                    Nutritional deficiencies
                    Poor oral hygiene
                    Pregnancy
                    Impaired salivary gland function
                    Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
                    Diabetes mellitus
                    Immune compromise including cancer and HIV disease

Associated Symptoms

                    The patient may be asymptomatic.
                    The patient may or may not complain of the following:

                       Burning sensation
                                                                                             ORAL LEUKOPLAKIA  265

                       Oral pain
                       Odynophagia
                       Dysphagia and/or voice changes. NOTE: Indicating the infection possibly spread to

                            the hypopharynx, larynx, and esophagus

Physical Examination

                    Lesions may appear as adherent, white, curdled/creamy plaques or patches with
                      surrounding erythema. NOTE: The plaques or patches can be wiped off the epithelial
                        surface, leaving an erythematous and sometimes ulcerated surface.

                    Most common oral sites affected:
                       Tongue (lateral aspects)
                       Buccal mucosa
                       Mucobuccal folds
                       Oropharynx (including hard and soft palate). NOTE: Consider flexible fiberoptic
                            laryngoscopy examination to evaluate for spread of infection.

Pharmacotherapy Options

                    Nystatin 100,000 units/mL as 5 mL oral swish and spit or swallow four times a day ×
                      7 to 14 days. NOTE: Nystatin is recommended as first-line treatment for uncomplicated
                        OC.

                    Mycelex (clotrimazole) troches 10 mg four times a day × 7 to 14 days

                   The following can be used alone or in combination with Nystatin in chronic cases of
                   OC. NOTE: Combining systemic therapy with Nystatin topical therapy reduces the dose
                     and duration of systemic therapy.
                    Diflucan (fluoconazole) 100 mg orally × 7 to 14 days
                    Sporonox (itrazonazole) 100 mg orally four times a day × 7 to 14 days

Strategies and Management

                    Rinse mouth after each inhaled corticosteroid use.
                    Maintain good oral hygiene.

ORAL LEUKOPLAKIA

                   Oral leukoplakia (OL) is the most common potentially malignant lesion that can occur
                   in the oral cavity. It is a white patch or lesion that in a small portion of cases (<10%) can
                   transform into small cell carcinoma (SCC). Leukoplakias are very unpredictable; they
                   may improve, remain stable, or progress to SCC. There are no validated clinical and/
                   or biological factors that can predict malignant transformation. If they do progress to
                   SCC, it may take a few months or many years. Therefore, it is important to first exclude
                   other known diseases or disorders (e.g., lichen planus and candidiasis) that carry little
                   or no risk of cancer. Then if the lesion(s) persist, a biopsy is warranted to rule out
                   malignancy. OL is not associated with any physical or chemical causative agent except
                   for tobacco use. Even if the biopsy is negative for malignancy, it is important to main-
                   tain a close follow-up of these patients and continue to rebiopsy if the lesion persists
                   over time, despite removing the suspected irritant. To date, no consensus has devel-
                   oped regarding specific management and follow-up care of these patients.
266  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Predisposing Risk Factors

                    Tobacco and/or alcohol abuse
                    Chronic trauma from sharp or broken tooth
                    Some leukoplakias are idiopathic

Associated Symptoms
                    Most leukoplakias are asymptomatic.

Physical Examination

                    White, well-demarcated plaque or lesion that cannot be removed off the surface
                      by rubbing. The surface texture can vary from a smooth thin surface to a leathery
                      appearance with surface fissures.

                    Leukoplakia lesion(s) may or may not be present in association with erythroplakia
                      (see next section).

                    Most commonly located sites include the following:
                       Lip (vermilion)
                       Buccal mucosa
                       Mandibular gingiva
                       Tongue
                       Floor of mouth (FOM)
                       Hard and soft palate
                       Maxillary gingiva

                    "High risk sites" for SCC include ventrolateral surface of the tongue, FOM, and max-
                      illary retromolar or adjoining soft palate regions.

Workup

         Once other benign conditions have been ruled out, a biopsy is warranted to rule out
           malignancy.

         Biopsy results may indicate the following:
            Benign pathology
            Epithelial hyperplasia: Abnormal changes; however, nonmalignant
            Dysplasia: Precancerous changes
            Carcinoma in situ: Early form of cancer that is defined by the absence of invasion
              of tumor cells into the surrounding tissue
            SCC (<10%)

Treatment Options

                    The objective of treatment is to prevent malignant transformation. There is no medi-
                      cation that will resolve these lesions.

                    There is no evidence of a treatment in preventing malignant transformation of leu-
                      koplakia lesions.

                    Leukoplakia lesions can unpredictably improve, remain stable, or progress to SCC.
                    It is important to emphasize to the patient cessation of all tobacco and/or alcohol use.
                    Acid from uncontrolled GERD can continue to irritate these lesions. Therefore,

                      maintain good control of GERD with appropriate pharmacotherapy and dietary
                      measures.
                                                                                           TONSIL HYPERTROPHY  267

                    Dental problems (such as a malaligned tooth irritating the mucosa at the site of the
                      leukoplakia) need to be managed appropriately through a dental specialist.

Surgical Management

                    Even when removed, there is a possibility that leukoplakia lesions can recur.
                      There is no significant association between recurrence and the degree of epithelial
                      dysplasia.

                    Surgical resection of OL is curative only if all areas of epithelial abnormalities are
                      identified and resected.

ORAL ERYTHROPLAKIA

                   Oral erythroplakia (OE) is not as common as OL; however, it carries a much higher
                   risk of malignancy than leukoplakia. OE can appear as red lesions that are flat, smooth,
                   granular, nodular, or velvety in appearance. The most commonly affected areas are the
                   FOM, buccal mucosa, and soft palate regions. The tongue is rarely affected. It is impor-
                   tant to biopsy OE lesions when other benign pathology has been ruled out. OE is the
                   diagnosis of exclusion. OE is frequently associated with dysplasia and is thus consid-
                   ered a precancerous lesion until proven otherwise; therefore, follow-up is important in
                   these patients because if these lesions persist, they need to be biopsied.

                          Chewing tobacco, smoking, and alcohol drinking have been described as risk
                   factors for OE. Treatment involves biopsy of the lesions and complete excision depend-
                   ing on the histopathology found in the biopsy. Long-term monitoring is needed.

TONSIL HYPERTROPHY

Palatine Tonsil Hypertrophy

Figure 13.2:  Tonsillar hypertrophy is an abnormal enlargement of the palatine tonsils. This may be
Tonsil        due to chronic infection or excess tissue growth. Significant tonsillar hypertrophy can
hypertrophy.  cause aberrant speech patterns and even alter orofacial and craniofacial growth.

              TONSIL HYPERTROPHY

                                  FIGURE 13.2 Tonsil
                                  hypertrophy (on fiberoptic
                                  laryngoscopy examination).
268  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Figure 1.11:                             TONSIL SIZE SCORING
Tonsil size
scoring.                                                                   Percentage of Space the Tonsil
                                                                           Occupies in the Oropharynx
              Grade  Tonsil Description
              0
              1+     Surgically removed tonsils              N/A
              2+
              3+     Tonsils are hidden within the tonsil pillars 0%-25%
              4+
                     Tonsils extend to the pillars           25%-50%

                     Tonsils are beyond the pillars          50%-75%

                     Tonsils extend to midline               75%-100%

Lingual Tonsil Hypertrophy

                   Lingual tonsils are lymphatic tissues located on the dorsal surface at the base of tongue
                   (BOT). The best way to see the lingual tonsils is through indirect or direct laryngoscopy.
                   Very rarely do lingual tonsils undergo hypertrophy or hyperplasia. If they do, they can
                   cause airway problems due to the encroachment of space in the oropharynx. The cause
                   of lingual tonsillar hypertrophy or hyperplasia is usually related to a chronic, low-grade
                   infection, GERD, and/or even compensatory hypertrophy following an adenotonsillec-
                   tomy. It is appropriate to trial a course of an antibiotic and anti-inflammatory therapy. A
                   course of antireflux therapy may be helpful as well. There is no grading system for lin-
                   gual tonsillar hypertrophy. Asymmetric lingual tonsils need to be further evaluated to
                   exclude immunosuppression (e.g., caused by immunosuppressive medication or HIV
                   infection) and to rule out cancer of the BOT.

TONSILLITIS

Figure 13.3:  Tonsillitis refers to inflammation mainly of the palatine tonsils, but may involve other
Tonsillitis.  areas in the oropharynx including the lingual tonsils. Throat infection or tonsillitis
              are one of the most common reasons patients seek care, which often results in anti-
              biotic treatment. According to the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and

              Infected tonsil                                             Infected tonsil
                                                                          Edematous uvula
              FIGURE 13.3 Tonsillitis.
                                                     Tongue
                                                                                                       TONSILLITIS  269

                   Neck Surgery, a throat infection is defined as a sore throat caused by viral or bacterial
                   infection of the pharynx, palatine tonsils, or both, which may or may not be culture
                   positive for group A Streptococcus. There are several variations of tonsillitis--acute,
                   recurrent and chronic tonsillitis, and peritonsillar abscess (PTA).

Tonsil Physiology

                    The tonsils initiate immune responses against antigens entering the body through the
                      mouth and nose and are most active between the ages of 3 and 10 years. Although ton-
                      sillitis can still occur in adults, it is most common in children during this age range.

Classifications

                    Acute tonsillitis: Current signs and symptoms of an active tonsil infection
                    Recurrent tonsillitis: Four to seven episodes of acute tonsillitis in 1 year, five epi-

                      sodes for 2 consecutive years, or three episodes per year for 3 consecutive years
                    Chronic tonsillitis: Complaints of chronic or recurring sore throat, malodorous

                      breath, tonsilliths, and tender cervical lymphadenopathy when all other identifiable
                      causes have been ruled out.
                    PTA: Also known as "quinsy," PTA is an infection located between the tonsillar capsule
                      and the muscles of the tonsillar fossa. More information on PTA is given later in this
                      chapter.

Most Common Viral Pathogens in Tonsillitis

                    Adenovirus
                    Coxsackievirus
                    Parainfluenza
                    Enteroviruses
                    EBV
                    HSV
                    Respiratory syncytial virus

Most Common Bacterial Pathogens in Tonsillitis

                    Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci (GABHS)
                    Non-GABHS bacteria
                    Beta-lactamase-producing organisms such as Bacteroides, nontypable Haemophilus,

                      Staphylococcus aureus, and Moraxella catarrhalis. NOTE: PTAs have a higher incidence
                        of anaerobic bacteria.

                   Symptoms and physical examination findings of a throat infection can include (but are
                   not limited to) the following:

                    White patches or pus on the tonsils
                    Erythema and inflammation of the larynx, pharynx, or tonsils
                    Cervical lymphadenopathy
                    Tender glands of the neck
                    Odynophagia
                    Dysphagia
                    Fever
                    Pain in the throat when speaking, eating, or swallowing
                    Chronic sore throat
270  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Workup

           The diagnosis of tonsillitis is made by careful clinical examination with the history
             and physical examination supported by appropriate laboratory testing.

           Swabbing the throat and testing for GABHS by rapid antigen detection test (RADT)
             and/or culture can be considered because the clinical features alone cannot discrimi-
             nate between GABHS and a viral pathogen. NOTE: Do not use the presence of GABHS
             on rapid strep screen as the only criterion and indication for treatment. The screening
             test is only 95% sensitive. Results of a throat culture will take 3 to 5 days and the oppor-
             tunity to prevent renal and cardiac complications from the streptococcal infection may
             be missed. Even in the absence of a positive culture, antibiotic therapy can be of benefit
             when signs and symptoms of infection are present.

           In children and adolescents: If the RADT is negative, consider a back-up throat
             culture, because in this population the risk of subsequent complications (although
             rare), including rheumatic fever, PTA, and neuropsychiatric disorder (PANDAS)
             can occur. However, it is not necessary to do a back-up culture if the RADT is
             positive.

Pharmacotherapy Treatment

                  Acute Tonsillitis
                    Acute tonsillitis or tonsillitis due to GABHS: Penicillin is the first-line antibiotic of

                      choice

                  Recurrent or Chronic Tonsillitis
                    Antibiotics effective against beta-lactamase-producing microorganisms or encapsu-

                      lated anaerobes are indicated.
                       Augmentin (amoxicillin-clavulanate)
                       Clindamycin

PERITONSILLAR ABSCESS

                   A PTA is a collection of puss located between the tonsillar capsule and the muscles of
                   the tonsillar fossa.

Etiology

           A PTA develops secondary to an infection of a peritonsillar salivary gland, called a
             Weber gland, that is located between the tonsil capsule and muscles of the tonsillar
             fossa.

Most Common Bacterial Pathogens in Tonsillitis

                  Anaerobic Bacteria
                    PTAs have a higher incidence of anaerobic bacteria.
                    Fusobacterium (most common)

                  Aerobic Bacteria
                    Streptococcus pyogens (GABHS) is most common.
                                        PERITONSILLAR ABSCESS  271

                   Symptoms and physical examination findings of a throat infection can include (but are
                   not limited to) the following:

                    Same as tonsillitis except:
                       The sore throat is severe and unilateral.
                       There is an unmistakable presence of a peritonsillar bulge with medial and infe-
                         rior displacement of the tonsil. There may be displacement of the uvula as well
                         toward the opposite side. NOTE: Often the tonsils themselves appear normal.

                    Trismus
                    Odynophagia
                    Dysphagia
                    Muffled voice--"hot potato" quality
                    Otalgia
                    Cervical lymphadenopathy

Treatment

                    Treatment for a PTA includes combining needle drainage or incision and drainage
                      (I and D) with appropriate antibiotic therapy.
                       Needle aspiration is often as effective as I and D in the management of a PTA. In
                         most cases, it should be used as the first step in the treatment plan.

                    Many patients can be managed in an outpatient setting. A small percentage may
                      require hospitalization for pain control and hydration.

                  Antibiotic Therapy
                    Antibiotics effective against Staphylococcus aureus and oral anaerobes. The following

                      are examples of adult dosing schedules:
                       IV therapy:

                      · Ampicillin/sulbactam (Unasyn) 3 g every 6 hours
                      · Clindamycin (Cleocin) 900 mg every 8 hours
                      · Penicillin G 10 million units every 6 hours plus metronidazole (Flagyl) 500 mg

                            every 6 hours
                       Oral therapy:

                      · Clindamycin 600 mg twice a day or 300 mg four times daily
                      · Penicillin VK 500 mg four times plus metronidazole 500 mg four times daily
                      · Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (Augmentin) 875 mg twice a day, or
                      · Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (Augmentin XR) 1000 mg twice a day

                  Other Treatment Considerations
                    Oral steroids may be useful in reducing symptoms and speeding recovery.
                    Pain reliever
                    Hydration

Complications of Peritonsillar Abscess

            Airway obstruction
            Problems that can arise if the infection extends beyond the peritonsillar space into

              the tissues of the deep neck and posterior mediastinum

Follow-Up

            The patient should come for a follow-up visit 1 to 2 days after the needle drainage or
              I and D. If necessary, the I and D procedure is repeated or an I and D is considered if
              the needle drainage was ineffective initially.
272  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Recurrence

                    There is a 10% to 15% risk of developing a second PTA (Johnson, Stewart, & Wright,
                      2003). If this occurs, a tonsillectomy is recommended. PTA in the absence of tonsil
                      tissue is rare.

                      PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: NEEDLE DRAINAGE AND INCISION AND
                      DRAINAGE OF A PERITONSILLAR ABSCESS

                      Indications

                       Suspected peritonsillar abscess

                      Contraindications

                        Pediatric patient or uncooperative patient. NOTE:With the carotid artery located
                             2.5 cm posterior and lateral to the tonsil, there is minimal room for error and
                             patient movement.

                      Complications

                        Severe bleeding
                        Aspiration of abscess contents into the patient's airway
                        Pain from inadequate anesthesia

                      Needle Drainage Procedure

                       1. Have the patient sit upright with a support behind the head.
                       2. Have Yankhauer suction ready.
                       3. Anesthetize the most prominent area of the mucous membrane overlying the

                          abscess with a topical anesthetic (e.g., Cetacaine spray, viscous lidocaine).
                       4. Use manual palpation to locate the fluctuant area of the abscess.
                       5. Displace the tongue using a tongue blade or your gloved finger.
                       6. Anesthetize the fluctuant area over the palatoglossal arch with a local filtra-

                          tion of 1 to 2 mL of 1% lidocaine with epinephrine, via a 27-gauge needle.
                          NOTE: The abscess is usually superior to the tonsil, at the intersection of the base
                          of the uvula and the anterior tonsillar pillar, and deep to the mucosa and palatoglos-
                          sus muscle. The carotid artery is usually 2 to 2.5 cm posterolateral to the target.
                          Consider bending the needle at 1.5 cm or cutting off the needle cap to expose only
                          1.5 cm of needle as a safety measure. Be careful not to increase the abscess size by
                          direct injection into the abscess cavity.

                       7. Using a 10-mL syringe with an 18-gauge needle, insert the needle in the fluctu-
                          ant area of the abscess constantly pulling back while advancing. Use a three-
                          point method--do needle aspirations from the superior, middle, and lower
                          regions of the peritonsillar space. Aspirate as much puss as possible. Have
                          Yankhauer suction ready in case puss drains with injection, so the patient does
                          not aspirate the pus. It is not necessary to send the aspirated pus to the labora-
                          tory for culture.

                                                                                                                                                (continued)
                                                                           TONSILLECTOMY  273

NOTE: Remember to avoid directing the needle laterally and more than 2 to 2.5
cm deep to the carotid. Do not aspirate the tonsil itself because the abscess is
located in the peritonsillar space surrounding the tonsil. A negative aspirate
does not rule out a PTA; however, consider a CT scan of the neck to confirm the
diagnosis.

Incision and Drainage Procedure

Follow steps 1 to 6 above.

1. Using a No. 11 or 15 scalpel blade, make a 1- to 1.5-cm incision in the mucous
   membrane parallel to the palatal arch at the site with the largest bulge or area
   of maximal fluctuance. Have Yankhauer suction ready in case puss drains
   with injection, so the patient does not aspirate the pus. Expect bleeding
   because this is an inflamed and vascular area.

2. Using a hemostat, gently open the incision to break up the loculations and
   allow the puss to flow freely out of the space.

3. Suction the incised area with a No. 9 or 10 Frazier suction tip to aid in removal
   of the purulent material.

4. Allow the patient to gargle with saline or diluted peroxide/saline solution.
    NOTE: It is not necessary to pack or suture this incision site.

TONSILLECTOMY

Tonsillectomy is one of the most commonly performed surgical procedures. The
two common indications for tonsillectomy are recurrent sore throat infections
and sleep-disordered breathing (SDB). More information on SDB can be found in
Chapter 14: Evaluation and Management of Sleep Apnea. A tonsillectomy may be
performed with or without an adenoidectomy.

Tonsillectomy Indications

Criterion      TABLE 13.5 CLINICAL INDICATIONS FOR TONSILLECTOMY
#1                Definition

                           Minimum frequency of sore     Documentation in the medical record
                               throat episodes based         for each episode of a sore throat
                               on the Paradise Criteria      should include at least one of the
                               for Tonsillectomy:            following:

                            Seven or more episodes        Temperature greater than 38.3°C
                              in the past year, or          (100.94 °F)

                            Five or more episodes in      Cervical adenopathy
                              each of the preceding 2     Tonsillar exudate or erythema
                              years, or
                                                         Positive test for Group A beta-
                            Three or more episodes           hemolytic streptococcus (GABHS)
                              in each of the preceding
                              3 years

                                                                  (continued)
274  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Criterion  TABLE 13.5 CLINICAL INDICATIONS FOR TONSILLECTOMY
OR                                          (continued)
#2
              Definition
OR
#3         A history of recurrent        Additional factors that favor a
               throat infections not         tonsillectomy that include (but are
OR             meeting criteria in #1        not limited to) one or more of the
#4                                           following:

OR                                        Multiple antibiotic allergy/
#5                                          intolerance

                                          PFAPA syndrome (periodic fever,
                                            aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis,
                                            and adenitis)

                                          Peritonsillar abscess
                                          Parapharyngeal abscess

           A diagnosis of sleep-         Documentation of all of the following:
               disordered breathing
               (SDB)                      Tonsillar hypertrophy
                                          Abnormalities of respiratory pattern
           SDB can be made on the
               basis of history and         or the adequacy of ventilation
               physical examination         during sleep, including but not
               alone and does not           limited to snoring, mouth breathing,
               require polysomnography      and pauses in breathing
                                          A condition related to SDB
                                            (including but not limited to
                                            growth retardation, poor school
                                            performance, enuresis, excessive
                                            sleepiness, inattention, aggression,
                                            depression, hyperactivity, and
                                            behavioral problems) that is likely to
                                            improve after tonsillectomy

           A diagnosis of SDB for        Documentation of all of the following:
               children younger than
               3 years of age             Tonsillar hypertrophy
                                          SDB is chronic (more than 3 months
           Behavioral issues related
               to SBD is more difficult     duration)
               to identify in children    Child's parent or caregiver reports
               under 3 years of age
                                            regular episodes of nocturnal choking,
                                            gasping, apnea, or breath holding

           A diagnosis of obstructive    Documentation of all of the following:
               sleep apnea (OSA)
                                          Tonsillar hypertrophy
                                          A polysomnogram with an apnea-

                                            hypopnea index (AHI) greater
                                            than 1.0

                                                              (continued)
                                   TONSILLECTOMY  275

Criterion  Definition

OR

#6         Suspicion of tonsillar

           malignancy

Note: Tonsillectomy is considered medically necessary for individuals younger than 18 years of age
who meet any of the above #1-6 criteria.
Source: From Anthem "Tonsillectomy for Children Clinical Guidelines," which is widely accepted as the
standard of care for this procedure. Based on the American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and
Neck Surgery (AAO-HHS). (2011). Clinical practice guidelines on tonsillectomy in children.

Tonsillectomy Risks and Complications

                    Hemorrhage
                    Infection
                    Prolonged pain
                    Impaired healing
                    Permanent change in voice
                    Failure to improve airway, resolve snoring, sleep apnea, or mouth breathing.
                    Nasal regurgitation--velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI). See Chapter 12 discussion

                      on Adenoid Hypertrophy for more information on VPI.
                    Death (rare)

Tonsillectomy Procedure Description

                    The tonsils are removed including its capsule by dissecting the peritonsillar space
                      between the tonsil capsule and the muscular wall.

Pharmacotherapy Postoperative Tonsillectomy

                    Codeine is converted to morphine by the liver. Certain children may be ultrarapid
                      metabolizers of cytochrome CYP2D6, which can cause a significantly life-threatening
                      amount of morphine in the body. Deaths have occurred postoperatively in children
                      with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) who received codeine for pain relief following
                      a tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy. Therefore, codeine products should not be
                      used postoperatively following a tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy for children
                      and an alternate analgesic should be chosen instead.

                     NOTE: The FDA does not define the age specification for "children." ENT Today (Sep-
                     tember 2012, Volume 7, Issue 9) posted the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Tonsil-
                     lectomy and/or Adenoidectomy postop pain management protocol, which is widely
                     accepted:

                    All ages:
                       Acetaminophen every 5 hours (10-15 mg/kg/dose)
                       Dexamethasone 0.5 mg/kg, maximum 20 mg day of surgery until postop day 3
                       Ibuprofen 10 mg/kg/dose, maximum of three doses in 24 hours starting on postop
                         day 2

                    Age greater than or equal to 6 years:
                       Same as "all ages"
                       Acetaminophen with codeine every-5-hour dosing for rescue only
276  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

                    Ages 3 to 5 years: Consider testing for CYP2D6 genotype if available
                    Ages less than 3 years: No narcotics

Postoperative Tonsillectomy Instructions

                    Postoperative pain in adults can last up to 2 weeks and in children 10 days or less.
                    Hydration in the first week after surgery is extremely important to prevent dehydra-

                      tion and subsequently decrease the risk of hemorrhage and lessen the pain.
                    Postoperative bleeding is rare, but can occur up to 2 weeks after surgery.
                    No aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications 2 weeks before or after

                      surgery

INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS

                   Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is a common, usually self-limited disease. It is a clinical
                   syndrome most commonly associated with primary EBV infection. EBV is a member of
                   the herpes virus family and is one of the most common human viruses. IM may present
                   with severe manifestations and complications can also occur.

Etiology and Incidence

                    Most people become infected with the EBV at some point during their lifetime. More
                      than 95% of adults worldwide are infected (Luzuriaga & Sullivan, 2010).

                    Children can become infected with EBV and have few, if any symptoms. During
                      adolescence and young adulthood, EBV infection causes IM 35% to 50% of the time
                      (cdc.gov).
                       After an EBV infection causes IM, the EBV remains dormant in a few cells in the
                         throat and blood for the rest of the person's life. The virus can reactivate and the
                         reactivation usually occurs without symptoms.

                    The overall incidence of IM in the United States is approximately 500 cases per
                      100,000 persons per year, with the highest incidence in the age group of 15 to 24
                      years (Luzuriaga & Sullivan, 2010).

                    Other microorganisms (other than EBV) that can be associated with mononucleosis-
                      type symptoms include the following:
                       Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
                       Toxoplasma gondii
                       Rubella
                       Hepatitis A virus
                       HIV type 1
                       Adenoviruses

Symptoms

                   The incubation period (time from infection to appearance of symptoms) ranges from 4 to 6
                   weeks. Symptoms of IM usually resolve in 1 to 2 months and can include the following:

                    Pharyngitis
                    Fever
                    Malaise
                    Myalgia and/or arthralgia
                    Lymphadenopathy (lasting up to 4 weeks)
           PHARYNGITIS  277

Lab Test    Splenomegaly (mild splenomegaly is present 50% of the time) even if not palpable
              on physical examination

            Hepatomegaly (10%)

            Although a clinical diagnosis can be made on symptoms alone, a positive monospot
              lab test is needed for confirmation. NOTE: The monospot test detects proteins in the
              blood called heterophile antibodies that are produced by the immune system in response
              to an EBV infection. Keep in mind that during the early phase of infection, antibodies to
              EBV are usually not demonstrable.

            White blood cell count (WBC) may be normal to moderately elevated.
            Lymphocytes (on CBC differential) may be elevated.
            Atypical lymphocytes (on CBC differential) may be greater than 10% of the total

              leukocyte count.
            Liver enzymes may or may not be elevated.

Treatment

                   The focus of treatment is generally on treating the symptoms:
                    Rest
                    Fluids
                    Throat lozenges or sprays
                    Oral steroid taper over 5 to 6 days can be helpful at reducing the swelling of the

                      throat and tonsils.
                    Antiviral agents may provide a useful treatment option in patients with severe IM.

Education

            The transmission of EBV requires intimate contact with the saliva of an infected per-
              son. However, the virus can be found in the saliva of healthy people; thus, no special
              precautions or isolation procedures are recommended.

            The risk of splenic rupture is estimated at 0.1% and can occur within the first 3 weeks
              of illness (Ebell, 2004, p. 1285). Therefore, it is reasonable to restrict athletic activities
              for at least 3 to 4 weeks and until patients are asymptomatic. At that point, patients
              should base their return to usual activities on their energy levels.

PHARYNGITIS

                   Pharyngitis is an inflammatory disease of the mucosal and submucosal structures of
                   the throat. Acute pharyngitis is one of the most common illnesses for which patients
                   seek care. Most cases are of viral origin, benign, and self-limiting. The most important
                   bacterial cause is the beta-hemolytic group A Streptococcus. The sequelae of untreated
                   group A hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis (GAS) are rare. Other conditions can
                   cause pharyngitis as well such as radiation, reflux, OC, and smoking.

Etiology

           The pharynx (nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and laryngopharynx) has a
           large accumulation of lymph tissue especially in the mucosa of the nasopharynx and
278  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

                   oropharynx. This lymph tissue can become inflamed or infected due to a number of
                   different reasons.

Viral Cause of Pharyngitis

                    Most episodes of pharyngitis are viral and self-limiting and can be caused by the
                      following:
                       Rhinovirus or adenovirus (most common): Usually associated with conjunctivitis
                       EBV or IM: See previous section on IM for more information
                       HSV: Vesicular lesions may be present
                       Influenza virus or parainfluenza virus: Associated with cold or croup symptoms
                       Coronavirus: Associated with common cold symptoms
                       Enterovirus: Usually small vesicles are present on the tonsils, tonsillar pillars,
                         uvula, or soft palate on examination
                       Respiratory syncytial virus: Usually accompanied with lower respiratory tract
                         symptoms

Bacterial Causes of Pharyngitis

                    GABHS (Streptococcus pyogens), is the most common bacterial cause of pharyngitis
                      (especially in children).
                       Incubation period for GABHS lasts from 12 hours to 4 days.

                    Other bacterial pathogens can include the following:
                       Staphylococcus aureus
                       Diplococcus pneumoniae
                       Corynebacterium diphtheriae
                       Bordetella pertussis
                       Haemophilus influenzae
                       Neisseria species

Other Causes of Pharyngitis

                    OC (thrush)
                    Allergies
                    GERD
                    Radiation treatment
                    Smoking
                    Neoplasia

Symptoms

                    Symptoms can include (but are not limited to) the following:
                       Sore throat
                       Dysphagia
                       Fever
                       Headache
                       Viral etiologies may be associated with upper respiratory infection (URI)-like
                         symptoms such as rhinnorhea, cough, chills, and/or myalgias.

Tests

                    Swabbing the throat and testing for GABHS by RADT and/or culture can be con-
                      sidered because the clinical features alone cannot discriminate between GABHS and
                                                                         PHARYNGITIS  279

                      a viral pathogen. NOTE: However, keep in mind to not use the presence of GABHS on
                        rapid strep screen as the only criteria and indication for treatment. Even in the absence
                        of a positive culture, antibiotic therapy can be of benefit when signs and symptoms of
                        infection are present.
                    In children and adolescents if the RADT is negative, consider a back-up throat cul-
                      ture, because in this population the risk of subsequent complications (although rare),
                      including rheumatic fever, PTA, and neuropsychiatric disorder (PANDAS), can occur.
                      However, it is not necessary to do a back-up culture if the RADT is positive.

Physical Examination Findings

                   The following may or may not be present:

                    Edema and erythema of pharyngeal mucosa
                    Tonsillar exudate
                    Anterior cervical lymphadenopathy
                    Tonsillopharyngeal or palatal petechiae
                    Scarlatiniform rash

                     NOTE: Be sure to ask about recent exposure to someone with strep pharyngitis.

Treatment

                    Viral: The focus of treatment is generally on treating the symptoms.
                       Rest
                       Fluids
                       Throat lozenges or sprays

                    Bacterial: If the RADT is positive or the patient is suspected of having GABHS, treat-
                      ment with penicillin or amoxicillin is the first-line antibiotic of choice.

                    Ibuprofen or acetaminophen is recommended for analgesia.
                    Saltwater gargle, warm liquids, and rest may be helpful in relieving symptoms.

              TABLE 13.6 PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR GROUP A
                     BETA-HEMOLYTIC STREPTOCOCCI PHARYNGITIS

Drug                             Dose                                          Duration

Penicillin V                      Children < 60 lbs: 250 mg two or three       10 days
                                    times daily

                                  Children > 60 lbs, adolescents, and adults:
                                    500 mg two or three times daily

Amoxicillin                       50 mg/kg once daily (maximum 1 g)            10 days

Benzathin penicillin              Children < 60 lbs: 375 mg                    One time
    G (intramuscular              Children > 60 lbs, adolescents, and              dose
    injection)
                                    adults: 750 mg

Patients Allergic to Penicillin

Clindamycin (Cleocin)             20 mg/kg three times a day (maximum          10 days
                                    1.8 g/day)

Azithromycin (Zithromax)  12 mg/kg once daily (maximum 500 mg)                 5 days

Clarithromycin (Biaxin)           15 mg/kg per day divided two times a         10 days
                                    day (maximum 250 mg two times)

From the American Heart Association and American Academy of Pediatrics.
280  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

TONGUE TIE (ANKYLOGLOSSIA)

Figure 1.10:     The tongue is an important oral structure that affects speech, swallowing, breastfeeding,
Oral cavity and  and mechanical skills such as licking the lips or kissing. Ankyloglossia (tongue tie) is a
oropharynx.      congenital anomaly characterized by an abnormally short, thick lingual frenulum, which
                 affects movement of the tongue. Ankyloglossia may cause breastfeeding, tongue mobility,
                 and speech difficulties; however, there are no standard guidelines or criteria for the man-
                 agement of ankyloglossia. It is a controversial subject and it also remains controversial
                 which tongue ties need to be managed surgically and which can be left for observation.

                        During the first 4 to 5 years of life, the oral cavity changes significantly in shape
                 and size. Ankyloglossia can be significant at birth, but usually the functional effects
                 tend to decrease with time and oral growth. Therefore, as the child grows, the sever-
                 ity of the ankyloglossia can become less apparent and the initial restrictions of lingual
                 frenulum movement are usually diminished. Despite this information, there is evi-
                 dence to suggest that in some cases surgical measures to release the frenulum can aid
                 in breastfeeding and speech problems.

                        Frenulectomy (also called frenotomy, frenectomy, and frenuloplasty) are the main
                 surgical treatment options to release or remove an ankyloglossia. No specific surgical
                 method is favored over the other.

                        A lactation specialist often refers infants for evaluation if the infant is having
                 trouble breastfeeding. Although ankyloglossia is a common cause of breastfeeding
                 difficulties, it is not the only cause. It is important to emphasize to the mother that breast-
                 feeding difficulties may or may not be improved post frenulectomy. If a short frenulum
                 was the contributing cause of the breastfeeding difficulties, then post frenulectomy,
                 the mother should see less compression of the nipple by the tongue, better attachment,
                 increased milk transfer, and less maternal pain. If a short frenulum was the contribut-
                 ing cause associated with articulation problems, then post frenulectomy the child with
                 ankyloglossia should see improvement with tongue mobility and speech.

                 PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: LINGUAL FRENULECTOMY

                 Indications

                  Persistent lactation difficulties despite efforts and instruction by a lactation
                    specialist

                  Speech impairment accompanied with ankyloglossia; however, other causes
                    of speech problems should be considered and fully assessed by a speech-lan-
                    guage pathologist.

                 Contraindications

                  Bleeding disorder

                 Risks

                  Unsuccessful at correcting the initial concern
                  Bleeding can persist for a short time after the procedure
                  Pain (short-lived)
                  Infection (rare)

                                                                                                                                      (continued)
                                                        TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT DISORDERS  281

          Procedure

          In an infant, a lingual frenulectomy can be done in the office with no anesthet-
          ics. The procedure takes less than a minute to perform. The frenulum is divided
          with scissors and since the frenulum is so thin, it generally requires no sutures.
          Tongue mobility is usually adequate enough to prevent adhesions from form-
          ing. However, in older children, a frenulectomy usually requires a trip to the
          operating room for general anesthesia to ensure adequate cooperation from the
          patient.

TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT DISORDERS

                   Temporomandibular disorders relate to discomfort of the temporomandibular
                   joint (TMJ). The exact etiology of TMJ disorders is unclear; however, it is thought
                   to be related to multiple different causes. The patient can have periods of spon-
                   taneous improvement for no specific reason. However, during symptomatic peri-
                   ods, the patient may present with debilitating symptoms, particularly otalgia. No
                   therapy has been shown to be superior over the other for the treatment of the TMJ
                   disorder.

Etiology

           Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis of the TMJ
           Facial asymmetry
           Malocclusion
           Trauma to the TMJ
           Bruxism (teeth grinding or clenching)
           Stress and/or anxiety
           Recent dental work

Symptoms

                    Severe pain in the orofacial region
                    Referred otalgia
                    Neck pain or stiffness
                    Headache
                    Clicking or grating within the TMJ during motion
                    Swelling in the surrounding TMJ tissues
                    Functional limitations of the mandible or trismus

Physical Examination Findings

                    Palpation of the TMJ and masseter muscles, which can be performed by placing a
                      finger over the TMJ or posterior to the tragus while the patient opens and closes
                      the mouth. Assess for clicking, grinding, creaking, or popping, which may indicate
                      intra-articular inflammation.
282  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

Imaging

               Radiological imaging of the TMJ has uncertain usefulness and should be only used
                 for severe or chronic symptoms or in the workup for surgical intervention.

Treatment

                    Bite appliances
                    Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications
                    Muscle relaxants
                    Moist heat or ice
                    Soft diet
                    Avoid extreme jaw movement (wide yawning, loud singing, gum chewing)
                    Relaxation techniques and stress management
                    Surgical modalities: Arthroplasty with or without total joint replacement is reserved

                      for failed nonsurgical modalities

Referral

               Refer the patient to a dentist who specializes in TMJ disorders. The dentist can
                 fit the patient with a proper dental occlusal splint. NOTE: Dental occlusal splints
                 primarily open the jaw, release muscle tension, and prevent teeth clenching. Inex-

                 pensive splints or mouthguards can be purchased at a local pharmacy or sporting

                 goods store.
               Consider referral to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon for further evaluation if sur-

                 gery is a consideration.

Websites and Resources
                    The TMJ Association: www.tmj.org

BENIGN NEOPLASMS OF THE OROPHARYNX

                   There are a variety of tumors and/or tumor-like lesions that can occur in the oral cavity
                   and oropharynx. Below is a list of the most commonly encountered benign lesions that
                   can occur in these areas.

Congenital Anomalies in the Newborn

Figure 2.9:   These benign conditions usually do not present until later on in life when the patient
Oral cavity,  complains of a globus sensation or swallowing abnormalities.
tongue, and
oropharynx.    Lingual thyroid: Thyroid tissue is found in the foramen cecum area of the tongue.
               Thyroglossal duct cyst: See Chapter 16: Evaluation and Management of Benign

                 Neck Conditions for more information.
               Vallecular cyst: Etiology unclear.
               Hemangioma: Benign lesion of blood vessels or vascular elements. Usually occur in

                 the tongue or the FOM. The majority of hemangiomas do not require treatment and
                 regress spontaneously during childhood.
                                                                   OROPHARYNGEAL CANCER  283

Dermoid Cyst
                    Can occur in the FOM, lips, and cheek mucosa.

Fibroma

            Overgrowths caused by chronic irritation
            May also be called fibroepithelial polyp or fibrous hyperplasia
            The lesion usually has a smooth overlying mucosa and is often pedunculated
            It can be located on any oral or oropharyngeal mucosa
            Treatment is excision and removing the irritating cause

Lipoma

            Benign neoplasm composed of fat cells. The cause of these lesions is unknown.

Papilloma

            Benign warty epithelial lesion composed of squamous epithelium. The cause is
              unknown. Papilloma seldom measure more than a few millimeters.

            Usually the soft palate and uvula are involved.

Pyogenic Granuloma

                    Benign capillary-rich lesion thought to be the result of an overreaction to minor
                      trauma.

                    Frequently involves the gingiva, lower lip, and dorsal surface of the tongue.

Torus Palatinus

                    Bony protrusion on the hard palate. Usually a clinical finding and no treatment is
                      needed.

                    It is possible for ulcers to form on the area of lesion due to repeated trauma.
                    Surgical removal can be considered if the lesion causes complications or interferes

                      with denture wear.

OROPHARYNGEAL CANCER

                   More than 90% of all tumors of the oral cavity and oropharynx are SCCs. Other malignan-
                   cies in this location are rare. Cigarette smoking and excessive alcohol consumption are
                   well-known risk factors. However, human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is also a risk
                   factor for the development of SCCs of the oropharynx (particularly cancers of the lingual
                   and palatine tonsils and BOT). It is not certain at this time whether the HPV vaccine (Cer-
                   varix and Gardasil) will decrease the incidence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer.

Overview

            The most common site of origin of oropharyngeal cancer is the anterior tonsillar
              pillar.
284  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

                    Cancer of the BOT tends to grow silently and deeply and is often larger than expected
                      when found.

                    Due to the abundant lymphoid tissue in the oropharynx, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
                      can occur in this region.

Distant Metastasis

                    Due to the rich lymphatic supply of the oral cavity and oropharynx, most patients
                      present with lymph node involvement.

Diagnosis

            Requires a positive biopsy taken from the site of concern or lesion present.
            Tumor HPV testing is considered for cancers of the oropharynx.

Treatment

                    Combined modality therapy by head and neck surgeon, radiation therapist, and
                      oncologist.

                    Dental evaluation is important prior to radiation therapy.
                    Surgical excision and radiation therapy is usually the primary treatment choice.

           STAGING CRITERIA

                            TNM STAGING CRITERIA: LIP AND ORAL CAVITY CANCER
           T Primary Tumor

                   TX Primary tumor cannot be assessed
                   T0 No evidence of primary tumor
                   Tis Carcinoma in situ
                   T1 Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension
                   T2 Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 4 cm in greatest dimension
                   T3 Tumor more than 4 cm in greatest dimension
                   T4a Moderately advanced local disease. Superficial erosion alone of bone/tooth

                                  socket by gingival primary is not sufficient to classify a tumor as T4
                   T4b Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades masticator space, pterygoid

                                  plates or skull base, and/or encases internal carotid artery
           N Regional Lymph Nodes

                   NX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
                   N0 No regional lymph node metastasis
                   N1 Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, 3 cm or less in greatest

                                  dimension

                                                                                                                                 (continued)
                                                  OROPHARYNGEAL CANCER  285

   N2 Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, more than 3 cm but not
                  more than 6 cm in greatest dimension; or in multiple ipsilateral lymph
                  nodes, none more than 6 cm in greatest dimension; or in bilateral or
                  contralateral lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

        N2a       Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node more than 3 cm

                      but not more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

        N2b       Metastasis in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none more than

                      6 cm in greatest dimension

        N2c       Metastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none more

                      than 6 cm in greatest dimension

   N3 Metastasis in a lymph node more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

M Distant Metastasis

   M0 No distant metastasis

           M1 Distant metastasis

Note: Nonepithelial tumors such as those of lymphoid tissue, soft tissue, bone, and cartilage are not
included.
Source: From American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC): TNM Staging Classification for the Lip and
Oral Cavity (7th ed., 2010).

STAGING CRITERIA

   TNM STAGING CRITERIA: OROPHARYNGEAL AND HYPOPHARYNGEAL CANCER

T  Primary Tumor

   TX   Primary tumor cannot be assessed

   T0   No evidence of primary tumor

   Tis  Carcinoma in situ

   Oropharynx

   T1   Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension

   T2   Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 4 cm in greatest dimension

   T3   Tumor more than 4 cm in greatest dimension or extension to lingual

             surface of epiglottis

   T4a Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades the larynx,
                   extrinsic muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, or
                   mandible. Mucosal extension to lingual surface of epiglottis from
                   primary tumors of the base of the tongue and vallecula does not
                   constitute invasion of larynx

   T4b Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades lateral pterygoid muscle,
                   pterygoid plates, lateral nasopharynx, or skull base or encases
                   carotid artery

                                                                    (continued)
286  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

STAGING CRITERIA (continued)

                  TNM STAGING CRITERIA: OROPHARYNGEAL
                          AND HYPOPHARYNGEAL CANCER

   Hypopharynx

   T1  Tumor limited to one subsite of hypopharynx and/or 2 cm or less in

                               greatest dimension

   T2  Tumor invades more than one subsite of hypopharynx or an adjacent

                               site, or measures more than 2 cm but not more than 4 cm in

                               greatest diameter without fixation of hemilarynx

   T3  Tumor more than 4 cm in greatest dimension or with fixation of

                               hemilarynx or extension to esophagus

   T4a Moderately advanced local disease. Tumor invades thyroid/cricoid
                   cartilage, hyoid bone, thyroid gland, or central compartment soft
                   tissue. Central compartment soft tissue includes prelaryngeal strap
                   muscles and subcutaneous fat

   T4b Very advanced local disease. Tumor invades prevertebral fascia,
                   encases carotid artery, or involves mediastinal structures

N  Regional Lymph Nodes: Oropharynx and Hypopharynx

   NX  Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

   N0  No regional lymph node metastasis

   N1  Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, 3 cm or less in greatest

                               dimension

   N2  Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, more than 3 cm but not

                               more than 6 cm in greatest dimension, or in multiple ipsilateral

                               lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in greatest dimension, or in

                               bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in

                               greatest dimension

       N2a Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node more than 3 cm
                       but not more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

       N2b Metastasis in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none more
                       than 6 cm in greatest dimension

       N2c Metastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none
                       more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

   N3  Metastasis in a lymph node more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

M  Distant Metastasis

   M0  No distant metastasis

   M1  Distant metastasis

Note: Nonepithelial tumors such as those of lymphoid tissue, soft tissue, bone, and cartilage are not
included (Includes base of tongue, soft palate, and uvula).
Source: From American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC): TNM Staging Classification for the
Oropharynx and Hypopharynx (7th ed., 2010).
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  287

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Akpan, A., & Morgan, R. (2002). Oral candidiasis. Postgraduate Medical Journal, 78(922), 455-459.
                   Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1742467/pdf/v078p00455.pdf.

            Alroud, S., Aljfout, Q., Almomani, S., Abu Nahleh, E., Alnawaiseh, S., & Alrawashdeh, M. (2012).
                   Peritonsillar abscess management; needle drainage versus incision and drainage comparison of
                   outcomes. International Journal of Biological and Medical Research, 3(4), 2545-2547. Retrieved from
                   http://www.biomedscidirect.com/journalfi les/IJBMRF2012917/peritonsillar_abscess_manage-
                   ment_needle_aspiration_versus_incision_and_drainage_comparison_of_outcomes.pdf.

            American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases. (2006). Red book: Report of the Com-
                   mittee on Infectious Diseases (p. 27). Elk Grove Village, IL: Author.

            American Joint Committee on Cancer. (2002). AJCC cancer staging manual (6th ed.). New York, NY:
                   Springer.

            American Society of Temporomandibular Joint Surgeons. (2008). Guidelines to the evaluation of impair-
                   ment of the oral and maxillofacial region. Retrieved from http://www.astmjs.org/impairment.html.

            Au, J., Patel, D., & Campbell, J. H. (2013). Oral lichen planus. Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Clinics of
                   North America, 25(1), 93-100, vii.

            Baugh, R. F., Archer, S. M., Mitchell, R. B., Rosenfeld, R. M., Amin, R., Burns, J. J., . . . American Academy
                   of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery Foundation. (2011). Clinical practice guideline: Ton-
                   sillectomy in children. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy
                   of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 144(1 Suppl), S1-S30.

            Blakley, B. W., & Magit, A. E. (2009). The role of tonsillectomy in reducing recurrent pharyngitis: A
                   systematic review. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of
                   Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 140(3), 291-297.

            Brocklehurst, P., Tickle, M., Glenny, A. M., Lewis, M. A., Pemberton, M. N., Taylor, J., . . . Yates, J. M.
                   (2012). Systemic interventions for recurrent aphthous stomatitis (mouth ulcers). Cochrane Database
                   of Systematic Reviews, 9, CD005411.

            Buescher, J. J. (2007). Temporomandibular joint disorders. American Family Physician, 76(10), 1477-
                   1482.

            Burton, M. J., & Glasziou, P. P. (2009). Tonsillectomy or adeno-tonsillectomy versus non-surgical treat-
                   ment for chronic/recurrent acute tonsillitis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review, 1, CD001802.

            Burton, M. J., Pollard, A. J., & Ramsden, J. D. (2010). Tonsillectomy for periodic fever, aphthous
                   stomatitis, pharyngitis and cervical adenitis syndrome (PFAPA). Cochrane Database of Systematic
                   Review, 9.

            Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2006). Epstein-Barr virus and infectious mononucleosis. 2006
                   diagnostic guidelines. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/ebv.htm.

            Chan, J., Edman, J. C., & Koltai, P. J. (2004). Obstructive sleep apnea in children. American Family Physi-
                   cian, 69(5), 1147-1154.

            Chan, E. S., Thornhill, M., & Zakrzewska, J. (2000). Interventions for treating oral lichen planus. Cochrane
                   Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, CD001168.

            Chavan, M., Jain, H., Diwan, N., Khedkar, S., Shete, A., & Durkar, S. (2012). Recurrent aphthous stomati-
                   tis: A review. Journal of Oral Pathology and Medicine: Official Publication of the International Association
                   of Oral Pathologists and the American Academy of Oral Pathology, 41(8), 577-583.

            Choby, B. A. (2009). Diagnosis and treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis. American Family Physician,
                   79(5), 383-390.

            Ebell, M. H. (2004). Epstein-Barr virus infectious mononucleosis. American Family Physician, 70(7), 1279-
                   1287.

            Galioto, N. (2008). Peritonsillar abscess. American Family Physician, 77(2), 199-202. Retrieved from
                   http://www.aafp.org/afp/2008/0115/p199.pdf.

            Gerber, M. A., Baltimore, R. S., Eaton, C. B., Gewitz, M., Rowley, A. H., Shulman, S. T., Taubert, K. A.,
                   Glore, R. J., Spiteri-Staines, K., & Paleri, V. (2009). A patient with dry mouth. Clinical Otolaryngol-
                   ogy: Official Journal of ENT-UK; Official Journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and
                   Cervico-Facial Surgery, 34(4), 358-363.

            Hermans, R. (2005). Oropharyngeal cancer. Cancer Imaging, 5(Spec No A), S52-S57. Retrieved from
                   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1665316/.

            Huber, M. A., & Hall, E. H. (1989). Glossodynia in patients with nutritional deficiencies. Ear, Nose, and
                   Throat Journal, 68(10), 771-775.
288  13. OROPHARYNX DISORDERS

            Johnson, R. F., Stewart, M. G., & Wright, C. C. (2003). An evidence-based review of the treatment of
                   peritonsillar abscess. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of
                   Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 128(3), 332-343.

            Kuribayashi, Y., Tsushima, F., Sato, M., Morita, K., & Omura, K. (2012). Recurrence patterns of oral leu-
                   koplakia after curative surgical resection: Important factors that predict the risk of recurrence and
                   malignancy. Journal of Oral Pathology and Medicine: Official Publication of the International Association
                   of Oral Pathologists and the American Academy of Oral Pathology, 41(9), 682-688.

            Lalakea, M. L., & Messner, A. H. (2003). Ankyloglossia: Does it matter? Pediatric Clinics of North America,
                   50(2), 381-397.

            Lavanya, N., Jayanthi, P., Rao, U., & Ranganathan, K. (2011). Oral lichen planus: An update on patho-
                   genesis and treatment. Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, 15(2), 127-132. Retrieved from
                   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3329692/.

            Lee, K. J. (2008). Essential otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery (9th ed., p. 539) New York: McGraw-
                   Hill.

            Luzuriaga, K., & Sullivan, J. L. (2010). Infectious mononucleosis. New England Journal of Medicine,
                   362(21), 1993-2000.

            Messner, A. H., & Lalakea, M. L. (2002). The effect of ankyloglossia on speech in children. Otolaryngol-
                   ogy--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck
                   Surgery, 127(6), 539-545.

            National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guilde-
                   lines). (2012). Head and neck cancers. Version 1. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/profession-
                   als/physician_gls/pdf/head-and-neck.pdf.

            Naylor, G. D., Marino, G. G., & Shumway, R. C. (1989). Glossodynia after radiation therapy and chemo-
                   therapy. Ear, Nose, and Throat Journal, 68(10), 751-757.

            Nierengarten, M. (2012). Post-operative pain in children undergoing tonsillectomy. ENT Today, 7(9).
                   Retrieved from http://www.enttoday.org/details/article/2544431/Post-Operative_Pain_in_Chil-
                   dren_Undergoing_Tonsillectomy.html. Accessed on April 16, 2013.

            Nishimura, T., & Suzuki, K. (2003). Anatomy of oral respiration: Morphology of the oral cavity and
                   pharynx. Acta Oto-Laryngologica. Supplementum, 550, 25-28.

            Ono, Y., Takahashi, H., Inagi, K., Nakayama, M., & Okamoto, M. (2002). Clinical study of benign lesions
                   in the oral cavity. Acta Oto-Laryngologica. Supplementum, 547, 79-84.

            Paradise, J. L., Bluestone, C. D., Bachman, R. Z., Colborn, D. K., Bernard, B. S., Taylor, F. H., . . . Friday,
                   G. A. (1984). Efficacy of tonsillectomy for recurrent throat infection in severely affected children.
                   Results of parallel randomized and nonrandomized clinical trials. New England Journal of Medicine,
                   310(11), 674-683.

            Patton, L. L., Siegel, M. A., Benoliel, R., & De Laat, A. (2007). Management of burning mouth syndrome:
                   Systematic review and management recommendations. Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology,
                   Oral Radiology, and Endodontics, 103 Suppl, S39.e1-S39.e13.

            Preeti, L., Magesh, K., Rajkumar, K., & Karthik, R. (2011). Recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Journal of Oral
                   and Maxillofacial Pathology: JOMFP, 15(3), 252-256.

            Reamy, B. V., Derby, R., & Bunt, C. W. (2010). Common tongue conditions in primary care. American
                   Family Physician, 81(5), 627-634.

            Reichart, P., & Philipsen, H. (2005). Oral erythroplakia--a review. Oral Oncology, 41, 551-561. Retrieved
                   from http://www.exodontia.info/files/Oral_Oncology_2004._Oral_Erythroplakia_-_A_Review.
                   pdf.

            Ricke, L. A., Baker, N. J., Madlon-Kay, D. J., & DeFor, T. A. (2005). Newborn tongue-tie: Prevalence and
                   effect on breast-feeding. Journal of the American Board of Family Practice/American Board of Family
                   Practice, 18(1), 1-7.

            Shaikh, N., Swaminathan, N., & Hooper, E. G. (2012). Accuracy and precision of the signs and symp-
                   toms of streptococcal pharyngitis in children: A systematic review. Journal of Pediatrics, 160(3),
                   487-493.e3.

            Shulman, S., Bisno, A., Clegg, H., Gerber, M., Kaplan, E., Lee, G., et al. (September 2012). Clinical prac-
                   tice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of Group A streptotoccal pharyngitis: 2012
                   Update by the Infectious Disease Society of America. Clinical Infectious Diseases Advanced Access.
                   Retrieved from http://www.idsociety.org/uploadedFiles/IDSA/Guidelines-Patient_Care/PDF_
                   Library/2012%20Strep%20Guideline.pdf. April 20, 2013.

            Speciali, J. G., & Stuginski-Barbosa, J. (2008). Burning mouth syndrome. Current Pain and Headache
                   Reports, 12(4), 279-284.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  289

Steyer, T. (2002). Peritonsillar abscess: Diagnosis and treatment. American Family Physician, 65(1), 93-96.
      Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/2002/0101/p93.pdf.

Suter, V. G., & Bornstein, M. M. (2009). Ankyloglossia: Facts and myths in diagnosis and treatment.
      Journal of Periodontology, 80(8), 1204-1219.

Tas, D. A., Yakar, T., Sakalli, H., & Serin, E. (2013). Impact of Helicobacter pylori on the clinical course of
      recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Journal of Oral Pathology and Medicine: Official Publication of the Inter-
      national Association of Oral Pathologists and the American Academy of Oral Pathology, 42(1), 89-94.

U. S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2013). FDA Drug Safety Communication. Safety review
      update of codeine use in children; new boxed warning and contraindication on use after tonsil-
      lectomy and/or adenoidectomy. Safety announcement February 20, 2013. Retrieved from http://
      www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm339112.htm. April 16, 2013.

Valera, F. C., Travitzki, L. V., Mattar, S. E., Matsumoto, M. A., Elias, A. M., & Anselmo-Lima, W. T. (2003).
      Muscular, functional and orthodontic changes in pre school children with enlarged adenoids and
      tonsils. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 67(7), 761-770.

Visvanathan, V., & Nix, P. (2010). Managing the patient presenting with xerostomia: A review. Interna-
      tional Journal of Clinical Practice, 64(3), 404-407.

Wessels, M. R. (2011). Clinical practice. Streptococcal pharyngitis. New England Journal of Medicine,
      364(7), 648-655.
