14  Evaluation and
    Management of
    Sleep Apnea

SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING

                   Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) is a group of related disorders that describes abnor-
                   mal breathing during sleep. Examples include apneas (cessation of breathing for 10
                   seconds or more), hypopneas (abnormally slow or shallow breathing), frequent loud
                   snoring without apnea or hypopnea, and other respiratory-related arousals. Obstruc-
                   tive sleep apnea (OSA), also commonly called obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
                   (OSAS), is the most common of these disorders.

                          There are multiple risk factors for the development of OSA, which include
                   weight; neck size; family history; and structural factors such as airway length; position
                   of the jaw; size of the tongue, adenoids, or tonsils; and/or the presence of a low soft
                   palate or the impact of a deviated septum on the nasal passageway. There is consider-
                   able variation in the severity of sleep apnea from person to person, night to night, and
                   this depends on the risk factors for OSA, duration of sleep, body position, time spent
                   in different stages of sleep, and other factors such as alcohol consumption and sedative
                   medications before going to bed.

Signs and Symptoms of Obstructive Sleep Apnea

                    Snoring
                    Gasping or choking while sleeping
                    Nocturia
                    Morning headaches
                    Decreased concentration
                    Daytime sleepiness not explained by any other factor. NOTE: This is not a common

                        finding in young children.
                    Witness apnea or breathing interruptions

Screening Questionnaire Tools for Obstructive Sleep Apnea

                    Cleveland Questionnaire
                    Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)
                    Berline Questionnaire for OSA

                          OSA can cause direct consequences to the rest of the body over time if left
                   untreated. The consequences occur as a result of the repetitive collapse of the upper air-
                   way leading to hypoxemia and hypercapnia, which has an adverse effect on mortality
                   and morbidity. This outcome can cause undo stress and inflammation on the body
                   and in the long term can contribute to hypertension, stroke, myocardial infarction,
                   decreased daytime alertness, and cor pulmonale.
292  14. SLEEP APNEA

POLYSOMNOGRAM TESTING

                   If SDB is suspected, the patient must be evaluated by a polysomnogram (PSG), which
                   measures multiple parameters during sleep to help determine the cause. A PSG con-
                   sists of monitoring a person while sleeping in a controlled facility environment for a
                   minimum of 6 hours. There is no clinical test or finding on physical examination that
                   will predict the severity of OSA. Therefore, objective testing is required. In the majority
                   of people, there usually is not just one contributing cause of OSA or one single manage-
                   ment option to resolve OSA.

                          The PSG measures various parameters to help determine if OSA exists:

                    Electroencephalogram (EEG): Records the brain's electrical activity
                    Electroculogram (EOG): Records eye movements
                    Chin electromyogram: Records the changes in resting muscle activity
                    Airflow
                    Respiratory effort
                    Oxygen saturation
                    Electrocardiogram (ECG) or heart rate
                    Limb movements
                    The frequency of obstructive events reported as the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) or

                      respiratory disturbance index (RDI). NOTE: No consensus exists on whether the AHI
                        or RDI should be the standard index used to determine treatment. Of note, RDI is prefer-
                        able to the AHI to some clinicians because it includes respiratory event-related arousals
                        (RERAs) and AHI does not.

Apnea-Hypopnea Index

                    The number of apneas plus hypopneas that occur per hour of sleep

Respiratory Disturbance Index

                    The RDI means the average number of respiratory disturbances--obstructive apneas
                      plus hypopneas plus RERAs--per hour of sleep

                    The formula to determine RDI = obstructive apneas + hypopneas + RERAs × 60/
                      total sleep time (TST) in minutes

Determining Obstructive Sleep Apnea Severity

                   According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services criteria for the positive
                   diagnosis and treatment of OSA using either AHI or RDI criteria:

                    OSA severity:
                       Normal: Less than five events/hour
                       Mild: Five to fifteen events/hour
                       Moderate: 15 to 30 events/hour
                       Severe: Greater than 30 events/hour

                    The diagnosis of OSA is confirmed if the AHI on PSG is 15 events/hour or greater
                      than five events/hour accompanied with signs and symptoms of OSA. NOTE: Five or
                        more events/hour accompanied with symptoms of OSA is abnormal enough to warrant
                        treatment with a CPAP device to keep the airway open.
                        EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA IN PEDIATRICS  293

IN-HOME PORTABLE MONITORING EVALUATION

                   In-home portable monitoring (PM) evaluation is an alternative to PSG testing, which
                   is done in a monitored facility. Just like PSG testing, PM can be used to diagnose OSA;
                   however, it should be done in combination with a comprehensive sleep evaluation. A
                   practitioner must supervise the results received from PM evaluation. The practitioner
                   should have board certification in sleep medicine or fulfills the eligibility criteria for
                   the sleep medicine certification examination. Either way, there are certain criteria that
                   need to be met in order to accurately interpret the results of PM evaluation.

                          Patients who present with a strong suggestive history and physical examination
                   findings of moderate to severe OSA who have no other associated medical disorders
                   may benefit most from PM versus in-facility PSG testing. There are few data on the use
                   of PM in the pediatric or older (greater than 65 years of age) populations.

                          PM in lieu of in-facility evaluation should not be done on patients with heart or
                   lung problems such as moderate to severe pulmonary disease, neuromuscular disease,
                   or congestive heart failure. If there is suspicion for other types of sleep disorders such
                   as central sleep apnea, periodic limb movement disorder, insomnia, narcolepsy, and so
                   on, in-facility PSG monitoring should be done.

                          Once a qualified person has evaluated the PM results, the results should be
                   combined with information obtained in the clinical evaluation to determine whether
                   in-facility PSG testing is required to further establish the diagnosis of OSA or if positive
                   pressure airway treatment should be automatically initiated. PM evaluation can also
                   be done to monitor the response to nonpositive pressure airway treatments for OSA,
                   which include oral appliances (OAs), upper airway surgery, and weight loss.

POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE DEVICE

                   Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is the gold standard treatment for OSA.
                   CPAP pressures vary among individuals and change over time; thus, the CPAP must
                   be titrated in the sleep laboratory before using the device to determine the optimal
                   level and it needs to be periodically adjusted thereafter by the sleep study specialist. A
                   CPAP can be used with a nasal, oral, or oronasal device.

Websites

          American Academy of Sleep Medicine: www.aasmnet.org
          American Sleep Apnea Association: www.sleepapnea.org
          National Sleep Foundation: www.sleepfoundation.org
          Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Sleep and Sleep Disorders: A Public Health

             Challenge: www.cdc.gov/sleep
          National Institutes of Health National Center on Sleep Disorders Research: www.nhlbi.

             nih.gov/sleep

EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE
SLEEP APNEA IN PEDIATRICS

                   According to the American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,
                   approximately 10% of children snore regularly but only 2% to 4% of the pediatric
294  14. SLEEP APNEA

History  population has OSA. However, mild SDB or snoring can cause many of the same prob-
         lems as OSA in children.

                According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, OSA in children is a disorder
         of breathing during sleep characterized by prolonged partial upper airway obstruc-
         tion and/or intermittent complete obstruction (OSA) that disrupts normal ventilation
         during sleep and normal sleep patterns accompanied by signs or symptoms. Keep in
         mind that history and physical examination alone are poor predictors of OSA severity
         in children and/or risks of postoperative complications.

         If the answer is yes to any of the following questions, the child may have SDB and a
         more focused evaluation needs to be done:

          Does the child snore and if so, is snoring present 3 or more nights per week? NOTE:
            All children/adolescents should be screened for snoring. Almost all children who have
            OSA snore.

          Does labored breathing or apnea exist during sleep?
          Does the child have interrupted sleep by gasping and/or snorting?
          Is the child irritable and/or unusually sleepy during the day?
          Does the child have difficulty concentrating in school or poor school performance?
          Does the child have any hyperactivity or attention deficit disorders or behavioral

            issues?
          Does the child have unexplainable frequent bedwetting? NOTE: SDB can cause

            increased nighttime urine production due to frequent arousals, leading to bedwetting.

Physical Examination

                   If any of the following are present (accompanied with a positive history suggestive of
                   SDB), the child may have OSA:

                    Tonsil and/or adenoid hypertrophy. NOTE:Tonsil size alone cannot be used to predict
                        the presence of OSA.

                    Adenoid facies: A long face and open-mouth posture
                    Micrognathia: Jaw is undersized
                    Retrognathia: Recessed lower jaw
                    Obesity defined as BMI greater than 95th percentile for age and gender. NOTE: OSA

                        can be related to large fat deposits around the neck and throat that can narrow the
                        airway.

Polysomnography in Children

                    PSG can occasionally produce false readings in children. Therefore, borderline or
                      normal PSG test results may still lead to a diagnosis of SDB based on parental obser-
                      vation, history, and physical examination findings.

                    The diagnosis of OSA in children has not been standardized, although there is some
                      consensus that a threshold of greater than 1 on the AHI is an indication of OSA (Au,
                      2009; Chan, Edman, and Koltai, 2004; Spruyt, 2012).

Indications for Polysomnography in Children

                    According to Mitchell, Pereira, and Friedman (2006), only approximately 10% of oto-
                      laryngologists request a sleep study in children with SDB prior to surgery.
                            EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA IN ADULTS  295

                    The majority of otolaryngologists rely on a clinical diagnosis of OSA rather than PSG
                      when recommending adenotonsillectomy for SDB in children or when the diagnosis
                      of OSA is in doubt. However, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
                      objective testing with PSG before adenotonsillectomy for SDB in children.

                    Due to the importance of improving diagnostic accuracy in high-risk populations,
                      PSG testing should be considered in the following children:
                       Those with associated comorbidities such as obesity, Down syndrome, craniofa-
                         cial abnormalities, neuromuscular disorders, sickle cell disease, or mucopolysac-
                         charidoses.

Consequences of Untreated Pediatric Sleep-Disordered Breathing

                    May not produce enough growth hormone, resulting in abnormally slow growth
                      and development

                    May cause the body to have increased resistance to insulin, which can contribute to
                      obesity

                    May cause excessive daytime fatigue leading to decreased physical activity, which
                      can contribute to obesity

                    May be associated with an increased risk of hypertension, neurocognitive impair-
                      ment, behavioral problems, cardiac dysfunction, and/or failure to thrive

Surgical Treatment Options for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Children

                    Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, if needed, is considered first-line treatment for
                      pediatric OSA if the symptoms are significant and the tonsils and/or adenoids are
                      enlarged.

Postoperative Polysomnography Indications

                    Children with mild OSA preoperatively should have clinical evaluation following
                      adenotonsillectomy to assess for residual symptoms of OSA. If there is suggestion
                      for persistent OSA, PSG should be performed.

Continuous Positive Airway Pressure Treatment for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Children

                    CPAP is recommended as treatment for OSA if an adenotonsillectomy is not per-
                      formed or if OSAS persists postoperatively.

Nonsurgical Options for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Children

                    Children with OSA who are treated with an OA should have clinical followup and
                      PSG testing to assess success of treatment with the device in place.

EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE
SLEEP APNEA IN ADULTS

History

          See signs and symptoms of OSA earlier in this chapter.
296  14. SLEEP APNEA

Epworth Sleepiness Scale

                    The ESS is a set of eight questions that evaluate a person's general degree of daytime
                      sleepiness. The ESS has become the standard method for evaluating this assessment
                      and it is a good way to evaluate the outcome of CPAP therapy.

                    For each question, ask, "What is the chance that you could doze off or fall asleep in
                      this situation?"

                    Each question is rated on a scale of 0 to 3 with 3 being the highest chance of dozing
                      off or falling asleep.

                    Maximum score = 24
                    Score greater than 10 indicates moderate to high probability of OSA.

Physical Examination

Figure 2.10:     Evaluate for the following:
Mallampati          Obesity (BMI > 30)
Classification      Presence of retrognathia
Score.              Presence of micrognathia
                    Increased neck circumference (> 17 inches in men, > 15 inches in women)
                    Mallampati score of 3 or 4
                    Lateral peritonsillar narrowing or pharyngeal wall collapse
                    Presence of macroglossia
                    Tonsillar hypertrophy
                    Elongated or enlarged uvula
                    Nasal abnormalities (septal deviation, polyps/mass, valve abnormalities, tur-
                      binate hypertrophy)
                    Large lingual tonsils
                    The extent of base of tongue (BOT) prominence or relaxation

                On fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy document the following:

                 Muller's maneuver:
                    Evaluates the level of collapse on three levels: (a) soft palatal collapse, (b) lateral
                      pharyngeal wall collapse, and (c) BOT collapse. NOTE: Diagnosing which levels are
                       responsible for airway collapse can be difficult.
                    When the fiberoptic scope is at the retropalatal area (posterior soft palate, lateral
                      and posterior pharyngeal walls), have the patient close the mouth while the nose
                      is pinched. Ask the patient to breathe in against the closed mouth and nose. Eval-
                      uate the retropalatal area for collapse and document the amount of collapse as a
                      percentage (e.g., 75%). NOTE: Lateral pharyngeal wall collapse plays a significant
                       role in OSA. However, it is difficult to surgically create adequate lateral pharyngeal

                       wall tension to prevent its collapse. Patients who primarily have a lateral wall col-

                       lapse likely would not benefit from uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) surgery.
                    Advance the fiberoptic scope to view the BOT. This area is also called the retro-

                      lingual or retroglossal area. NOTE: Patients with hypopharyngeal collapse would be
                       expected to have a poor outcome if a UPPP was done, because this surgery does not

                       affect the lower hypopharyngeal airway.

Classification Patterns of Airway Narrowing or Collapse

                    Type I: Collapse involves narrowing of the retropalatal region
                    Type II: Includes narrowing or collapse of both the retropalatal and retrolingual

                      areas
                    Type III: Collapse occurs only in the retrolingual area
                                                   SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA  297

Oral Appliances

                    Oral Appliances (OAs) enlarge the upper airway and/or decrease upper airway col-
                      lapsibility, which can improve upper airway muscle tone.

                    OAs are indicated for use in patients with mild to moderate OSA (AHI < 30) who
                      prefer OAs to CPAP, or who do not respond to CPAP, are not appropriate candidates
                      for CPAP, or who fail CPAP or behavioral measures such as weight loss. However,
                      some patients find OAs to be intrusive, inconvenient, or intolerable.

                    Dental personnel should fit OAs.
                    To ensure adequate benefit from OAs, patients should have a PSG or PM evaluation

                      with the OA in place.
                    Intolerance or improper use is a common problem with OAs.
                    OAs may aggravate temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disease and may cause dental

                      misalignment and discomfort.

Types of Oral Appliances

                    Mandibular repositioning appliances (MRA) cover the upper and lower teeth and
                      hold the mandible in an advanced position with respect to the resting position.

                    Tongue-retaining devices (TRD) hold only the tongue in a forward position with
                      respect to the resting position, without mandibular repositioning.

Weight Loss

                    Encourage exercise because weight loss can improve the AHI in obese patients with
                      OSA.

                    After substantial weight loss (i.e., 10% or more of body weight), a follow-up PSG test
                      is routinely indicated to ascertain whether CPAP therapy is still needed or whether
                      adjustments in the CPAP level are necessary.

Continuous Positive Airway Pressure Treatment

                    CPAP is the gold standard treatment for OSA.
                    Follow-up PSG testing or PM evaluation is not routinely indicated in patients

                      treated with CPAP whose symptoms continue to be resolved with the use of the
                      CPAP device.

Pharmacotherapy Adjunctive Options

                    Topical nasal corticosteroids may improve the AHI in patients with OSA.

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA

                   CPAP therapy remains the first-line treatment for OSA. However, a significant pro-
                   portion of patients are unable to tolerate the device and seek alternative treatments.

Surgical Treatment Options for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Children

                    Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, if needed, are considered first-line treatment for
                      pediatric OSA if the symptoms are significant and the tonsils and/or adenoids are
                      enlarged.
298  14. SLEEP APNEA

                                           TABLE 14.1 SURGICAL OPTIONS FOR OBSTRUCTIVE
                                                             SLEEP APNEA BY LOCATION

                        Nasal Procedures

                         Septoplasty or turbinate reduction (i.e., Septo/BPRIT: Septoplasty/bilateral partial
                            reduction of inferior turbinates)

                         Functional rhinoplasty
                         Nasal polypectomy
                         Nasal valve surgery

                        Nasopharyngeal Procedure

                         Adenoidectomy

                        Oral Procedures

                         Palatal implants
                         Mandibular advancement and genioglossal advancement:

                             Repositions soft tissue to improve retrolingual collapse
                         Maxillomandibular advancement:

                             Involves simultaneous advancement of the maxilla and mandible through
                               surgical openings

                             Intended to improve retropalatal and retrolingual collapse

                        Oropharyngeal Procedures

                         Tonsillectomy
                         Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP)

                             Enlarges the retropalatal airway by excising the uvula and trimming the soft
                               palate

                             Can be done with or without tonsillectomy
                             Intended to improve retropharyngeal collapse

                        NOTE: Keep in mind that for patients with moderate-severe OSA, UPPP with or
                        without tonsillectomy usually does not resolve OSA completely. The patient usually
                        requires continued CPAP therapy.

                        Hypopharyngeal Procedures

                         Lingual tonsillectomy
                         Tongue and/or mandibular advancement, stabilization, or reduction
                         Laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty (LAUP): Laser ablation of the uvula

                        NOTE: A LAUP is not routinely recommended as a surgical option for OSA because
                        it generally does not normalize the AHI.

                         Radiofrequency ablation (RFA):
                             For the treatment of mild to moderate OSA
                             Involves the use of low-intensity radiofrequency energy to shrink the size of the
                               uvula, soft palate, and/or tongue

                        Laryngeal Procedures

                         Hyoid suspension
                         Tracheostomy:

                             Bypasses the upper airway obstruction
                             For obvious reasons, consider only when no other option exists
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  299

Surgical Options for Obstructive Sleep Apnea

                     NOTE: Other than a tracheostomy and maxillary or mandibular advancement, most other
                     sleep apnea surgeries are rarely curative for moderate to severe OSA but may improve
                     clinical outcomes.

                  Bariatric Surgery
                    Bariatric surgery is an option to achieve major weight loss. It is indicated with a BMI

                      greater than or equal to 40 kg/m2 when dietary attempts at weight control have been
                      ineffective.

Risks for Respiratory Compromise in Children

                    Younger than 3 years of age
                    Respiratory infection (upper respiratory tract) on the day of surgery
                    Severe OSAS on PSG (AHI  10 obstructive events/hour, oxygen saturation < 80%,

                      or both)
                    Cardiac complications of OSA
                    Failure to thrive
                    Obesity
                    Craniofacial abnormalities
                    Neuromuscular abnormalities

Risks for Respiratory Compromise in Adults

                    If lowest oxygen saturation (either on preoperative PSG testing or during observa-
                      tion in the recovery room postoperatively) is less than 80%

                    An AHI greater than or equal to 24 events/hour on PSG testing
                    Patients with significant hypercapnia on PSG testing (peak PCO2  60 mmHg)

Postoperative Reassessment for Obstructive Sleep Apnea

                    All patients should be reassessed clinically for OSAS-related signs and symptoms
                      6 to 8 weeks after surgery. This is to determine whether a repeat PSG evaluation or
                      continued treatment with CPAP device is needed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Al Lawati, N. M., Patel, S. R., & Ayas, N. T. (2009). Epidemiology, risk factors, and consequences of
                   obstructive sleep apnea and short sleep duration. Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases, 51(4),
                   285-293.

            Au, C. T., & Li, A. M. (2009). Obstructive sleep breathing disorders. Pediatric Clinics of North America,
                   56(1), 243-259, xii.

            Aurora, R. N., Casey, K. R., Kristo, D., Auerbach, S., Bista, S. R., Chowdhuri, S., . . . American Academy
                   of Sleep Medicine. (2010). Practice parameters for the surgical modifications of the upper airway
                   for obstructive sleep apnea in adults. Sleep, 33(10), 1408-1413.

            Aurora, R. N., Zak, R. S., Karippot, A., Lamm, C. I., Morgenthaler, T. I., Auerbach, S. H., . . . American
                   Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2011). Practice parameters for the respiratory indications for poly-
                   somnography in children. Sleep, 34(3), 379-388.
300  14. SLEEP APNEA

            Bhattacharjee, R., Kheirandish-Gozal, L., Spruyt, K., Mitchell, R. B., Promchiarak, J., Simakajornboon,
                   N., . . . Gozal, D. (2010). Adenotonsillectomy outcomes in treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in
                   children: A multicenter retrospective study. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medi-
                   cine, 182(5), 676-683.

            Chan, J., Edman, J. C., & Koltai, P. J. (2004). Obstructive sleep apnea in children. American Family Physi-
                   cian, 69(5), 1147-1154.

            Collop, N. A., Anderson, W. M., Boehlecke, B., Claman, D., Goldberg, R., Gottlieb, D. J., . . . Portable
                   Monitoring Task Force of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2007). Clinical guidelines
                   for the use of unattended portable monitors in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea in adult
                   patients. Portable Monitoring Task Force of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Journal of
                   Clinical Sleep Medicine: JCSM: Official Publication of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 3(7),
                   737-747.

            Epstein, L. J., Kristo, D., Strollo, P. J., Friedman, N., Malhotra, A., Patil, S. P., . . . Adult Obstructive Sleep
                   Apnea Task Force of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2009). Clinical guideline for the
                   evaluation, management and long-term care of obstructive sleep apnea in adults. Journal of Clinical
                   Sleep Medicine: JCSM: Official Publication of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 5(3), 263-276.

            Johns, M. W. (1991). A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness scale.
                   Sleep, 14(6), 540-545.

            Kimoff, R. J. (2011). To treat or not to treat: Can a portable monitor reliably guide decision-making in
                   sleep apnea? American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 184(8), 871-872.

            Kotagal, S., Nichols, C. D., Grigg-Damberger, M. M., Marcus, C. L., Witmans, M. B., Kirk, V. G. . . . Hoban,
                   T. F. (2012). Non-respiratory indications for polysomnography and related procedures in children:
                   An evidence-based review. Sleep, 35(11), 1451-1466.

            Marcus, C. L., Brooks, L. J., Draper, K. A., Gozal, D., Halbower, A. C., Jones, J., . . . American Academy
                   of Pediatrics. (2012). Diagnosis and management of childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
                   Pediatrics, 130(3), 576-584.

            Mitchell, R. B., Pereira, K. D., & Friedman, N. R. (2006). Sleep-disordered breathing in children: Survey
                   of current practice. Laryngoscope, 116(6), 956-958.

            Morgenthaler, T. I., Kapen, S., Lee-Chiong, T., Alessi, C., Boehlecke, B., Brown, T., . . . American Academy
                   of Sleep Medicine. (2006). Practice parameters for the medical therapy of obstructive sleep apnea.
                   Sleep, 29(8), 1031-1035.

            Owens, J. A. (2011). Update in pediatric sleep medicine. Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine, 17(6),
                   425-430.

            Parker, N. P., & Walner, D. L. (2011). Trends in the indications for pediatric tonsillectomy or adenotonsil-
                   lectomy. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 75(2), 282-285.

            Roland, P. S., Rosenfeld, R. M., Brooks, L. J., Friedman, N. R., Jones, J., Kim, T. W., . . . American Acad-
                   emy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery Foundation. (2011). Clinical practice guideline:
                   Polysomnography for sleep-disordered breathing prior to tonsillectomy in children. Otolaryngol-
                   ogy--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck
                   Surgery, 145(1 Suppl), S1-S15.

            Spruyt, K. (2012). Pediatric sleep disordered breathing: Criteria and spectrum of disease. In L. Kheiran-
                   dish-Gozal & D. Gozal (Eds), Pediatric sleep disordered breathing in children: A comprehensive clinical
                   guide to evaluation and treatment. New York, NY: Springer.

            Wise, M. S., Nichols, C. D., Grigg-Damberger, M. M., Marcus, C. L., Witmans, M. B., Kirk, V. G., . . .
                   Hoban, T. F. (2011). Executive summary of respiratory indications for polysomnography in chil-
                   dren: An evidence-based review. Sleep, 34(3), 389-398AW.
