15                Evaluation and
                  Management of
                  Salivary Gland Conditions

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SALIVARY GLAND HYPERTROPHY

Figure 1.9:       The majority of salivary gland diseases start with hypertrophy of the affected gland(s).
Salivary glands.  A wide variety of conditions can cause salivary gland hypertrophy. It is more com-
                  monly seen in one gland; however, bilateral hypertrophy can occur as well.

Most Common

                  Acute Sialadenitis
                    Acute onset of painful swelling of the affected gland
                    Usually unilateral and most commonly the result of a ductal infection
                    For more information see Sialadenitis within this chapter.

                  Chronic Sialadenitis
                    Chronic, recurring, often painful swelling/inflammation of salivary gland(s) tissue.

                        NOTE: It is a vicious cycle, because chronic swelling of the gland(s) contributes to
                        recurring issues with the normal drainage system of the gland(s), which can increase
                        the likelihood of infection.
                    For more information see Sialadenitis within this chapter.

                  Sialadenosis
                    Key features: Noninflammatory, painless, and bilateral
                    Affects mostly the parotid glands
                    Can be associated with metabolic disorders such as diabetes mellitus, hypothyroid-

                      ism, starvation, menopause, alcohol abuse, certain medications (diuretics), and so on.

                  Viral Parotitis
                    The most common cause of viral parotitis is mumps (paramyxovirus). Signs

                      and symptoms of mumps develop after a 2- to 3-week incubation period and
                      often resemble the symptoms of the flu.
                      NOTE: Mumps primarily affect the parotid gland. The virus is spread by airborne
                        respiratory droplets and is highly contagious.
                    The mumps mostly affects children less than 15 years of age; however, routine vac-
                      cinations have decreased the incidence. It usually resolves on its own within 7 to
                      10 days.
                    Other viral etiologies include HIV, cytomegalovirus, coxsackievirus, echovirus,
                      Epstein-Barr virus, and parainfluenza and influenza strains.
302  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

                  Benign Massenteric Hypertrophy
                    Due to the bulk of the superficial lobe of the parotid gland resting over the masseter

                      muscle, this condition can be mistaken for an infectious or inflammatory condition
                      of the salivary glands.

Autoimmune Conditions

                  Sarcoidosis
                    Although sarcoidosis occurs in multiple systemic organs, it can affect the salivary

                      glands as well. It is an abnormal growth of inflammatory cells (granulomas) that can
                      form as nodules in the affected organs.
                    The parotid gland(s) are the most commonly affected salivary gland.
                    Usually painless and more often bilateral than unilateral
                    For more information see Granulomatous Diseases Associated With Sialoadenitis
                      within this chapter.

                  Sjogren's Syndrome
                    Autoimmune disorder that can cause salivary gland enlargement
                    The diagnosis is confirmed with a biopsy of the salivary gland and detection with a lab

                      test showing autoantibodies, anti-Ro (anti-SS-A) and anti-La (anti-SS-B) in the blood.
                    For more information, see Sjogren's Syndrome within this chapter.

                  Wegener's Granulomatosis
                    Form of vasculitis, which is an autoimmune attack caused by an abnormal circulat-

                      ing antibody called ANCAs (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) against small-
                      and medium-sized blood vessels
                    Involvement of the salivary gland(s) in Wegener's disease is rare and does not usu-
                      ally occur as an isolated finding.
                    For more information, see Granulomatous Diseases Associated With Sialoadenitis
                      within this chapter.

Tumors or Masses

                  Lymphoma
                    Although rare, the majority of major salivary gland lymphomas are B-cell type, non-

                      Hodgkin's lymphoma.

                  Pleomorphic Adenoma
                    The most common type of salivary gland tumor and the most common tumor of the

                      parotid gland
                    Painless, slow-growing mass
                    For more information, see Pleomorphic Adenoma section within this chapter.

                  Warthin's Tumor
                    Second most common type of salivary gland tumor that mostly affects the parotid

                      gland
                    Painless, slow-growing mass
                    For more information, see Warthin's Tumor section within this chapter.

                  Radiation-Induced Sialadenitis
                    Following a total thyroidectomy after the diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma, treatment

                      may include administration of radioactive iodine (RAI). The RAI accumulates in
                                                                                                     SIALADENITIS  303

                      the thyroid tissue; however, it can also concentrate in the salivary glands, leading to
                      damage of the glandular tissue.
                    Parotid glands are affected the most with transient bilateral parotid swelling. It can
                      occur following RAI administration or start months later.
                    Sialogogues such as sour candies and Salagen (pilocarpine) have been known to
                      help.

Rare and Unusual Conditions

                  Pneumoparotid
                    Pneumoparotid is the presence of gas in the salivary ducts, most commonly affecting

                      the parotid gland.
                    It can occur with increased intraoral pressure. For instance, it can occur when play-

                      ing wind instruments, while coughing, positive-pressure ventilation during anes-
                      thesia, or when undergoing dental work.
                    The affected parotid gland(s) may be unilateral or bilateral and they may be painless
                      or tender and have warmth or erythema.
                    On physical examination, there can be crepitus on palpation of the gland, frothy saliva,
                      or air bubbles emanating from the Stensen's duct during massage of the gland.
                    Ultrasound, CT scan, and/or sialography will all show air within the parotid gland
                      and/or duct.

                  Polycystic Disease of the Parotid Glands
                    Rare, recurring painless swelling of the affected salivary gland(s)
                    The disease usually affects female patients and numerous various-sized benign cysts

                      cause the hypertrophy

                  HIV Sialopathy
                    Also known as benign lymphoepithelial cysts
                    Rare; seen in approximately 5% of HIV-positive patients (Gadodia, Bhalla, Sharma,

                      Thakar, & Parshad, 2011)
                    These cysts are painless and slow growing and predominately occur bilaterally affect-

                      ing the parotid glands. On examination they are usually multicystic with superficial
                      involvement. They can occur early in HIV disease and testing should be performed
                      if the patient presents with lymphoepithelial cysts.

                  Mikulicz's Syndrome
                    Chronic, usually painless parotid and lacrimal gland swelling of unknown etiology

                      that can occur with tuberculosis (TB), sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus
                      (SLE), leukemia, and lymphosarcoma.

SIALADENITIS

                   Sialadenitis is infectious or inflammatory disorder of the salivary gland(s).

Acute Sialadenitis

                  Etiology
                    Usually a bacterial infection of a salivary gland due to hyposecretion or obstruction

                      of the duct by stones or increased viscosity of saliva
304  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

                       Usually occurs as the result of chronic dehydration; however, it may follow immu-
                         nosuppression, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy

                    If bacterial infection is suspected, Staphylococcus aureus is the most common caus-
                      ative organism followed by Streptococcus pyogenes and Streptococcus viridans and
                      other bacteria of the oral flora.

                    Consider viral infection due to the mumps virus (paramyxovirus) especially if sud-
                      den onset and bilateral parotid glands are affected. NOTE: If mumps is suspected,
                        question about hearing loss as sensorineural hearing loss can often manifest as a com-
                        plication of the disease.

                  Symptoms
                   The following symptoms may or may not exist:

                    Swelling of the affected gland
                    Overlying pain and/or tenderness
                    Overlying erythema
                    Fever
                    Trismus

                  Physical Examination Findings
                   The following may or may not be present:

                    Firm and diffusely tender salivary gland
                    Erythema and edema of the gland
                    Inflammation and pus discharge from the duct opening, which may or may not be

                      present

                  Workup
                    Diagnosis is usually based on history and clinical findings.
                    If viral infection (mumps) is suspected:

                       Mumps IgM antibody serum test can be drawn. Levels of IgM antibodies increase
                         for several days after exposure and taper off over a few weeks.

                       Mumps IgG antibody serum test can be drawn to determine whether a person is
                         immune to the virus, either because of previous infection or due to vaccination in
                         the past. IgG antibodies stay in the bloodstream for life and provide protection
                         against reinfection.

                       The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends viral genetic testing
                         (RT-PCR) to confirm the genetic strain of the virus. This can be done with a buccal
                         (oral swab specimen) and a blood specimen that should be collected in the acute
                         phase (preferably within 3 days of onset of symptoms).

                         NOTE: Massage the parotid gland area for 30 seconds prior to swabbing the area
                            around the Stensen's duct to allow for optimal specimen sample from parotid
                            duct.

                    CT, ultrasonography, and MRI studies may help identify the cause if symptoms
                      persist despite initial treatment. See Chronic Sialadenitis for more information.

                  Treatment
                    Hydration
                    Over-the-counter mucolytic agents to thin the saliva; for example, Mucinex (guaife-

                      nesin)
                    Sialagogues (lemon juice, hard candy, etc.)
                    Warm compresses
                    Repeated massage of the gland
                                                                                                     SIALADENITIS  305

                    Oral antistaphylococcal antibiotic. Examples of adult dosing options include (but are
                      not limited to) the following:
                       Augmentin 875 mg twice a day × 7 to 10 days
                       Keflex (cephalexin) 250 to 500 mg every 8 hours for 6 to 8 days
                       Erythromycin 250 to 500 mg every 8 hours for 6 to 10 days

                    Oral steroids in cases of severe inflammation
                    In cases of viral parotitis, treatment is largely supportive. The patient is contagious

                      for 1 week after the onset of symptoms. Special attention should be paid to keeping
                      the patient well hydrated. Gland swelling can take weeks to resolve.

Chronic Sialadenitis

                  Etiology
                    Chronic sialadenitis is characterized by repeat episodes of pain and swelling of

                      the salivary gland with asymptomatic periods in between that can last weeks to
                      months.
                    The most common cause is salivary calculi that blocks normal saliva flow from the
                      duct. See Sialolithiasis within this chapter.
                    May develop after a severe acute sialadenitis episode.
                       Severe acute sialadenitis can cause irreversible ductal changes including scarring

                         and stenosis. The recurring inflammatory destruction can lead to a reduced secre-
                         tory function of the gland. This causes salivary stasis and thus predisposes it to
                         further cycles of inflammation.
                    Autoimmune disorders such as Sjogren's syndrome. See Sjogren's syndrome within
                      this chapter.
                    Granulomatous disorders associated with sialadenitis such as Wegener's disease
                      and sarcoidosis. See Granulomatous Disease within this chapter.
                    Those who have had radiation therapy to the oral cavity region

                  Symptoms
                   The following symptoms may or may not exist:

                    The patient may complain of thickened and/or diminished saliva, dry mouth
                    Same symptoms as acute sialadenitis during acute flare-ups

                  Physical Examination Findings
                   The following may or may not be present:

                    Same as acute sialadenitis during acute flare-ups
                    Chronic sialadenitis can cause the gland to become firm and permanently

                      enlarged

                  Workup
                    Consider doing a Gram stain and culture of the pus coming from the duct of the

                      affected gland in cases of chronic recurrent bacterial sialadenitis refractory to anti-
                      biotic therapy.
                    In cases of chronic, recurrent, or intermittent sialadenitis in which the infectious
                      agent is unknown, a CT scan or sialography may help to differentiate the inflam-
                      matory cause.
                       Sialography (also called sialogram) involves injection of contrast into the sali-

                         vary duct of a single gland, followed by x-ray projections. It evaluates for duc-
                         tal obstruction and the overall integrity of the salivary gland. NOTE: Sialography
                            is contraindicated in acute sialadenitis or sialadenitis with known stone or calculi
306  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

                            obstruction because it can amplify the inflammatory process. If stones or calculi are
                            suspected, CT of the parotid gland is the study of choice.

                  Treatment
                    First treat the underlying infection and inflammation as would be done in acute

                      sialadenitis.
                    Over-the-counter mucolytic agents to thin the saliva; for example, Mucinex (guaife-

                      nesin)
                    Additional measures such as hydration, gland massages are done but generally do

                      not change the chronicity of the disease.
                    Sialogogues:

                       Over-the-counter biotene products, sour lozenges, lemon drops, and so on
                       Prescription:

                      · Salagen (pilocarpine) 5 mg three times a day and at bedtime
                      · Evoxac (cevimeline) 30 mg three times a day
                    Once inflammation subsides, if calculi or stones are involved, they are removed. See
                      sialolithiasis within this chapter.
                       Sialoendoscopy is an endoscopic procedure that allows for the treatment of
                         salivary gland obstructions, strictures, and sialoliths (salivary stones). This is
                         a rather new technology and treatment option, which is not currently widely
                         available.
                    Consider surgical excision of the affected gland in severe cases.

PAROTID ABSCESS

                   A parotid abscess can occur, although uncommon, as a result of a complication from
                   an acute bacterial or viral infection of the parotid gland. The infection is usually unilat-
                   eral. In severe cases and in children especially, treatment may require hospitalization,
                   intravenous antibiotic therapy, and surgical drainage. Drainage of a parotid abscess
                   can be difficult because of the proximity to the facial nerve.

Pathogens Involved

                    Ultrasound-guided needle aspiration and culture of the abscess is the best method to
                      identify the causative organism.

                    The most common pathogens are Staphylococcus aureus and anaerobic bacteria.

Complications

                    Parotid gland abscess can:
                       Lead to facial paralysis
                       Invade the temporomandibular joint space
                       Extend into the deep spaces of the neck such as the parapharyngeal space. In some
                         cases this can lead to airway-compromise related to the extensive inflammation
                         and swelling of the surrounding structures.

Workup  Ultrasonography or CT scan
                                             GRANULOMATOUS DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH SIALADENITIS  307

Treatment

                    Ultrasound-guided needle drainage is recommended.
                    Bacterial culture should be taken whenever possible and an antibiotic therapy cho-

                      sen in accordance to the culture results.
                    Penicillin or cephalosporins together with anaerobic coverage would be the first-line

                      treatment.
                    IV vancomycin may be considered if cases of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus

                      areus.

GRANULOMATOUS DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH SIALADENITIS

                   Granulomatous disorders that affect the salivary gland can cause acute swelling or
                   chronic, generally unilateral, glandular swelling. There are multiple granulomatous
                   diseases that can affect the salivary glands. In most cases, the parotid glands are more
                   frequently involved and there is usually no significant pain. The problem usually lies
                   within the lymphatic tissue within the gland itself.

Sarcoidosis

                    Noninfectious cause of salivary gland inflammation
                    The exact cause is unknown and the diagnosis is based on exclusion.
                    Heerfordt's syndrome is a form of sarcoidosis and is characterized by the

                      following:
                       Prodrome of symptoms that include fever, weakness, malaise, nausea, night

                         sweats that can last several days to weeks
                       Salivary gland enlargement then occurs (usually parotid) in combination with

                         uveitis (inflammation of the uvea of the eye) and facial paralysis.
                       The salivary gland swelling can last months to years with spontaneous eventual

                         resolution. Facial paralysis is usually transient.
                       Treatment is symptomatic with corticosteroids being most helpful.
                    Tissue biopsy is the primary test used to confirm the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.

Wegener's Granulomatosis

                    Can occur as an acute, unilateral painful mass in the affected salivary gland.
                    Confirm diagnosis with serum blood test for cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplas-

                      mic antibody (C-ANCA) and histopathological examination by fine-needle aspira-
                      tion (FNA) of the mass.
                    Keep in mind that Wegener's disease involves other organs and is a multisystem
                      disease. Approach to management is multidisciplinary involving rheumatologists,
                      pulmonologists, nephrologists, and otolaryngologists.

Sjogren's Syndrome

                    Systemic autoimmune disease in which immune cells attack and destroy the exo-
                      crine glands that produce tears and saliva

                   See Sjogren's Syndrome within this chapter for more information.
308  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

Toxoplasmosis and Cat-Scratch Disease

                    Pathogen:
                       Toxoplasmosis is caused by Toxoplasma gondii, which is a protozoan parasite.
                       Cat-scratch disease is a caused by Bartonella henselae, which is a bacterial infec-
                         tion.

                    Source:
                       Toxoplasma gondii can be transmitted through the consumption of undercooked
                         raw meats or through contact with cat feces.
                       Bartonella henselae can spread from cat bites and scratches.

                    The organism travels through the lymphatic system and can invade the salivary tis-
                      sue, usually the parotid glands.

                    Isolated neck adenopathy can exist.
                    The disease is usually self-limiting. Treatment is reserved for severe disease and for

                      pregnant and immune-suppressed individuals. If treatment is needed, consultation
                      with infectious disease is recommended.

Tularemia

            Caused by Gram-negative bacteria, Francisella tularensis, an organism whose
              host is the cottontail rabbit. The disease can also be transmitted through insect
              bites.

            An erythematous papule forms at the site of inoculation, which may become nodu-
              lar and ulcerated.

            Fever, headache, and tender lymphadenopathy follow 2 to 10 days later. Then sali-
              vary gland involvement (usually parotid swelling) can occur.

            Treatment: Streptomycin, gentamicin, doxycycline, tetracycline, and ciprofloxacin
              are the preferred antibiotics of choice.

Actinomycosis

                    Introduction of this bacteria is usually from the tonsils or teeth.
                    Treat with penicillin therapy.

Primary Tuberculosis

                    Rare
                    Consider if there is history of exposure to TB
                    Diagnosis is made with FNA of the gland.
                    Treatment includes multidrug anti-TB medications management through infectious

                      disease.

Secondary Syphilis

                    Rare
                    Caused by Treponema pallidum, a bacterial infection that causes the sexually transmit-

                      ted disease (STD)
                    Serum lab test:

                       Rapid plasma reagin (RPR): Screening test for syphilis, but this test is not specific
                         for syphilis alone. A positive result (which indicates a potentially active syphilis
                         infection) must be confirmed with a more specific test.
                                                                                        SIALOLITHIASIS  309

           Fluorescent traponema antibody absorption (FTA-ABS): This blood test detects
             antibodies specific to T. pallidum and is useful after the first 3 to 4 weeks following
             exposure. The test is highly specific for syphilis. Once a person is infected, these
             antibodies develop and are present in the blood for life.

SIALOLITHIASIS

Etiology  Sialolithiasis is calculi or stones that can occur in the salivary glands or ducts.
          Wharton's duct, which drains the submandibular glands (SMG), are larger and
          longer than Stensen's duct, which drains the parotid glands. This anatomical fea-
          ture combined with the fact that salivary flow within Wharton's duct is slow and
          against gravity, is the reason why more calculi occur in the SMGs compared to
          the parotid glands. SMG stones tend to be larger and intraductal, whereas parotid
          stones are more often multiple and some can occur within the parotid gland itself.
          If the stone is not removed, local inflammation, fibrosis, infection, and atrophy of
          the gland can occur.

           Stagnation of saliva that is rich in calcium phosphate in a setting of partial duc-
             tal obstruction can lead to calculi formation. Other contributing factors can
             include:
              Dehydration
              Trauma
              Anticholinergic, diuretic, and other similar medications that can lead to dryness

           Gout is the only systemic disease known to cause salivary gland calculi. Calculi in
             cases of gout are composed mainly of uric acid and not calcium phosphate as with
             most calculi.

Symptoms

                    Sudden onset of swelling and pain over the affected gland that usually occurs dur-
                      ing or shortly after eating a meal.

                    The patient may report history of xerostomia (dry mouth) and gritty, sand-like for-
                      eign bodies in the oral cavity.

Physical Examination Findings

                    Erythematous, painful, swollen salivary gland
                    Massage of the gland can reveal decreased flow of cloudy or mucopurulent saliva
                    Stones may be palpable or visually seen along the floor of mouth (FOM)

Workup

           Depending on the sialolith size and calcification degree, it can be visible on radio-
             graphic examination. SMG calculi usually contain more calcium phosphate than
             parotid calculi, therefore SMG calculi are more radiopaque and more easily visual-
             ized on imaging.
              CT scan with and without contrast are more sensitive than plain film in detecting
                stones. Plus, a CT scan can detect other pathology such as abscess or tumor.
310  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

                    Remember that x-ray sialography is contraindicated in patients with acute sialadeni-
                      tis, although sialography is very effective at confirming the diagnosis.

                    Ultrasound can detect up to 90% of salivary duct stones (Fazio & Deschler, nd).
                    MRI imaging will not detect calculi.

Management

                    Treatment is based on the location of the salivary stone.
                    If the inflammation and possible underlying infection exists, it may be necessary

                      to treat with antibiotics and steroids and wait until the acute phase subsides before
                      manipulation of the duct is attempted.

                  Intraoral Manual Extraction
                    Occasionally, it is possible to milk out the stone in the duct until it appears at the

                      ductal opening, adjacent to the frenulum. If the stone is at the ductal opening, but
                      would not easily extract, the ductal papilla can be dilated with a lacrimal probe,
                      which can help aid in stone removal.

                  Intraoral Incision Extraction
                    An incision can be made over the stone after first administering local anesthetic to

                      allow extraction. However, careful attention must be paid to the adjacent lingual
                      nerve. No closure of the incision is made after stone extraction.

                  Sialoendoscopy
                    Sialoendoscopy is an endoscopic procedure that allows for the treatment of sali-

                      vary gland sialolithiasis. It allows for endoscopic transluminal visualization of the
                      obstructive pathology related to the ductal system.
                    In general, smaller stones (<4 mm in the SMG and <3 mm in the parotid gland) are
                      amenable to endoscopic removal. Stones larger than 4 mm may have to be frag-
                      mented further with lithotripsy before endoscopic extraction.
                    The only contraindication for sialendoscopy is acute sialadenitis.

                  Surgical Resection of the Gland
                    Surgical resection of the gland is considered for frequent recurrent sialadenitis

                      and/or larger stones embedded in the body of the gland. NOTE: During surgery
                        of the SMG, care is taken to preserve the marginal mandibular division of the facial
                        nerve, hypoglossal nerve, and lingual nerve, all of which lie in close proximity to the
                        gland.

SJOGREN'S SYNDROME

                   Sjogren's syndrome is a multisystem autoimmune disorder that affects the sali-
                   vary and lacrimal glands in addition to many different areas of the body. The
                   body mistakenly reacts to the tissue in the affected glands. Sjogren's is a chronic,
                   inflammatory disease process. There is no cure. Once the diagnosis is made, rheu-
                   matologists oversee the management of the disease. However, the patient usu-
                   ally ends up being seen by multiple specialty groups before the final diagnosis is
                   made.
        SJOGREN'S SYNDROME  311

Basic Overview of the Disease Process

                    There is an overabundance of lymphocytes (type of white blood cell) in the glands
                      responsible for saliva and/or fluid production. The amount of saliva or fluid pro-
                      duction from these glands decreases over time. There are two types of Sjogren's
                      disorders:
                       Primary Sjogren's is a solo diagnosis, essentially a diagnosis of exclusion
                       Secondary Sjogren's coexists with other autoimmune conditions such as systemic
                         lupus erythematous (SLE), scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and polymyo-
                         sitis.

Symptoms

                     NOTE: Do not base the diagnosis of Sjogren's syndrome on patient symptoms alone.

                    Sjogren's syndrome is composed of sicca complex or sicca syndrome; symptoms can
                      include:
                       Dry mouth (xerostomia). Complications can include:
                      · Oral candidiasis
                      · Angular cheilitis
                      · Fissures of the tongue and lips
                      · Decreased sense of taste
                      · Increased number of dental caries
                       Dry eyes (xerophthalmia). Complications can include:
                      · Keratoconjunctivitis
                      · Dryness, burning, itching of the eyes
                      · Sandy grit feeling in the eyes
                       Dry throat. Complications can include:
                      · Dysphagia
                       Nasal passageway dryness. Complications can include:
                      · Decreased sense of smell (hyposmia)
                      · Epistaxis
                      · Chronic sinusitis as a result of inspissated secretions
                       Intermittent salivary gland hypertrophy
                       Joint pain
                       Muscle pain

Workup

         Lab tests (look for a positive result in these tests):
            Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs)
            Rheumatoid factor (RF)
            Antibodies more specific to Sjogren's syndrome:
             · Anti-SSA (also called Ro)
             · Anti-SSB (also called La)

         Salivary gland biopsy
            The best single test for Sjogren's syndrome.
            Evaluates for an accumulation of lymphocytes and the presence of inflammation.

         Rose Bengal or lissamine green staining of the cornea or conjunctiva of the eye
            Performed by ophthalmologists
            Evaluates the extent to which dryness has damaged the surface of the eye
312  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

Diagnostic Classification Criteria

                   According to the American College of Rheumatology, the classification crite-
                   ria to diagnose Sjogren's syndrome includes at least two of the following three
                   criteria:

                    One of the following (both are associated with Sjogren's syndrome):
                       Positive serum levels of either the anti-SSA and/or anti-SSB antibody
                       Positive serum levels of the rheumatoid factor antibody (RFA) and an elevated
                         ANA titer > 1:320

                    Ocular surface staining scores of greater than 3 is considered positive. The stain-
                      ing measures the extent to which dryness has damaged the surface of the eye. A
                      specialized dye is applied to the tear film that bathes the surface of the eye. An oph-
                      thalmologist would do this specific test and evaluation.

                    Positive salivary gland biopsy from at least a 4-mm square site of inflammation

Treatment

                    There is no cure for Sjogren's syndrome. Treatment is intended to relieve symptoms.
                      It is important to emphasize to the patient to increase hydration.

                    Be cautiously aware of prescribing medications with the side effect of dryness includ-
                      ing decongestants, antihistamines, diuretics, and so on.

                  Ocular Symptoms
                    Artificial tears and tear stimulants
                    Eye lubricants

                  Oral Symptoms
                    Sialagogues to stimulate saliva production
                    Mouth lubricants: NeutraSal is prescription powder that contains calcium phos-

                      phate and electrolytes. When it dissolves in water it creates a solution similar to
                      saliva.

                  Dental Care
                    Sjogren's patients are prone to cavities related to the dryness they experience. There-

                      fore, dental care is very important.

                  Other Therapies
                    Immunosuppressant drugs and steroids may be indicated; however, initiation and

                      management of these medications needs to be done through a rheumatologist.

Websites

           Sjogren's Syndrome Foundation: www.sjogrens.org
           American College of Rheumatology: Sjogren's Syndrome: www.rheumatology.

             org
           American Autoimmune Related Disease Association: www.aarda.org
           National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Sjogren's Syndrome infor-

             mation page: www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/sjogrens/sjogrens.htm
                                                    DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS  313

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS

                   Tumors of the salivary glands are located in the major glands (i.e., parotid, sub-
                   mandibular, and sublingual) or in one of the minor salivary glands and can
                   widely spread throughout the aerodigestive tract. Salivary gland tumors vary
                   considerably in their presentation and behavior. They most commonly pres-
                   ent as a painless enlarging mass. More than 50% of salivary gland neoplasms are
                   benign and approximately 70% to 80% originate in the parotid gland (Speight &
                   Barrett, 2002). Most of the time, the diagnosis can be derived from FNA cytol-
                   ogy; however, many cases will require surgical excision to determine the defini-
                   tive diagnosis. Risk factors for developing salivary gland cancers remain unclear;
                   however, there may be an association between smoking, alcohol use, and radiation
                   therapy.

                             NOTE: Rule of thumb--80% of parotid tumors are benign; 75% of benign parotid
                     tumors are benign mixed tumors (BMTs); 50% of SMG tumors are benign; and 20% of
                     minor salivary gland tumors are benign.

Workup Process in the Diagnosis of Salivary Gland Tumors

                  Imaging Studies
                    Radiological workup is necessary in evaluating the salivary gland tumor to deter-

                      mine if the tumor is:
                       Intraglandular or extraglandular
                       In the superficial or deep lobe of the parotid gland
                       Suspicious for malignancy
                       Extends and invades surrounding tissues
                       Associated with regional lymphadenopathy
                    Ultrasound, especially combined with ultrasound-guided FNA cytology of the
                      tumor, is the preferred initial assessment.
                    CT scan or MRI is more useful if the tumor is located deep in the parotid gland or in
                      the minor salivary glands.
                       MRI is better for evaluation of suspected neoplastic disease than a CT scan or

                         ultrasound. It is more sensitive in picking up small tumors and detecting the
                         extent of deep lobe involvement and proximity of the facial nerve involvement.
                         It does not have the risks of radiation exposure or the complications with IV
                         contrast injection. Yet, a CT scan with contrast is a more commonly ordered
                         study.

                  Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy
                    FNA is useful to determine if a lesion is

                       Benign or inflammatory lesion
                       Suspicious for neoplasm or lymphoma
                       Epithelial malignant tumor
                       Possible metastasis from another site

                          The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies salivary neoplasms in
                   the following categories: adenomas, carcinomas, nonepithelial tumors, malig-
                   nant lymphomas, secondary tumors, unclassified tumors, and tumor-like
                   lesions.
314  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

Benign Salivary Gland Tumors: Most Common

                     NOTE: Some benign salivary tumors have the propensity for malignancy transformation.

                  Pleomorphic Adenoma
                    Most common salivary gland tumor and the most common type of parapharyngeal

                      space tumor
                    It is also known as a "benign mixed tumor" (BMT)
                    Occurs in adults
                    The parotid is the most affected gland, specifically the lower pole. Can also occur in

                      the deep lobe of the gland and extend into the parapharyngeal space
                    Slow growing, painless mass
                    Recurrence and malignant transformation are rare, but have been reported. NOTE:

                        Capsular rupture and spillage of tumor cells during excision is the most important risk
                        factor for recurrence.

                          For additional information, see Pleomorphic Adenoma in this chapter.

                  Warthin's Tumor
                    Occurs in adulthood
                    Almost exclusively restricted to the parotid glands, specifically the lower pole
                    A strong link between Warthin's tumor and cigarette smoking
                    Painless mass that can be moderately fast growing and fluctuate in size, especially

                      when eating
                    Although malignant transformation is rare, it is important to rule out cystic metasta-

                      sis in intra- and periparotid lymph nodes.

                          For additional information, see Warthin's Tumor in this chapter.

                  Hemangioma and Lymphangioma
                    Soft tissue tumor
                    Although uncommon in general, parotid gland hemangiomas are the most common

                      salivary gland tumor in children but are extremely rare in adults.
                    Presents as slow or sometimes fast growing, usually asymptomatic soft tissue swell-

                      ings. The majority of lesions spontaneously involute by the time the child is 7 years
                      old.
                    A bluish color may be visible through the skin, but the overlying skin is usually not
                      involved.
                    Surgical treatment is seldom required. Steroids are the main treatment and can
                      reduce growth. Embolization may be considered if the lesion is large.

                  Myoepithelioma
                    Can occur at any age; however, more common in adults
                    More common in the parotid gland
                    Usually present as a slow growing, painless mass
                    Recurrence and malignant transformation are rare but have been reported

                  Basal Cell Adenoma
                    Typically seen in adults
                    Parotid gland is the most frequent site of occurrence
                    Presents as small multiple tumors that are solitary, well-defined, mobile nodules.

                      They are usually firm; however, can occasionally be cystic.
                    Recurrence and malignant transformation are rare, but have been reported.
                                                    DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS  315
Malignant Salivary Gland Tumors: Most Common

STAGING CRITERIA

   TNM STAGING CRITERIA FOR SALIVARY GLAND CANCEROUS TUMORS

T  Primary Tumor

   TX  Primary tumor cannot be assessed

   T0  No evidence of primary tumor

   T1  Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension without extraparenchymal

       extension. Extraparenchymal extension is clinical or macroscopic

       evidence of invasion of soft tissues. Microscopic evidence alone does

       not constitute extraparenchymal extension for classification purposes.

   T2  Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 4 cm in greatest dimension

       without extraparenchymal extension. Extraparenchymal extension

       is clinical or macroscopic evidence of invasion of soft tissues.

       Microscopic evidence alone does not constitute extraparenchymal

       extension for classification purposes.

   T3  Tumor more than 4 cm and/or tumor having extraparenchymal

       extension. Extraparenchymal extension is clinical or macroscopic

       evidence of invasion of soft tissues. Microscopic evidence alone does

       not constitute extraparenchymal extension for classification purposes.

   T4a Moderately advanced disease. Tumor invades skin, mandible, ear
                  canal, and/or facial nerve.

   T4b Very advanced disease. Tumor invades skull base and/or pterygoid
                  plates and/or encases carotid artery.

N  Regional Lymph Nodes

   NX  Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

   N0  No regional lymph node metastasis

   N1  Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, 3 cm or less in greatest

       dimension

   N2  Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, more than 3 cm but not

       more than 6 cm in greatest dimension; or in multiple ipsilateral

       lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in greatest dimension; or in

       bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none more than 6 cm in

       greatest dimension

       N2a Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node more than 3 cm
                      but not more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

       N2b Metastasis in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none more
                      than 6 cm in greatest dimension

       N2c Metastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none
                      more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

   N3  Metastasis in a lymph node more than 6 cm in greatest dimension

                                                                         (continued)
316  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

STAGING CRITERIA (continued)

       TNM STAGING CRITERIA FOR SALIVARY GLAND CANCEROUS TUMORS
M Distant Metastasis

M0  No distant metastasis

M1  Distant metastasis

Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). (2010). TNM staging classification for the major
salivary glands: Parotid, submandibular and sublingual (7th ed.).

Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma
 Most common parotid gland malignancy in both adults and children
 Majority of these neoplasms occur in the parotid gland; however, it can occur in the

   SMGs as well.
 Usually the mass is firm, fixed, and painless.
 Intraoral, minor salivary gland neoplasms may exhibit a blue-red color and mimic a

   mucocele or vascular lesion.

Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma
 Majority of these neoplasms occur in the SMG and minor salivary glands with high-

   est frequency in the palate followed by the tongue, buccal mucosa, lip, and FOM.
 Usually the tumor is slow growing with an often indolent course over many years;

   pain can ensue due to the propensity for invasion late in the disease process.
 Light tan, firm masses of variable size
 Usually a fatal outcome

Salivary Squamous Cell Carcinoma
 It is essential to exclude metastatic disease. It is very unusual for a squamous cell

   carcinoma to arise in the salivary gland.
 Can occur in either the parotid or SMG
 Patients present with a firm, fixed, painful, rapidly enlarging mass.

Acinic Cell Carcinoma
 Majority of these neoplasms occur in the parotid gland.
 Usually manifest as slow, enlarging, solitary, circumscribed, and solitary mass.
 Pain is often vague and intermittent.

Basal Cell Adenocarcinoma
 Similar to basal cell adenoma but is an epithelial neoplasm with potential for metas-

   tasis.
 Only adults have been affected.
 Usually just occurs in the parotid gland, specifically the lateral lobe of the parotid gland.
 Slow growing, usually painless. For the most part, patients are asymptomatic except

   for tumor enlargement.

Lymphoma
 Can include the following:

    Hodgkin's lymphoma
    Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
    Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
                                                    DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS  317

                          Patients who present with benign salivary gland tumors of the parotid or
                   SMGs usually do not experience any direct pain or neurological symptoms related
                   to the tumor. However, clinical features suspicious for malignancy include neuro-
                   logical symptoms such as ipsilateral facial nerve palsy, pain, tumor fixation to the
                   overlying skin or underlying muscle, and cervical lymphadenopathy. Patients usu-
                   ally have a clinical history of a slowly enlarging, painless mass in the area of the
                   involved salivary gland. Any mass of this type should be considered a malignant
                   tumor until proven otherwise. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for the majority
                   of salivary gland tumors. If the patient does not present with clinical features suspi-
                   cious for malignancy and the FNA cytology is suggestive for a benign neoplasm, it
                   is possible to not do surgical excision of the lesion and just monitor the lesion over
                   the course of time.

Surgical Management of Salivary Gland Tumors

                   Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for salivary gland tumors.

                  Superficial Lobe Parotid Gland Tumors
                    Most parotid gland tumors are located in the superficial lobe.

                    Surgical Procedure of Choice
                    Superficial parotidectomy with facial nerve dissection and preservation.

                       Whether it is a superficial or limited partial parotidectomy, the surgical approach
                         is similar--a modified Blair's incision. This is an incision made just anterior to the
                         tragus, curves posteriorly toward the mastoid process, and then turns anteriorly
                         and inferiorly toward a neck skin crease.

                  Deep Lobe Parotid Gland Tumors
                    Surgical Procedure of Choice

                       Total parotidectomy with full dissection of all branches of the facial nerve
                       The facial nerve is sacrificed only if the tumor is enveloping or infiltrating the

                         facial nerve
                       Most malignant deep lobe parotid tumors will require postoperative radiation

                         treatment because of the limitations when trying to resect all of the tumor mar-
                         gins

                  Submandibular Gland Tumors
                    Surgical Procedure of Choice
                    Complete excision of the SMG is done if the lesion is limited to the gland itself.

                      More extensive tumors require excision of the SMG in addition to a neck dissec-
                      tion.

                  Frey Syndrome
                    Rare disorder that can occur as a complication after a parotidectomy. It is thought to

                      be a result of the inability of the parasympathetic nerve fibers to regenerate. These
                      fibers normally innervate the sweat glands of the face.
                    Symptoms include erythema/flushing and excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) over
                      the cheek and temporal regions. These symptoms are a gustatory response and can
                      randomly occur when the patient eats, smells, or talks about food.
                    Intracutaneous injection of botulinum toxin A (Botox) is an effective, long-lasting,
                      and well-tolerated treatment of Frey syndrome.
318  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

PLEOMORPHIC ADENOMA

                   Pleomorphic adenomas (PAs), also known as BMT, are the most common type of sali-
                   vary gland tumors and are most common in the parotid gland. They represent approxi-
                   mately 60% to 70% of all parotid tumors and 90% of submandibular benign tumors
                   (Lalwani, 2007).

Presentation

                    Painless, enlarging mass within the affected salivary gland
                    Well-circumscribed, rounded mass
                    When the tumor involves the parotid gland, it is usually located inferior to the pinna

                      in the area of the parotid.
                    PA can also arise from the deep lobe of the parotid and extend into the parapha-

                      ryngeal space or arise in the parapharyngeal space itself without connection to the
                      parotid gland.

Physical Examination

                    Should be directed toward determining the following:
                       Size of the tumor
                       If the tumor is fixated to the skin
                       If there is associated lymphadenopathy
                       Status of facial nerve function

                    Soft palate swelling may be present if the tumor involves the parapharyngeal space.

Workup

         CT scan is the most common study ordered and may be the only imaging study
           needed to help in the evaluation. NOTE: A CT scan may falsely suggest invasion of the
           surrounding tissue. In these cases, consider an MRI to ensure accuracy in the relation-
           ship of the tumor to the surrounding structures.

         MRI may suggest specific tissue type based on signal intensity characteristics as well
           better orientation of the mass related to the facial nerve.

         Ultrasound does not typically help to understand the three-dimensional (3D) rela-
           tionship of the tumor to the parotid gland and the facial nerve.

         FNA with ultrasound guidance is the diagnostic procedure of choice for determining
           specific cell cytology.

        NOTE: A direct biopsy of the mass is contraindicated secondary to risk of inadvertently
        injuring the facial nerve and risk of tumor spillage, which increases the risk of tumor
        recurrence even for benign lesions.

Surgical Excision

                    Surgical excision is curative in most cases; however, due to the mass being poorly
                      encapsulated, there can be a rate of recurrence related to residual tumor cells if not
                      completely excised at the time of surgery.

                    Previously, PA tumors located in the parotid gland were "shelled out," which
                      resulted in frequent recurrence. Current technique involves excision of the tumor
                                                                                              WARTHIN'S TUMOR  319

                      along with surrounding normal parotid tissue, called a superficial lobectomy, with
                      careful attention to preserve the facial nerve.
                    If the tumor in the parotid gland involves the deep lobe, the surgery is more com-
                      plex. A superficial lobectomy is performed and, in addition, the facial nerve is care-
                      fully freed from the underlying tumor when removed.

Tumor Complications

                    There is a small, rare risk for malignant transformation with PA.
                    Risk factors for malignancy include advanced age, large size, history of radiation

                      therapy, and recurrent tumors.

Surgical Complications

                    Facial nerve palsy
                    Neuroma (a growth or tumor of nerve tissue) formation
                    Gustatory sweating (Frey syndrome)

WARTHIN'S TUMOR

Figure 15.1:  Warthin's tumor (WT) is also called adenolymphoma or papillary cystadenoma
Warthin's     lymphomatosum. It is the second most common salivary gland tumor and is located
tumor.        almost exclusively within the parotid gland. However, locations other than the
              parotid glands include cervical lymph nodes and the SMGs. These tumors are nearly
              always benign. The exact cause is unknown; however, smokers have an eight-fold
              risk of developing the tumor (Hatch & Shah, 2005). The average age of diagnosis is
              60 years.

              R

                 FIGURE 15.1 Warthin's
                 tumor. Within left parotid
                 gland there is a peripherally
                 enhancing mass with smooth
                 well-defined margins arising
                 within the deep parotid lobe
                 and extending below it,
                 measuring 2.8 x 2.77 cm. It
                 abuts the sternocleidomastoid.
                 Pathology confirmed
                 Warthin's tumor.
320  15. SALIVARY GLAND CONDITIONS

Presentation

                    Asymptomatic, slow-growing, well-defined round or oval mass that in the majority
                      of cases is located in the lower pole of the parotid gland

                    Occasionally patients may note pain, pressure, or rapid growth of the mass
                    Although more commonly affecting one salivary gland, these tumors can appear

                      bilaterally
                    WT can occur simultaneously with PAs. NOTE:When multiple masses are found within

                        the parotid gland, WT is the most likely diagnosis.

Workup  Same as pleomorphic adenoma.

Surgical Excision

                    Simple observation of the mass's growth over time versus surgical excision is appro-
                      priate unless the mass is causing pain or neurological symptoms.

                    Recurrence of the lesion is rare after surgical excision.

Surgical Complications

                    Facial nerve palsy
                    Neuroma (a growth or tumor of nerve tissue) formation
                    Gustatory sweating (Frey syndrome)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Agulnik, M., McGann, C., Mittal, B., Gordon, S., & Epstein, J. (2008). Management of salivary gland
                   malignancies: Current and developing therapies. Oncology Reviews, 2(2), 86-94.

            American Joint Committee on Cancer. (2002). AJCC cancer staging manual (6th ed.). New York, NY:
                   Springer.

            Barrett, A. W. (2012). Wegener's granulomatosis of the major salivary glands. Journal of Oral Pathology
                   and Medicine: Official Publication of the International Association of Oral Pathologists and the American
                   Academy of Oral Pathology, 41(10), 721-727.

            Bell, R. B., Dierks, E. J., Homer, L., & Potter, B. E. (2005). Management and outcome of patients with
                   malignant salivary gland tumors. Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery: Official Journal of the
                   American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons, 63(7), 917-928.

            Bialek, E. J., Jakubowski, W., Zajkowski, P., Szopinski, K. T., & Osmolski, A. (2006). US of the major sali-
                   vary glands: Anatomy and spatial relationships, pathologic conditions, and pitfalls. Radiographics:
                   A Review Publication of the Radiological Society of North America, 26(3), 745-763.

            Brook, I. (2003). Acute bacterial suppurative parotitis: Microbiology and management. Journal of Cran-
                   iofacial Surgery, 14(1), 37-40.

            Brook, I. (2009). The bacteriology of salivary gland infections. Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Clinics of
                   North America, 21(3), 269-274.

            Chatterjee, A., Varman, M., & Quinlan, T. W. (2001). Parotid abscess caused by Mycobacterium tubercu-
                   losis. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, 20(9), 912-914.

            Cohen, M. A., & Docktor, J. W. (1999). Acute suppurative parotitis with spread to the deep neck spaces.
                   American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 17(1), 46-49.

            Copelli, C., Bianchi, B., Ferrari, S., Ferri, A., & Sesenna, E. (2008). Malignant tumors of intraoral minor
                   salivary glands. Oral Oncology, 44(7), 658-663.

            de Bree, R., van der Waal, I., & Leemans, C. R. (2007). Management of Frey syndrome. Head and Neck,
                   29(8), 773-778.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  321

Ettl, T., Schwarz-Furlan, S., Gosau, M., & Reichert, T. E. (2012). Salivary gland carcinomas. Oral and
      Maxillofacial Surgery, 16(3), 267-283.

Fazio, S. B., & Deschler, D. G. (n.d.). Salivary gland stones: Up to date. Retrieved from http://www.
      uptodate.com/ version 15.3. Accessed May 16, 2013.

Gadodia, A., Bhalla, A. S., Sharma, R., Thakar, A., & Parshad, R. (2011). Bilateral parotid swelling: A
      radiological review. Dento Maxillo Facial Radiology, 40(7), 403-414.

Guzzo, M., Locati, L. D., Prott, F. J., Gatta, G., McGurk, M., & Licitra, L. (2010). Major and minor salivary
      gland tumors. Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology, 74(2), 134-148.

Hatch, R. L., & Shah, S. (2005). Warthin tumor: A common, benign tumor presenting as a highly suspi-
      cious mass. Journal of the American Board of Family Practice/American Board of Family Practice, 18(4),
      320-322.

Huoh, K. C., & Eisele, D. W. (2011). Etiologic factors in sialolithiasis. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck
      Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 145(6), 935-
      939.

International Agency for Research on Cancer. Cancer pathology and genetics: Pathology and genetics
      of head and neck tumors. Chapter 5: Tumors of the salivary gland: Pg 209-281. Retrieved from
      http://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/pdfs-online/pat-gen/bb9/bb9-chap5.pdf. May 23, 2013.

Jardim, E. C., Ponzoni, D., de Carvalho, P. S., Demétrio, M. R., & Aranega, A. M. (2011). Sialolithiasis of
      the submandibular gland. Journal of Craniofacial Surgery, 22(3), 1128-1131.

Jeong, S., & Lee, J. (2010). Radiation sialadenitis induced by high-dose radioactive iodine therapy.
      Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 44, 102-109.

Kristensen, R. N., & Hahn, C. H. (2012). Facial nerve palsy caused by parotid gland abscess. Journal of
      Laryngology and Otology, 126(3), 322-324.

Lalwani, A. (2007). Pleomorphic adenomas. In Current diagnosis and treatment. Otolaryngology head and
      neck surgery (2nd ed., pp. 307-308). New York, NY: McGraw Hill Lange.

Laurie, S. A., & Licitra, L. (2006). Systemic therapy in the palliative management of advanced salivary
      gland cancers. Journal of Clinical Oncology: Official Journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology,
      24(17), 2673-2678.

Licitra, L., Grandi, C., Prott, F. J., Schornagel, J. H., Bruzzi, P., & Molinari, R. (2003). Major and minor
      salivary glands tumours. Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology, 45(2), 215-225.

Madani, G., & Beale, T. (2006). Inflammatory conditions of the salivary glands. Seminars in Ultrasound,
      CT, and MR, 27(6), 440-451.

Makeieff, M., Pelliccia, P., Letois, F., Mercier, G., Arnaud, S., César, C., . . . Guerrier, B. (2010). Recurrent
      pleomorphic adenoma: Results of surgical treatment. Annals of Surgical Oncology, 17(12), 3308-3313.

National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guilde-
      lines). (2012). Head and neck cancers. Version 1. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/profession-
      als/physician_gls/pdf/head-and-neck.pdf. May 6, 2013.

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). Sjogren's syndrome information
      page. Available online at http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/sjogrens/sjogrens.htm through
      http://www.ninds.nih.gov. Accessed May 21, 2013.

Orloff, L. A., Hwang, H. S., & Jecker P. (2009). The role of ultrasound in the diagnosis and management
      of salivary disease. Operative Techniques in Otolaryngology, 20, 136-144.

Pagana, K. D., & Pagana, T. J. (2007). Mosby's diagnostic and laboratory test reference (8th ed., pp. 100-101).
      Saint Louis, MO: Mosby.

Saarinen, R. T., Kolho, K. L., & Pitkäranta, A. (2007). Cases presenting as parotid abscesses in children.
      International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 71(6), 897-901.

Shiboski, S. C., Shiboski, C. H., Criswell, L., & Baer, A. (2012). American College of Rheumatology clas-
      sification criteria for Sjogren's syndrome: A data driven, expert consensus approach in the Sjogrens
      International Collaborative Clinical Alliance cohort. Arthritis Care and Research, 64(4), 475-487.

Speight, P. M., & Barrett, A. W. (2002). Salivary gland tumours. Oral Diseases, 8(5), 229-240.
Tan, V. E., & Goh, B. S. (2007). Parotid abscess: A five-year review--clinical presentation, diagnosis and

      management. Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 121(9), 872-879.
Zenk, J., Iro, H., Klintworth, N., & Lell, M. (2009). Diagnostic imaging in sialadenitis. Oral and Maxil-

      lofacial Surgery Clinics of North America, 21(3), 275-292.
Zenk, J., Koch, M., Klintworth, N., König, B., Konz, K., Gillespie, M. B., & Iro, H. (2012). Sialendoscopy

      in the diagnosis and treatment of sialolithiasis: A study on more than 1000 patients. Otolaryngol-
      ogy--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck
      Surgery, 147(5), 858-863.
