16            Evaluation and
              Management of
              Benign Neck Conditions

LYMPHADENOPATHY IN THE NECK

Figure 1.16:  See Chapter 2: Lymphatic Tissue for the Head and Neck for a description of the drain-
Neck:         age pathways for each nodal group in the neck.
Lymphatic
system and           Lymphadenopathy refers to lymph nodes that are abnormal in size, consistency,
node groups.  and/or number. Lymphadenopathy in the neck can occur due to a wide range of
              inflammatory, infectious, autoimmune diseases, and neoplastic conditions. It may be
Table 16.1:   single and localized to one location, multiple in number, and grouped by anatomical
Lymph node    location, or scattered in multiple generalized locations.
groups.
                     Cervical lymphadenopathy is defined as cervical lymph nodal tissue measuring
              more than 1 cm in diameter. Cervical lymph nodal tissue is lymph nodes found any-
              where in the neck. To better differentiate the location of the neck lymph nodes, lymph
              node levels or groups are used to describe their location. There are seven different
              levels.

                     Cervical lymphadenopathy is further classified into the following:

               Acute: 2-week duration or less
               Subacute: 2- to 6-week duration
               Chronic: More than 6-week duration

                     The majority of patients will present with acute, unilateral lymphadenopathy.
              Workup for these cases is not necessary. Subacute or chronic disease that is not respond-
              ing to antibiotic therapy needs to be further evaluated.

Laboratory Tests

                    Complete blood count (CBC) with differential
                    ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate)
                    Rapid streptococcal test
                    Serology (Epstein-Barr virus [EBV], toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus [CMV], syphi-

                      lis, and HIV)
                    Purified Protein Derivative placement

                  Other Tests
                    Ultrasound: Provides qualitative data on the size and number of affected lymph

                      nodes, as well as anatomical planning for possible excision
                    CT scan of neck with and without contrast: Radiation exposure, but allows for good

                      details of anatomy surrounding the affected lymph node
                    Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of prominent lymph node: Consider doing the FNA

                      with ultrasound guidance to ensure greater accuracy of the specimen obtained. If
324  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

   the FNA is inconclusive or negative and suspicion is high for malignancy, excisional
   biopsy should be performed.
 Chest x-ray: In whom systemic disease is suspected. It can help identify tuberculosis
   (TB) lesions and mediastinal lymphadenopathy

                                 TABLE 16.1 LYMPH NODE GROUPS

Level  Group                     Location                        Metastasis Can
I                                                                Occur Froma
       IA  Submental             Between the anterior belly
                                     of digastric muscles and     Floor of mouth
                                     the hyoid bone                 (FOM)

       IB  Submandibular Lies between the anterior                Anterior oral
                                                                    tongue
                                 and posterior bellies of
                                                                  Anterior
                                 the digastric muscles,             mandibular
                                                                    alveolar ridge
                                 the stylohyoid muscle,
                                                                  Lower lip
                                 and the body of the
                                                                  Oral cavity
                                 mandible                         Anterior nasal

II     Upper jugular             High jugular lymph nodes.          cavity
                                     Located along the upper      Soft tissue
III    Middle jugular                third of the jugular
                                     vein. Superior border          structures of
IV     Lower jugular                 is the base of skull. The      the midface
                                     inferior border is less      Submandibular
                                     well defined at the level      gland
                                     of the hyoid bone (or
                                     bifurcation of carotid       Oral cavity
                                     artery)                      Nasal cavity
                                                                  Nasopharynx
                                 Midjugular lymph nodes.          Oropharynx
                                     Located along the            Hypopharynx
                                     middle third of the          Larynx
                                     jugular vein. Superior       Parotid gland
                                     border is the hyoid
                                     bone. The inferior           Oral cavity
                                     border is the upper rim      Nasopharynx
                                     of the cricoid cartilage     Oropharynx
                                                                  Hypopharynx
                                 Lower jugular lymph nodes.       Larynx
                                     Located along the lower
                                     third of the jugular vein.   Hypopharynx
                                     Superior border is the       Cervical
                                     upper rim of the cricoid
                                     cartilage. Inferior border     esophagus
                                     is the clavicle              Larynx

                                                                                   (continued)
                                   LYMPHADENOPATHY IN THE NECK  325

Level Group              Location                     Metastasis Can
                                                      Occur Froma

V    Posterior triangle  Also called posterior         Nasopharynx
                             cervical group, spinal    Oropharynx
                             accessory chain, or       Thyroid gland
                             supraclavicular
                             nodes.

                         Located posterior to the
                             sternocleidomastoid
                             muscle (SCM)

VI   Anterior compartment Includes the prelaryngeal,   Thyroid gland

                         pretracheal, and              Glottic and

                         paratrachal nodes            subglottic larynx

                         Located between the           Piriform sinus

                         right and left medial         Cervical

                         borders of the               esophagus

                         sternocleidomastoid

                         muscles (or carotid

                         sheaths). Superior

                         border is the hyoid

                         bone. Inferior border is

                         the suprasternal

                         notch

VII  Nodes of upper      Located below the             Tracheobronchial
                             suprasternal notch and      region
     mediastinum             includes nodes of the
                             upper mediastinum         Thyroid

aCancer can also spread to the cervical lymph nodes from other sites in the head or neck, or occasionally
a site farther away in the body.

Acute Lymphadenopathy

                   Acute lymphadenopathy, 2-week duration or less, most commonly represents a
                   transient response to a benign local or generalized infection. Viral lymphadenopa-
                   thy is the most common form of reactive lymphadenopathy. Acute bilateral cer-
                   vical lymphadenitis is usually caused by a viral upper respiratory tract infection
                   or streptococcal pharyngitis. Cervical lymphadenopathy is common in children.
                   Lymph node swelling due to infection is more commonly seen in infants and young
                   children than adults since immature immune systems are less adept at fighting off
                   bacteria and viruses.

                          Acute unilateral cervical lymphadenitis is usually caused by streptococcal or
                   staphylococcal infection. The lymphadenopathy is often diffuse and nontender. Most
                   cases of cervical lymphadenitis are self-limited and require no treatment.

                          Suppurative bacterial lymphadenopathy is commonly caused by group A
                   Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus. The majority of patients who present with
                   unilateral lymphadenopathy are bacterial. Patients may have erythema, tender-
                   ness of the overlying skin, and fever. The treatment of acute bacterial cervical
                   lymphadenitis without a known primary cause should provide adequate cover-
                   age for group A Streptococcus, S. aureus, and Streptococcus pyogenes. Ultrasound
326  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

              TABLE 16.2 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CERVICAL LYMPHADENOPATHY
Infectious

Viral                   Bacterial               Fungal                 Parasitic

 Infectious              Cat-scratch disease     Histoplasmosis         Toxoplasmosis
   mononucleosis         Pharyngitis due         Coccidioidmycosis      Leishmaniasis
                                                 Cryptococcosis
 Epstein-Barr virus        to group A            Sporotrichosis
 Cytomegalovirus           Streptococcus
 Respiratory syncytial   Staphylococcus aureus
                         Tuberculosis bacillus
   virus                 Tularemia (rabbit
 Infective hepatitis       fever)
 Rubella                 Diphtheria
 Measles                 Infected acne
 Adenovirus              Ear infections
 Rhinovirus              Dental abscesses
 Enterovirus             Cellulitis
                         Lyme disease
   (coxsackie A and B)
 Herpes simplex

Sexually Transmitted Diseases                    Gonorrhea
                                                 HIV
 Syphilis
 Chlamydia

Immune System Disorders                          Mixed connective tissue disease
                                                 Sjogren's syndrome
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus

Malignant                                        Non-Hodgkin's
                                                 Lymphoma
 Hodgkin's                                       Metastatic carcinoma
 Leukemia                                        Rhabdomyosarcoma
 Multiple myeloma
 Neuroblastoma

Other

 Sarcoidosis                                     Amyloidosis
 Connective tissue disorders                     Drug reaction (vaccines, immunosuppressive
 Castleman's disease (lymph node hyperplasia)
                                                   medications, etc.)

                   and CT scan of the neck with and without contrast is considered if an abscess
                   is suspected.

Subacute Lymphadenopathy

                   Subacute lymphadenopathy persists for 2 to 6 weeks and is most commonly related to
                   an infectious cause. The most common causative organisms of subacute lymphadenitis
                   are cat-scratch disease, atypical mycobacterial infection, and toxoplasmosis. To a lesser
                   extent, infectious mononucleosis with EBV or CMV being the implicating pathogen
                   can also contribute to subacute lymphadenopathy. Typical findings include a painless
                   or minimally tender, unilateral, enlarged cervical lymph node.
                                                          LYMPHADENOPATHY IN THE NECK  327

Cat-Scratch Disease
 Causative organism: Bartonella henselae
 Most patients have been exposed to a cat bite or scratch; however, fleas and dogs

   have been known to carry the organism.
 The patient may have a cutaneous lesion at the site of inoculation by cat scratch or

   bite.
 Regional lymphadenopathy begins 1 to 3 weeks after inoculation.
 There is usually a solitary, mildly tender lymph node. The patient may also have

   headache, fever, malaise, and abdominal pain.
 Most cases are self-limiting and resolve without treatment in 6 to 8 weeks after initial

   presentation. NOTE: Azithromycin may speed recovery.

Atypical Mycobacterial Infection
 Most common cause of subacute lymphadenopathy
 Causative organisms: Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, M. haemophilum, and M.

   scrofulaceum. They are found naturally in soil and water environments.
 Usually presents as a firm, painless lymph node. The patient has usually taken

   one or more courses of antibiotics without much response. Most common loca-
   tions include submandibular region followed by preauricular and parotid
   region.
 Macrolides are front-line drugs in mycobacterial infections--clarithromycin and
   azithromycin.
 Consider consultation with infectious disease management.

Toxoplasmosis
 Causative parasitic organism: Toxoplasma gondii
 Common route of transmission: Consumption of undercooked infected lamb or

   pork or ingestion of oocytes-containing cat feces
 Most patients are asymptomatic. Symptoms can include malaise, fever, sore throat,

   myalgias, and cervical lymphadenopathy.
 Complications can include risk of transmission to the fetus (TORCH infection) caus-

   ing congenital toxoplasmosis in the child. Unless treated, children with congeni-
   tal toxoplasmosis will have hearing loss, developmental delays, and chorioretinitis
   (inflammation of the vascular coat and retina of the eye).
 Testing:
    Two types of Toxoplasma antibodies may be found in the blood of an infected per-

      son--IgM and IgG.
    Toxoplasma IgM antibodies are present within a week or two after the initial expo-

      sure and then decline gradually.
    Toxoplasma IgG antibodies are produced several weeks after initial infection and

      provide long-term protection. IgG is present forever in the blood of infected indi-
      viduals.
 Treatment includes antibiotics: sulfonamides and pyrimethamine.

Infectious Mononucleosis
 Usually an acute, transient condition in which patients recover without sequela.

   For some patients, the condition is incapacitating and precipitates a chronic
   illness.
 Transmission occurs through exposure of infected saliva.
 The incubation period, from the time of initial exposure to the onset of symptoms is
   estimated at 30 to 50 days.
 Common symptoms include pharyngitis, fever, and cervical adenopathy.
328  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

                    Uncommon symptoms include palatal petechiae, periorbital edema, and rash.
                    The cervical adenopathy and fatigue can take a slower time to resolve, sometimes 6

                      months or longer. However, most patients can resume usual activities within 2 or 3
                      months.
                    Rare complication includes splenomegaly.
                    Testing:
                       CBC with differential: Look for elevated white blood cells, greater than 50% leu-

                         kocytes, and the presence of atypical lymphocytes
                       Monospot test or heterophile antibody screen (blood sample, CPT code 86308):

                         Looks for the presence of heterophile antibodies (antibodies associated with infec-
                         tious mononucleosis), not EBV. If negative initially and mononucleosis is sus-
                         pected, repeat the test 1 week or so later.
                       EBV antibodies test (blood sample): Ordered if mononucleosis suspected, but
                         the mononucleosis test is persistently negative
                      · Epstein-Barr antibody viral IgM capsid (CPT code 86665): Appears first after

                            exposure to the virus and then tends to disappear after about 4 to 6 weeks
                      · Epstein-Barr antibody nuclear antigen antibody (CPT code 86664): Does not

                            appear until the acute phase has resolved. It develops about 2 to 4 months after
                            the initial infection and is present for life.

                     NOTE: If the mono test and EBV antibodies are negative, the patient might be infected
                     by another microorganism that is causing mono-like symptoms such as a CMV or
                     toxoplasmosis.

                    Treatment:
                       Supportive
                       Avoid contact sports for 2 months to prevent splenic rupture in the case of sple-
                         nomegaly.

Chronic Lymphadenopathy

                   Once a lymph node has been present for more than 6 weeks, the risk of malignancy
                   increases especially if the mass is enlarging despite current or recent antibiotic therapy.
                   Supraclavicular or posterior cervical lymphadenopathy carries a much higher risk
                   for malignancy than does anterior cervical lymphadenopathy. It is important to get
                   a FNA of the suspected lymph node(s). Consider ultrasound-guided FNA to ensure
                   greater accuracy of the specimen obtained. Excision biopsy is often needed because
                   FNA sometimes does not provide enough tissue for diagnosis if a malignancy is pres-
                   ent. The excision biopsy should be done on the largest and firmest node palpable with
                   the capsule intact upon excision. This prevents seeding (or spread of cells) in the case
                   of malignancy or bacterial pathogens.

BRANCHIAL CLEFT ANOMALIES

Figure 16.1:  Branchial cleft anomalies include a wide variety of congenital defects that occur in
Branchial     the head and neck. During embryonic development, four branchial clefts result in five
cleft cyst.   ridges known as the branchial (or pharyngeal) arches, which contribute to the forma-
              tion of various structures in the head, neck, and thorax. If any portion of the four clefts
              fail to form completely, the entrapped remnant can form a cyst with or without a fistula
              to the overlying skin or an incomplete sinus tract.
                                                                                 BRANCHIAL CLEFT ANOMALIES  329

                                                                                           FIGURE 16.1 Branchial cleft
                                                                                                      cyst. Cyst in the right neck anterior
                                                                                                      to the parotid gland. Excision of
                                                                                                      the lesion was done and it was
                                                                                                      determined to be moderately
                                                                                                      differentiated cystic squamous cell
                                                                                                      carcinoma.

                          The range of anomalies that can occur along the tract include branchial cleft:
                    Cyst (malformation with no external opening)
                    Fistula (connection through a tract with both internal and external communica-

                      tions)
                    Sinus (incomplete tract)

Overview of the Four Branchial Cleft Anomalies

                  First Branchial Cleft
                    Rare
                    Type I: Located near the external auditory canal. Most commonly they are inferior

                      and posterior to the tragus, but may also be in the parotid gland or at the angle of
                      the mandible. It may be difficult to distinguish from a solid parotid mass on clinical
                      examination.
                    Type II: Associated with the submandibular gland or found in the anterior triangle
                      of the neck

                  Second Branchial Cleft
                    Most common
                    Ninety-five percent of abnormalities of the branchial cleft arise from the second cleft

                      and at least 75% of all second branchial cleft abnormalities are cysts, which typically
                      present when an individual is between 10- and 40-years-old (Mitroi, et al., 2008).
                    Second branchial cleft fistulas and sinuses are less common and usually present dur-
                      ing the first decade of life (Mitroi, et al., 2008).
                    Usually found along the anterior border of the upper third of the sternocleidomas-
                      toid muscle (SCM), lateral to the carotid space and posterior to the submandibular
                      gland.
                    They can also appear anywhere along the skin of the lateral neck, between the inter-
                      nal and external carotid arteries and into the tonsillar pillar.
                    The patient usually presents with a unilateral painless neck mass, unless it is
                      infected.
330  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

                  Third and Fourth Branchial Cleft
                    Very rare
                    Third branchial cleft: Extends medially between the bifurcation of the internal and

                      external carotid arteries to the lateral pharyngeal wall
                    Fourth branchial cleft: Lies in the pharyngeal mucosal space

                          In some cases, branchial cleft anomalies are asymptomatic and surgery is not
                   indicated. However, in the majority of cases, there is recurring infection and surgery is
                   eventually done to prevent the infections. An infection generally occurs during periods
                   of an upper respiratory tract infection because lymphoid tissue is located beneath the
                   epithelium of the tract. Surgery is best done when the cyst is not infected and should
                   consist of a complete excision.

THYROGLOSSAL DUCT CYST

Figure 16.2:  The thyroglossal duct is an anatomical structure, which during embryological
Thyroglossal  development forms a connection between the initial area where the thyroid gland
duct cyst.    appears and where the thyroid gland rests in its final position, in the pretracheal
              space. The duct later normally atrophies and closes off before birth, after the thy-
              roid gland is in its final resting position. Alteration in this process during gestation
              can result in ectopic thyroid tissue, which can occur anywhere from the base of the
              tongue along the persistent thyroglossal duct tract. A cyst can also develop any-
              where along the course of the duct, which is called a thyroglossal duct cyst (TDC).
              TDCs are the most common anterior midline neck masses in children, although a
              portion of these cysts may not become clinically evident until adulthood. These

              R

                        FIGURE 16.2 Thyroglossal
                        duct cyst: Rounded lesion
                        within midline of the tongue
                        measures 3.3 x 6.1 x 4.5 cm
                        with no evidence of
                        calcification. The lesion is
                        above the hyoid bone without
                        extension beyond the borders
                        of the tongue.
                                                 THYROGLOSSAL DUCT CYST  331

          masses must be surgically removed because of the rare presence of thyroid carci-
          noma within the duct. The incidence of TDC carcinoma is 1% with papillary thyroid
          carcinoma (PTC), comprising the majority of cases (Kennedy, Whitaker, & Wadih,
          1998). NOTE: Calcification on CT scan is the single most specific marker for the pres-
          ence of carcinoma.

Location

           The thyroglossal duct is located at the base of the tongue and extends inferiorly
             through the muscle of the tongue and the mylohyoid muscle at the FOM into
             the anterior neck to the normal position of the thyroid gland, in the pretracheal
             space.

           Most TDCs occur below the level of the hyoid bone and in the midline.

Complications
                    TDC often becomes inflamed and infected following an upper respiratory infection.

Physical Examination Findings

                    Painless, cystic, mobile, fluctuant, midline mass, which moves with swallowing and
                      protrusion of the tongue. NOTE: The lesion moves during swallowing because of the
                        close proximity of the lesion to the hyoid bone superiorly and the attachment of the
                        thyroid gland inferiorly.

Workup

           Ultrasound is useful in children. The presence or absence of thyroid tissue within the
             TDC may be difficult to ascertain.

           CT neck has a high degree of diagnostic accuracy for TDCs. It should be done in all
             adult patients presenting with a TDC prior to definitive treatment. It is important to
             verify that there is normal thyroid tissue after TDC resection.

           MRI is rarely required for the diagnosis.
           FNA can be considered to confirm the diagnosis with cell identification.

Management
                    Antimicrobials, if infected

Surgical Options

                    Surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Specifically, the Sistrunk procedure.
                    Sistrunk procedure: Requires complete excision of both the cyst and the entire

                      thyroglossal duct tract up to the foramen cecum at the base of the tongue.
                      The close association of the tract with the hyoid bone mandates simultaneous
                      removal of the central portion of the hyoid to ensure complete removal of the
                      tract. Failure to do this is the most common cause of recurrence. NOTE: During
                        the resection of the hyoid bone, care is taken not to injure the hypoglossal nerve
                        (CN XII).
332  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

DERMOID CYST

                   Dermoid cysts do not exclusively occur in the neck; however, most occur on the face,
                   neck, or scalp with the orbit being the area most commonly affected in the head and
                   neck region. They occur as a congenital malformation where, during embryonic devel-
                   opment, the skin layers do not develop properly. This abnormal development produces
                   a tract and once the tract forms, dermoid cysts can appear anywhere along the path-
                   way. Dermoids, being developing skin, can have components of hair follicles, sweat
                   glands, smooth muscle, and sebaceous tissue. Most dermoids have a sinus tract exiting
                   via an opening. In some cases, the tract may extend to the intracranial cavity and these
                   cases pose an increased risk of meningitis.

                          Dermoid cysts in the neck are slow growing, benign tumors, which may occur
                   in the midline of the neck. Rarely a dermoid cyst is evident in the newborn. It usually
                   becomes evident years later. On presentation, they are usually firm lumps attached to
                   the overlying skin. Imaging studies such as CT scan or MRI can help to distinguish
                   dermoid cysts from other tumors and malformations and help rule out an intracranial
                   or intraorbital extension. Surgical excision is the treatment of choice and with complete
                   excision, recurrence is rare.

CYSTIC HYGROMA

                   Cystic hygromas (CHs) are congenital malformations of the lymphatic system and
                   during embryonic development, there is a failure of the lymphatic system to con-
                   nect to the venous system. They can arise anywhere but more are located in the
                   posterior triangle of the neck. CH is a lymph fluid-containing tumor and is also
                   called cystic lymphangiomas. Lymphangiomas are capillary, cavernous, or cystic
                   and CH is the cystic variety of lymphangiomas. Although most occur during con-
                   genital development, CH can arise from trauma, inflammation, or obstruction of a
                   lymphatic drainage pathway at any point in a person's lifetime. More than 60% of
                   CHs are present at birth and up to 90% become apparent before the age of 2 years
                   (Fonkalsrud, 2006).

                          CHs are benign lesions; however, they can get infected at anytime. On clinical
                   examination, these lesions appear soft, compressible, nontender, and they transil-
                   luminate without any bruit. CT scan and MRI are helpful in determining the extent
                   of the lesion and its association with surrounding nerves and vessels. Ultrasound
                   is used to detect CH in utero. During the course of an infection, the CH increases
                   in size and becomes warm, erythematous, and tender. Surgical management of the
                   lesion is the preferred treatment of choice. Aspiration of the lesion can be done as a
                   temporary measure to reduce the size. There is a small chance of recurrence after sur-
                   gical removal of the CH, which depends on whether the wall of the cyst was entirely
                   removed or not.

                          CH can occur as an isolated finding or in association with other birth defects
                   as part of a syndrome. The majority of prenatally diagnosed CHs are associated with
                   Turner's syndrome, a chromosome abnormality in which a female has only one X chro-
                   mosome instead of two. Physical abnormalities of Turner's syndrome includes short
                   stature, broad chest, low hairline, low-set ears, and webbed neck. CHs that develop in
                   the third trimester or in the postnatal period are usually not associated with chromo-
                   somal abnormalities.
                                                                           NEUROGENIC TUMORS OF THE NECK  333

HEMANGIOMA

                   Hemangiomas do not grow in utero, but instead may appear during the first few
                   weeks of life. A hemangioma is a benign vascular neoplasm or growth made up of
                   blood vessels. The majority of the time these tumors will disappear or involute on
                   their own in the first decade of life without any residual complications. The majority
                   of hemangiomas appear in the head and neck region. Subglottic hemangiomas should
                   be considered in a child with recurrent stridor despite treatment with a short course
                   of oral steroids. At this time, the etiology of these lesions and why they spontaneously
                   resolve is unknown.

                          There are multiple views and opinions on the timing and type of treatments, if any,
                   that should be used to treat hemangiomas. The vast majority of infantile hemangiomas
                   require no treatment except observation. Surgery should be used to treat any disfigur-
                   ing hemangioma or one that could affect the patient's vision, breathing, or hearing. The
                   broad spectrum of treatment options include oral corticosteroids, topical steroids, intral-
                   esional steroid injections, and excision or laser surgery.

NEUROGENIC TUMORS OF THE NECK

                   Neurogenic tumors of the neck occur in children and adults. There are large number of
                   nerves in the head and neck, which makes this area susceptible for neurogenic tumors.
                   A neurogenic tumor one that forms or originates in the nervous system along the nerve
                   sheath. The most common neurogenic tumors in the head and neck are schwannomas
                   (neurilemomas) and neurofibromas. Presentation in the neck is both painless and slow
                   growing for both tumors. FNA or excision of the tumor is the only way to differentiate
                   between the two. There is rare potential for malignant transformation with some of
                   these tumors, called neurofibrosarcomas; therefore, surgical resection is considered in
                   these lesions.

Schwannoma

                    The most common solitary neurogenic tumor in the neck.
                    The exact cause is unknown.
                    A slow growing, often benign neural sheath tumor that occurs all over the body,

                      including the head and neck region.
                    Schwannomas do not spread but can grow large enough to press against important

                      structures.
                    Schwannomas of the temporal bone can be categorized as vestibular (most com-

                      mon), facial, trigeminal, and jugular foramen tumors.

                  Vestibular Schwannoma (Acoustic Neuroma)
                    An example of a schwannoma
                    Affects vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII)
                    May present with unilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and disequilibrium

                   See Chapter 8 discussion on Vestibular Schwannoma (Acoustic Neuroma).

                  Facial Schwannoma
                    The tumor can arise anywhere along the facial nerve.
                    Most common presentation is facial weakness or paralysis that progresses gradually

                      over weeks or months.
334  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

                    Patients may also present with facial twitching (synkinesis--involuntary muscle
                      movements).

                  Trigeminal Schwannoma
                    Rare
                    Presentation includes facial neuralgia, paresthesia, or hypesthesia in one or more

                      divisions of the trigeminal nerve.

                  Jugular Foramen Schwannoma
                    Occurs within the jugular sheaths of CN IX, X, and XI.
                    Intracranial and extracranial extension can occur with these tumors.
                    Presentation includes dysphagia, aspiration, hoarseness, and shoulder weakness. If

                      intracranial extension is present, the patient may present with tinnitus, hearing loss,
                      dysequilibirum, and/or headache.

Neurofibromas

                    Benign nerve sheath tumors
                    Can be a solitary lesion or multiple lesions
                    Can be associated with neurofibromatosis I (von Recklinghausen disease)--a genetic

                      disorder that affects the cell growth of neural tissue.
                    The patient usually has café au lait spots.

                     NOTE: It is important to evaluate for hearing loss and the possible presence of an acoustic
                     neuroma in a patient with a history of neurofibromatosis.

Neuroblastic Tumors

                    Consist of neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and ganglioneuroma. These
                      tumors typically arise in the chest and abdomen but occasionally present as a pri-
                      mary neck mass.

DEEP NECK ABSCESS

                   Deep neck abscess formation continues to have the potential for serious and even life-
                   threatening complications despite access to antibiotics. Delay in the diagnosis can lead
                   to severe complications including mediastinitis and death. Most of the time, the high risk
                   for complications has to do with the spread of infection in the head and neck region.

                          In children, the site of most infections occurs in the pharynx and tonsils. In adults,
                   infections of odontogenic or salivary origin are more likely to be the source. Despite
                   these common causes, often there is an unidentifiable source of the infection. When
                   evaluating a patient with a deep neck abscess, it is important to be familiar with deep
                   neck spaces and their anatomical location as they provide an understanding of the
                   nature of the disease process.

Spaces Involving Entire Length of the Neck

                  Retropharyngeal Space
                    Most infections in this space occur in children, because retropharyngeal lymph nodes

                      mostly disappear by the age of 5 years.
                                                                                             DEEP NECK ABSCESS  335

                    Contains fat, connective tissue, and lymph nodes that drain into the nose, nasophar-
                      ynx, soft palate, eustachian tube, and paranasal sinuses.

                    Contains lymph nodes; an abscess in this area generally results from an infection of
                      these lymph nodes.

                    In children, an abscess in this area usually precedes an upper respiratory infection
                      with fever, dysphagia, odynophagia, and a "hot potato voice."

                    In adults, an abscess in this area is usually caused by instrumentation, foreign body,
                      and trauma.

                    Physical examination findings may include bulging of the posterior pharyngeal
                      wall.

                    Infections in the retropharyngeal space can extend to the mediastinum, danger
                      space, and parapharyngeal space.

                  Danger Space
                    Posterior to retropharyngeal space and anterior to the prevertebral space

                      NOTE: It is given the name "danger space" because it extends from the skull base to
                        the posterior mediastinum and diaphragm. This space offers little protection against the
                        spread of infection.

                    An abscess in this area is generally caused by an infectious spread from the retropha-
                      ryngeal, prevertebral, and parapharyngeal spaces or less commonly by lymphatic
                      extension from the nose and throat.

                      Clinical presentation: Severe dyspnea, chest pain. Look for widened mediastinum on
                        chest x-ray in severe cases.

                  Prevertebral Space
                    Anterior to the vertebral bodies
                    Extends from skull base to the coccyx
                    Most common source of infection: Iatrogenic/penetrating trauma and tuberculo-

                      sis
                    Complication of an abscess in this space: Development of an abdominal abscess

                  Visceral Vascular Space
                    Potential space within the carotid sheath. It contains the carotid artery, internal jugu-

                      lar vein, and the vagus nerve (CN X).
                    Abscess formation in this space may be directly from posterior perforations of the

                      esophagus or by infections of the deep cervical lymph nodes lying adjacent to it.

Spaces Above the Hyoid Bone (Suprahyoid Space)

                  Parapharyngeal Space
                    In the lateral aspect of the neck. It has been described as an inverted pyramid or cone

                      lying on either side of the pharynx.
                       Superior border: Hyoid bone
                       Inferior border: Skull base
                       Lateral to the pharynx and medial to the mandible
                    Most common mass seen in this space: Pleomorphic adenoma and schwannoma.
                      Most tumors in this space are benign.
                    Clinical presentation: Trismus, stiff neck, dysphagia, and, sometimes, drooling

                  Submandibular and Submental Space
                    Inferior border: Hyoid bone
                    Anterior and lateral boundary: Mandible
336  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

                    Posterior boundary: Muscles of the tongue
                    Most common cause of abscess in this space: Odontogenic infection. Inspect the

                      second and third molars. The apices of these molars provide direct access to the
                      submandibular space.
                    Infections that start in the submandibular space can spread into the submental space
                      and vice versa.

                  Parotid Space
                    Contains the parotid gland, external carotid, posterior facial vein, facial nerve, and

                      lymph nodes
                    The deep lobe of the parotid gland communicates with the parapharyngeal space.

                  Masticator Space
                    Encases the muscles of mastication.
                    It lies anterior and lateral to the parapharyngeal space.
                    Most common source of infection: Third molar
                    A complication of infection in this space is osteomyelitis of the mandible.

                  Peritonsillar Space
                   See Peritonsillar Abscess and Procedure Protocol: Needle Drainage and I and D of a
                   Peritonsillar Abscess in Chapter 13.

                    Inflammation in this region can result in an abscess.
                    The infection can spread into the parapharyngeal space.

                  Temporal or Buccal Space
                    Most common source of infection: Odontogenic
                    Complication of an infection in this space can lead to cavernous sinus thrombosis--

                      the formation of a blood clot within the cavernous sinus, which is a cavity at the base
                      of the brain containing a vein that carries blood from the brain to the heart.

Spaces Below the Hyoid Bone (Infrahyoid Space)

                  Pretracheal Space or Anterior Visceral Space
                    Lies anterior from the thyroid cartilage down to the superior mediastinum at the

                      level of the fourth thoracic vertebra near the arch of the aorta.
                    This space completely surrounds the trachea and contains the thyroid and parathy-

                      roid glands.
                    Infections in this space are always serious because of possible extension into the

                      mediastinum.
                    Source of infection in this space: Extension from tonsillitis (most common), trauma

                      to the esophagus, and/or external trauma
                    Clinical presentation: Dysphagia, hoarseness, dyspnea, airway obstruction

                  Suprasternal Space
                    This narrow space is just above the sternum. It contains the anterior jugular veins.
                    An abscess in this area is infrequent; this confined space usually does not allow an

                      infection to spread through the neck and into the mediastinum.
                    Symptoms can include hoarseness, dyspnea, dysphagia, odynophagia, and edema

                      of the hypopharynx that may extend to include the glottis and supraglottis. The
                      patient may have neck edema, pain, erythema, and/or crepitus.
                    Source of infection in this space: Foreign body, instrumentation, and extension of
                      infection
         LIPOMA  337

Bacterial Source

                   The vast majority of deep neck abscesses are caused by more than one microbial spe-
                   cies (Gram positive, Gram negative, aerobic, and anaerobic). The following bacteria
                   are most commonly isolated: Streptococcal and Staphylococcus species (most common),
                   Haemophilus influenza, S. pneumonia, Moraxella catarrhalis, Klebsiella, Neisseria species,
                   and Borrelia vincentii.

                          The access of entry and causative species are different for each space. Obtain
                   cultures whenever possible to help direct antimicrobial therapy.

Imaging

         Plain lateral and anteroposterior x-rays are helpful in the diagnosis of deep neck space
         infections; however, a CT scan of the neck with contrast is more sensitive. It can some-
         times be hard, even on CT imaging to differentiate between an abscess, cellulitis, and
         lymphadenopathy. MRI is less routinely ordered, except in cases when it is difficult to
         differentiate the findings on CT. Ultrasound is helpful in guiding FNA for cytology.
         A chest x-ray is done when there is suspicion of pulmonary involvement or spread of
         infection to the mediastinum.

Management

                  Inpatient Setting
                   Some patients may need to be hospitalized, especially in cases of airway compromise
                   and intravenous (IV) antibiotic therapy. If the airway is compromised, an endotra-
                   cheal tube or tracheostomy is performed. In an in-patient setting, blood cultures and
                   cultures from the abscess are typically obtained. Typically IV Unasyn (ampicillin-
                   sulbactam) with Flagyl (metronidazole) or clindamycin is started initially until cul-
                   ture results are known. Consultation with infectious disease is imperative. Surgery
                   to drain or debride the abscess is indicated for airway compromise if there is no
                   significant response to antibiotic therapy within 24 to 48 hours or if there is evidence
                   of sepsis.

                  Outpatient Setting
                   Clindamycin and Ceftin (cefuroxime axetil) are good outpatient antibiotics of choice.
                   If the patient fails to improve within 24 to 48 hours of therapy, consider changing the
                   antibiotic. Be sure to cover Gram positive, Gram negative, and aerobic/anaerobic bac-
                   teria, including beta-lactamase-producing organisms. Modify antibiotics according to
                   culture and sensitivity results if a culture was obtained. If there is still no improvement
                   within 24 to 48 hours, surgical drainage and hospital admission should be considered.
                   Add steroids if airway compromise is impending or present.

LIPOMA

                   A simple lipoma is the most common benign soft tissue neoplasm that can occur in
                   various locations of the body. There are various types of lipomas, each with differ-
                   ences in treatment, prognosis, and long-term followup. It is important to distinguish
                   a simple lipoma from a well-differentiated liposarcoma, which is malignant. MRI is
                   the preferred imaging study of choice as it is highly sensitive in the detection of well-
                   differentiated liposarcomas and highly specific in the diagnosis of a simple lipoma.
338  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

Simple Lipoma

                    Usually affects patients over 35 years.
                    A typical, simple lipoma is an encapsulated mass of mature adipocytes (or fat cells)

                      that typically do not cause any diagnostic problem.
                    An asymptomatic smooth, painless, mobile, round mass usually located between the

                      skin and underlying muscle layer.
                    Arises from the subcutaneous tissue.
                    If the patient is symptomatic, surgical excision of the lipoma is indicated. If excised,

                      recurrence of the lesion is rare.

Liposarcoma

                    Malignant soft tissue tumor that develops in fat tissue
                    Usually slow-growing, painless, nonulcerated submucosal mass
                    An MRI is useful in attempting to distinguish a lipoma from a liposarcoma; how-

                      ever, a biopsy is needed for an ultimate pathological diagnosis.

Lipoma of the Cerebellopontine Angle and Internal Auditory Canal

                    Rare
                    Due to congenital malformations
                    The neurovascular structures of the cerebellopontine angle (CPA) travel through the

                      lipoma.
                    Surgery, which includes resection of the tumor, should only be considered in cases of

                      definite tumor enlargement with intractable symptoms from the tumor.
                    Symptoms would include hearing loss, dizziness, and headache.

CAROTIDYNIA

                   Carotidynia is a syndrome characterized by tenderness located over the carotid artery
                   near the bifurcation, and by pain aggravated by movement of the neck with no struc-
                   tural abnormality. The condition is usually self-limiting (lasting on average 2 to 4 weeks)
                   and affects only one side. It may represent an inflammatory process; however, the exact
                   etiology is unknown. This condition may or may not be a subset of vasculitis.

Symptoms

                   May or may not include the following:

                    Localized anterior cervical pain of the neck in the typical location over the carotid
                      artery, near the bifurcation

                    Pain may be throbbing, dull, and aggravated by swallowing, coughing, and/or
                      chewing. The pain may radiate and the patient may have a difficult time moving the
                      head toward the unaffected side.

                    Symptoms may have preceded a flu-like episode or an upper respiratory tract infection.

Physical Examination

                    Unilateral neck pain reproducible with light pressure over the carotid artery
                    No associated lymphadenopathy and the remaining ENT examination, including

                      endoscopy, should be normal.
                                                              CAROTID BODY TUMOR  339

Imaging

          Typical verbiages that may or may not be mentioned on ultrasound of the carotid arter-
          ies include the following:

           Thickening of the wall of the carotid bulb
           Abnormally enhanced inflammatory tissue surrounding the symptomatic carotid

             artery
           Hypoechoic wall thickening of the carotid artery. NOTE: The thickening can lead to

             mild lumen narrowing and outward extension of the vessel wall.

          MRI of the Neck
           Abnormal or homogeneous enhancing tissue surrounding the carotid artery
           Increased intensity in the internal carotid sheath

Lab Studies

                    C-reactive protein (CRP) may be elevated
                    ESR may be elevated

Treatment

                    Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) typically for 10- to 14-days dura-
                      tion, then as needed

CAROTID BODY TUMOR

Etiology  Carotid body tumor (CBT) is a type of paraganglioma (PG), specifically a jugular PG.
          PGs are rare tumors derived from neural crest cells. PGs can occur anywhere neural crest
          cells migrate--from the skull base to the pelvis. CBTs are found in the neck at the branch-
          ing of the carotid artery. They are the most common type of PG in the head and neck.

           The exact cause is unknown, but hypoxia and genetic factors are thought to be
             involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. NOTE: Hypoxia from people living at high
             altitudes and chronic intermittent hypoxia in patients who have sleep apnea could stim-
             ulate the hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the carotid glands.

Symptoms

                    Painless, slowly enlarging, lateral neck mass
                    Dysphagia or odynophagia may be present due to compression of the mass

Physical Examination

                    Fontaine's sign: The mass is freely moveable horizontally rather than vertically
                      because it is attached to the carotid artery.

                    Carotid bruit may be heard over the mass or the mass may be pulsatile.
340  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

Carotid Body Tumor Classification

                    Class I: Localized with minimal vascular attachment. Tumor size is less than 5 cm.
                      Easy to surgically remove

                    Class II: Attached to the carotid wall but does not encase the carotid
                    Class III: Located inside the blood vessel and encases the carotid. Tumor size is

                      greater than 5 cm

Imaging

                    Ultrasound and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) play an important role in
                      confirming the clinical diagnosis.

        Ultrasound
         Although ultrasound can be helpful, it can be difficult to distinguish a CBT from

           other solid masses.

        Digital Subtraction Angiography
         Gold standard for the final diagnosis of CBT
         DSA is a type of fluoroscopy study used in interventional radiology to clearly visual-

           ize blood vessels
         Helps to determine the classification of CBTs
         Also provides access for preoperative embolization of feeder vessels to the CBT. This

           is done 2 to 3 days prior to surgical resection.
            Preoperative assessment of vasculature allows the surgeon to remove the arte-

              rial supply by embolization of the arterial feeder vessels to the CBT, diminishing
              blood loss during surgery.

Biopsy  MRI or CT of the Neck
         Reveals a mass at the bifurcation of the carotid artery; however, it is sometimes difficult

           to distinguish whether it is a CBT. Usually characteristic findings include splaying of
           the internal caroted artery and external caroted artery by the tumor at the bifurcation.

         Biopsy of a CBT is contraindicated, as the tumor is very vascular.

Treatment
                    CBTs are treated with either surgery and/or radiotherapy.

Risks and Complications

                    Stroke (occurs in less than 5% of patients)
                    Facial nerve or hypoglossal nerve damage. NOTE: Resection of a CBT should be done

                        earlier rather than later due to the risk of neural injury, which correlates directly to the
                        size of the tumor.

EAGLE'S SYNDROME

Figure 2.1: Skull Eagle's syndrome (ES) is a rare condition of symptoms caused by an elongated ossified
bone landmarks. styloid process. The styloid process is an elongated projection of the temporal bone
                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  341

         that lies anteriorly to the mastoid process, between the internal and external carotid
         arteries and lateral to the tonsillar fossa. The etiology remains unclear. This condition
         can be unilateral or bilateral. It usually occurs in adult patients and not all patients
         with an elongated styloid process are symptomatic.

Symptoms

                    Dysphagia, odynophagia, and vague throat discomfort
                    Anterolateral pharyngodynia (pain in the pharynx), neck pain, and/or sore throat

                      that is usually localized in the tonsillar fossa region
                    Secondary to the relationship of the styloid process to the internal and external

                      carotid arteries, it can compress these arteries resulting in a persistent pain irradiat-
                      ing in the carotid region.
                    May have "shooting" pains to the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and/or ear on the
                      affected side that last a couple of minutes and then disappears
                    May have tinnitus on the affected side
                    May or may not have a history of previous tonsillectomy

Physical Examination

                    May or may not be able to palpate bony projection deep in the tonsillar fossa. NOTE:
                        Palpation of the tip of the styloid should exacerbate existing symptoms.

Imaging

          Plain anteroposterior view neck x-ray to determine whether there is any lateral devi-
            ation of the styloid

          CT scan of the neck can confirm the presence of an elongated styloid process. NOTE:
            Normal length of the styloid in an adult is approximately 2.5 cm, whereas an elongated

            styloid is generally greater than 3 cm in length.

Nonsurgical Treatment

                    NSAIDs
                    Steroid injections

Surgery

          The elongated portion of the styloid process is removed (partial styloidectomy)
            through an intraoral or transpharyngeal approach versus an extraoral approach.
            NOTE: An intraoral approach has an increased risk for deep space neck infections com-

            pared to the extraoral approach.
          Complications of surgery can include damage to the carotid artery, internal jugular

            vein, and the facial, glossopharyngeal, vagus, and hypoglossal nerves because they
            are all located in this region.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Infectious Diseases. (2006). Epstein-
                   Barr virus and infectious mononucleosis. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/
                   ebv.htm. Accessed June 8, 2013.
342  16. BENIGN NECK CONDITIONS

            Chia, J. K., Nakata, M. M., Lami, J. L., Park, S. S., & Ding, J. C. (1998). Azithromycin for the treatment of
                   cat-scratch disease. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official Publication of the Infectious Diseases Society
                   of America, 26(1), 193-194.

            Costantinides, F., Vidoni, G., Bodin, C., & Di Lenarda, R. (2013). Eagle's syndrome: Signs and symp-
                   toms. Cranio: The Journal of Craniomandibular Practice, 31(1), 56-60.

            Dulin, M., Kennard, T., Leach, L., & Williams R. (2008). Management of cervical lymphadenitis in chil-
                   dren. American Family Physician. http://www.aafp.org/afp/2008/1101/p1097.html. Accessed
                   June 8, 2013.

            Ebell, M. H. (2004). Epstein-Barr virus infectious mononucleosis. American Family Physician, 70(7), 1279-
                   1287.

            Ferrer, R. Lymphadenopathy: Differential diagnosis and evaluation. http://www.aafp.org/afp/981015ap/
                   ferrer.html. Accessed on June 8, 2013.

            Fonkalsrud, E. W. (2006). Lymphatic disorders. In J. L. Grosfeld, J. A. O'Neill Jr, J. A. Coran, E. W.
                   Fonkalsrud, & A. A. Caldamone (Eds), Pediatric surgery (6th ed., pp. 2137-2145). Chicago: Mosby
                   Elsevier.

            Gaskin, C. M., & Helms, C. A. (2004). Lipomas, lipoma variants, and well-differentiated liposarcomas
                   (atypical lipomas): Results of MRI evaluations of 126 consecutive fatty masses. AJR. American Jour-
                   nal of Roentgenology, 182(3), 733-739.

            Goff, C. J., Allred, C., & Glade, R. S. (2012). Current management of congenital branchial cleft cysts,
                   sinuses, and fistulae. Current Opinion in Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, 20(6), 533-539.

            Gohar, S. (2002). Lipoma excision. American Family Physician, 65(5), 901-905.
            Goodman, A. (2006). Hemangioma treatment not one size fits all. ENT Today. Retrieved from http://

                   www.enttoday.org/details/article/531829/Hemangioma_Treatment_not_One_Size_Fits_All.
                   html. Accessed June 9, 2013.
            Gourin, C. G., & Meyers, A. D. (2013). Parapharyngeal space tumors. Retrieved from http://emedicine.
                   medscape.com/article/849385-overview. June 12, 2013.
            Kennedy, T. L., Whitaker, M., & Wadih, G. (1998). Thyroglossal duct carcinoma: A rational approach to
                   management. Laryngoscope, 108(8 Pt 1), 1154-1158.
            Knight, T. T., Gonzalez, J. A., Rary, J. M., & Rush, D. S. (2006). Current concepts for the surgical manage-
                   ment of carotid body tumor. American Journal of Surgery, 191(1), 104-110.
            Kosaka, N., Sagoh, T., Uematsu, H., Kimura, H., Miyayama, S., Noguchi, M., & Itoh, H. (2007). Im-
                   aging by multiple modalities of patients with a carotidynia syndrome. European Radiology, 17(9),
                   2430-2433.
            Kruger, A. J., Walker, P. J., Foster, W. J., Jenkins, J. S., Boyne, N. S., & Jenkins, J. (2010). Important ob-
                   servations made managing carotid body tumors during a 25-year experience. Journal of Vascular
                   Surgery, 52(6), 1518-1523.
            Kuhn, J., Harzheim, A., Horz, R., & Bewermeyer, H. (2006). MRI and ultrasonographic imaging of a
                   patient with carotidynia. Cephalalgia: An International Journal of Headache, 26(4), 483-485.
            Leung, A. K., & Davies, H. D. (2009). Cervical lymphadenitis: Etiology, diagnosis, and management.
                   Current Infectious Disease Reports, 11(3), 183-189.
            Leung, A. K., & Robson, W. L. (2004). Childhood cervical lymphadenopathy. Journal of Pediatric Health
                   Care: Official Publication of National Association of Pediatric Nurse Associates and Practitioners, 18(1),
                   3-7.
            Luzuriaga, K., & Sullivan, J. (2010). Infectious mononucleosis. New England Journal of Medicine, 362,
                   1993-2000. Retrieved from http://nuhem.com/emlinks/LLSA%20Articles%202012/Infec-
                   tious%20Mononucleosis.pdf. Accessed June 8, 2013.
            Mendelsohn, A. H., Berke, G. S., & Chhetri, D. K. (2006). Heterogeneity in the clinical presentation of
                   Eagle's syndrome. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of
                   Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 134(3), 389-393.
            Mirza, B., Ijaz, L., Saleem, M., Sharif, M., & Sheikh, A. (2010). Cystic hygroma: An overview. Journal of
                   Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery, 3(3), 139-144.
            Mitroi, M., Dumitrescu, D., Simionescu, C., Popescu, C., Mogoanta, C., Cioroianu, L., et al. (2008). Man-
                   agement of second branchial cleft anomalies. Romanian Journal of Morphology and Embryology (Revue
                   roumaine de morphologie et embryologie), 49(1), 69-74.
            Pryor, S. G., Lewis, J. E., Weaver, A. L., & Orvidas, L. J. (2005). Pediatric dermoid cysts of the
                   head and neck. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of
                   Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 132(6), 938-942.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  343

Sambandan, T., & Mabel, R. (2011). Cervical lymphadenopathy--a review. Journal of Indian Academy of
      Dental Specialists, 2(1), 31-33.

Stanbro, M., Gray, B. H., & Kellicut, D. C. (2011). Carotidynia: Revisiting an unfamiliar entity. Annals of
      Vascular Surgery, 25(8), 1144-1153.

Swaid, A., & Al-Ammar, A. (2008). Management of thyroglossal duct cyst. Open Otorhinolaryngology
      Journal, 2, 26-28.

Taniguchi, Y., Horino, T., & Hashimoto, K. (2008). Is carotidynia syndrome a subset of vasculitis? Journal
      of Rheumatology, 35(9), 1901-1902.

Türkyilmaz, Z., Sönmez, K., Karabulut, R., Demirgoullari, B., Sezer, C., Basaklar, A. C., & Kale, N.
      (2004). Management of thyroglossal duct cysts in children. Pediatrics International: Official Journal of
      the Japan Pediatric Society, 46(1), 77-80.

Vieira, F., Allen, S. M., Stocks, R. M., & Thompson, J. W. (2008). Deep neck infection. Otolaryngologic
      Clinics of North America, 41(3), 459-483, vii.

Weber, A. L., Montandon, C., & Robson, C. D. (2000). Neurogenic tumors of the neck. Radiologic Clinics
      of North America, 38(5), 1077-1090.

White, J. R., Carlson, M. L., Van Gompel, J. J., Neff, B. A., Driscoll, C. L., Lane, J. I., & Link, M. J. (2013).
      Lipomas of the cerebellopontine angle and internal auditory canal: Primum Non Nocere. Laryngo-
      scope, 123(6), 1531-1536.
