17  Overview of
    Malignant Neck Conditions

HEAD AND NECK SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA

                   Squamous cells are the epithelium, or tissue layer, that cover the majority of surface
                   cells in the body, including the head and neck region. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
                   can occur anywhere in the head and neck region. The area in which the cancer started
                   further categorizes SCC of the head and neck and helps to determine the treatment and
                   outcome of the disease. Tobacco use, alcohol use, and human papillomavirus (HPV)
                   are important risk factors for head and neck cancers.

                          Histologically, the process by which normal cells are transformed into SCC is
                   viewed as a continuum of change from the normal cell, to hyperplasia (increased number
                   of cells), to dysplasia (abnormal cellular changes), to carcinoma in situ (early form of can-
                   cer without tumor invasion), to invasive carcinoma. Variants of SCC include verrucous
                   carcinoma, spindle cell carcinoma, basaloid carcinoma, and adenosquamous carcinoma.

                          The most common metastatic lesion to the neck is SCC. However, SCC in the
                   head and neck region does not necessarily mean that this is the location of the pri-
                   mary cancer site. It is important when discovering a SCC in the head and neck region
                   to search other areas as well before assuming the head and neck mass is the primary.
                   The incidence of an unknown primary tumor is between 2% and 8% of all patients
                   with head and neck SCC (Lalwani, 2008). Imaging studies, such as CT scan, MRI scan,
                   chest x-ray, and/or PET scan may be helpful in the search for the primary tumor.

                          The diagnosis of SCC can be diagnosed accurately with a fine-needle aspiration
                   (FNA) biopsy. For many years, nearly all patients with SCC of the head and neck were
                   treated with surgical excision often followed by radiation and/or chemotherapy. The
                   often devastating side effects of this treatment prompted further research into treat-
                   ments that would improve the posttreatment quality of life. To that end, in 1991 the
                   Veteran's Administration published a landmark study of advanced laryngeal cancer
                   that demonstrated that utilization of induction chemotherapy and radiation therapy
                   provided comparable remission rates to laryngectomy patients but allowed more
                   patients to preserve their larynx. This has inspired an era of multimodality therapy
                   with more conservative surgical interventions.

Squamous Cell Carcinoma Head and Neck Site Locations

                  Ear
                    SCC that involves the ear and lateral skull base is most often a cutaneous neoplasm

                      that originates from the skin of the pinna or external auditory canal (EAC).
                    SCC of the ear usually appears on the helix or preauricular region and is often an

                      ulcerated lesion with irregular borders, surrounding erythema, and induration.
                      Sometimes scaling or crusting is present.
346  17. MALIGNANT NECK CONDITIONS

                  In the ear canal, the earliest sign may be frequent bloody or serosanguineous dis-
                    charge. There may be associated pain and history of chronic otitis externa.

                  Along with basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and melanoma, SCC is one of the most com-
                    mon neoplasms of the auricle.

Figure 17.1:     Oral Cavity and Oropharynx
Tongue mass.      Approximately 90% of all carcinomas of the oral cavity are SCC.
                  The most common sites for SCC in the oral cavity and oropharynx are the lip, floor
Figure 17.2:
SCC at the base     of mouth (FOM), gingiva, hard palate, tonsils, and tongue including the base of the
of the tongue.      tongue (BOT).
                  SCC of the oral cavity is strongly associated with tobacco use as well as heavy alco-
                    hol use.
                  SCC of the tonsils is strongly associated with HPV infection.
                  Lesion or ulcer that does not heal are highly suspicious for SCC and should be biop-
                    sied.
                  Oral leukoplakia is the most common potentially malignant lesion. Less than 10% of
                    cases can transform into SCC.

                 Dorsum of
                 Tongue

                            SCC of the tongue

                                                       FIGURE 17.1 Tongue mass.

Figure 17.3:     Paranasal Sinuses and Nasal Cavity
Naso-             Approximately 70% of all carcinomas of the paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity are SCC.
pharyngeal        SCC of the sinonasal cavity most commonly arises in the maxillary sinus. The second
mass.
                    most common site is the ethmoid sinus. Usually at the time of the diagnosis, these
                    tumors are very large.
                  The chance of carcinoma in patients with sinonasal inverted papilloma is approximately
                    11% and the associated malignancy is predominantly SCC (But-Hadzic et al., 2011).
                  Primary SCC of the nasal septum is very rare. The usual presentation is bleeding,
                    crusting of the nasal septum, and nasal obstruction. Local and distant metasta-
                    sis is also very rare. Treatment of choice is surgical excision and postoperative
                    radiation.

                 Pharynx and Larynx
                  Approximately 90% of all carcinomas of the pharynx are SCC.
                  SCC is the most common type of cancer found in the larynx.
                                          HEAD AND NECK SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA  347

R

                                                                      FIGURE 17.2 Squamous cell
                                                                               carcinoma at the base of the
                                                                               tongue: Mass has irregular
                                                                               margins, crossing the midline
                                                                               and measuring 3.7 x 3.4 x
                                                                               5.9 cm. It was determined to
                                                                               be a moderately to poorly
                                                                               differentiated squamous cell
                                                                               carcinoma predominantly
                                                                               involving the oropharynx with
                                                                               extension into the posterior
                                                                               tongue.

                                                                              Nasopharyngeal Mass

                     Nasopharyngeal Mass

Nasopharyngeal Mass                       Nasopharyngeal Mass

FIGURE 17.3 Nasopharyngeal mass.
348  17. MALIGNANT NECK CONDITIONS

                  Vocal Cords
                   The true vocal cords are most commonly affected by SCC. If treated early, SCC of the

                     vocal cords has a high cure rate and excellent possibility of voice preservation. This
                     is likely related to early presentation and meager lymphatics in this area.

                  Salivary Glands
                   Although rare, SCC can arise within the salivary gland.

Figure 17.4: SCC  Solitary Neck Mass including Lymph Nodes
of neck.           In adult patients, in the absence of overt signs of infection, a lateral neck mass per-

                     sisting for longer than 6 weeks is likely metastatic SCC or lymphoma until proven
                     otherwise.
                   SCC can be found in the lymph nodes of the neck even when there is no evidence
                     of cancer in other parts of the head and neck. This is called a "metastatic squamous
                     neck cancer with unknown (occult) primary."
                   Enlarged lymph nodes high in the neck or the posterior triangle, positive for SCC,
                     suggest that the primary may be a nasopharyngeal lesion.
                   Enlarged jugulodigastric lymph nodes positive for SCC suggest that the primary
                     may be in the tonsils, BOT, or the supraglottic larynx.
                   Enlarged lymph nodes in the supraclavicular area positive for SCC suggest that the
                     primary may be in the digestive tract, tracheobronchial tree, breast, thyroid, or the
                     genitourinary tract.

                  R

                                    FIGURE 17.4 Squamous
                                    cell carcinoma of neck: CT
                                    with contrast shows a left
                                    neck mass interior to the
                                    sternocleidomastoid, with
                                    increased heterogeneity,
                                    compatible with necrosis. The
                                    mass abuts the left carotid
                                    artery. There are multiple
                                    adjacent lymph nodes as well.
                                    Pathology results indicated
                                    that the neck mass was a
                                    moderately differentiated
                                    squamous cell carcinoma.

NECK MASS: LYMPHOMA

Figure 17.5:      Lymphomas are malignant neoplasms of white blood cells called lymphocyte cells of
Lymphoma.         the lymphatic system. The exact etiology for each specific type of lymphoma is unclear.
                  Lymphoma, second to SCC, is the most common primary malignancy that occurs in
                  the head and neck region. The location and extent of the disease affects the staging
                  process as well as the treatment and predicted response to therapy. Lymphomas can be
                  treated with radiation, chemotherapy, or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
                                                                                       NECK MASS: LYMPHOMA  349

                           R

                                                                                               FIGURE 17.5 Lymphoma:
                                                                                                          Solid right parotid gland
                                                                                                          mass just inferior to the
                                                                                                          right ear along the posterior
                                                                                                          aspect of the inferior-most
                                                                                                          parotid gland, 20 x 13 mm.
                                                                                                          The borders are indistinct
                                                                                                          with mild surrounding fatty
                                                                                                          infiltration. No calcification is
                                                                                                          observed. Pathology indicated
                                                                                                          malignant lymphoma,
                                                                                                          follicular type.

Types of Lymphoma

                    The types of cells that multiply and how the cancer presents itself differentiates the
                      types of lymphomas.

                    Main types are the following:
                       Hodgkin's lymphoma:
                       Occurrence: Approximately 15% of all lymphomas
                       Thought to originate in B-lymphocyte cells
                       Usually presents as a disease process of the lymph nodes only. The disease usually
                            progresses slowly in an orderly way from one lymph node region to the next
                       When Hodgkin's cells are examined microscopically, Reed-Sternberg cells are
                            the characteristic histopathological finding.
                       Average age of onset is 27 years old
                       Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL):
                       Occurrence: Approximately 85% of all lymphomas
                       Thought to originate in both B-lymphocyte and T-lymphocyte cells
                       Usually presents as a disease process of the lymph nodes and extranodal (out-
                            side the lymph node). NHLs are less predictable in their course and are more
                            apt to spread.
                       Average age of onset is 67 years old.

Disease Sites and Presentation

                    Presents most often as enlarged, painless, mobile, lymph nodes in the neck. Most
                      often in the lower cervical or supraclavicular region

                    The most common head and neck region for extranodal lymphomas is Waldeyer's
                      ring (tonsils, nasopharynx, and BOT region).
                       Tonsillar lymphoma presents as unilateral tonsillar hypertrophy and sometimes
                         a sore throat.
                       Nasopharyngeal lymphoma presents with a neck mass, nasal obstruction,
                         decreased hearing, and possibly serous otitis media (related to blockage of eusta-
                         chian tube).
350  17. MALIGNANT NECK CONDITIONS

Workup        BOT tongue lymphoma presents with foreign body sensation in the throat (globus
Staging         sensation) and possibly a sore throat.

Websites   Other extranodal head and neck site involvement most often occurs in the paranasal
             sinuses, nasal cavity, larynx, oral cavity, parotid gland, and thyroid gland.

           In patients where a FNA is highly suggestive for lymphoma, an open biopsy may be
             necessary to obtain sufficient tissue for diagnosis.

           After Hodgkin's or NHL is diagnosed, the patient will be "staged." This requires the
             patient to undergo a series of tests and procedures to determine the extent of the dis-
             ease and which areas of the body are affected. The workup will include the following:
              Labs
              Chest x-ray: Important to rule out mediastinal involvement
              CT scan
              PET scan
              MRI of chest, abdomen, pelvis
              Bone marrow biopsy

           After the workup in the staging process, the patient will be classified according to
             the Ann Arbor Staging Classification scheme. The staging is the same for both Hodg-
             kin's and NHL.

           The following letters are added after the stage number for the following reasons
             (e.g., Stage IIIES):
              A: There is absence of systemic symptoms
              B: There is presence of systemic symptoms
              E: There is localized extranodal extension
              S: There is splenic involvement

          Stage I
          Involvement of a single lymph node region (most often the cervical region) or localized
          involvement of a single extralymphatic organ or site in the absence of any lymph node
          involvement. This is a rare diagnosis in Hodgkin's lymphoma.

          Stage II
          Involvement of two or more lymph node regions on the same side of the diaphragm,
          or of one lymph node region and a contiguous extralymphatic site

          Stage III
          Involvement of lymph node regions on both sides of the diaphragm, which may
          include the spleen and/or an extralymphatic extension in association with adjacent
          lymph node involvement

          Stage IV
          Any diffuse involvement of one or more extralymphatic organs

           Lymphoma Information Network: www.lymphomainfo.net
           National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology:

             Hodgkin Lymphoma (2013): http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/
             pdf/hodgkins.pdf
                                                           OVERVIEW OF SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OPTIONS  351

                    National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology:
                      Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (2013): http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_
                      gls/pdf/nhl.pdf

OVERVIEW OF SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

                   For many tumors of the head and neck, depending on the size of the tumor surgery
                   is still considered vitally important. For many tumors, the oncological surgical stan-
                   dard is to remove a 2-cm margin of tumor-free tissue around the primary tumor in
                   addition to removing the tumor itself. However, in head and neck tumors, this can
                   often result in sacrificing vital structures and impaired quality of life postoperatively.
                   Locally advanced laryngeal cancers require a form of a laryngectomy, which is removal
                   of the larynx. Radiation and/or chemotherapy are generally combined with surgical
                   intervention. Multimodal therapy often affects cure while preserving vital structures
                   and improving the quality of life posttherapy.

Types of Neck Dissection

                   For more advanced lesions and with associated lymphatic node metastasis, more
                   extensive neck surgery, termed neck dissection, may need to be done. A neck dissec-
                   tion involves removing the primary tumor in addition to removing cervical lymph
                   nodes in various levels of the neck. Indications for doing a neck dissection depend on
                   whether there is evidence of disease in the neck (other than the tumor), the size of the
                   tumor, the location of the tumor, and the lymphatic drainage pattern associated with
                   that site.

                  Extended Radical Neck Dissection
                    Indication
                    Extensive metastatic neck disease, lymphatic involvement, and the tumor is attached

                      to nonlymphatic structures in the neck

                    Surgery Involves
                    Removal of the internal jugular (IJ) vein, the sternocleidomastoid (SCM), the sub-

                      mandibular gland (SMG), the spinal accessory nerve, and all lymph nodes on the
                      affected side. Removal of additional lymphatic and nonlymphatic structures are
                      considered, including the following:
                       Vagus or hypoglossal nerves
                       Carotid artery
                       Additional lymph node groups
                       Skin

                  Radical Neck Dissection
                    Indication
                    Extensive metastatic neck disease and the tumor is attached to nonlymphatic struc-

                      tures in the neck

                    Surgery Involves
                    Removal of the internal jugular vein, the SCM, the SMG, the spinal accessory nerve,

                      and all lymph nodes on the affected side
352  17. MALIGNANT NECK CONDITIONS

                  Modified Radical Neck Dissection
                    Indication
                    Extensive metastatic neck disease and the tumor is not attached to nonlymphatic

                      structures in the neck

                    Surgery Involves
                    Removal of all the lymph nodes on the affected side; however, one or more of the

                      nonlymphatic structures (SCM, IJ, or the spinal accessory nerve) are spared.

                  Selective Neck Dissection
                    Indication
                    The tumor is not attached to nonlymphatic structures in the neck and one or more

                      lymph node groups are preserved.

                    Surgery Involves
                   Classified into four types determined by the specific site and initial staging of the
                   tumor:

                    Supraomohyoid neck dissection: Indicated for tumors of the FOM, retromolar trigone,
                      anterior two thirds of the tongue, upper/lower alveolar ridges, and buccal mucosa
                      in addition to selected lymph nodes if lymphatic spread is involved

                    Lateral neck dissection: Indicated for tumors of the oropharynx, hypopharynx, and
                      larynx with or without nodal involvement

                    Anterior neck dissection: Indicated for tumors originating in the thyroid gland, para-
                      thyroid gland(s), cervical esophagus, and glottic/subglottic larynx

                    Posterolateral neck dissection: Indicated primarily for patients with skin tumors

                  Surgical Complications
                   Removal of certain structures in the neck can cause associated complications:

                    IJ vein results in facial edema. Usually only occurs if there is bilateral resection.
                    SCM results in cosmetic flat-neck deformity.
                    Spinal accessory nerve damage can result in shoulder dysfunction, shoulder droop,

                      winged scapula, and neck pain.

Laryngectomy

                   Locally advanced laryngeal cancers require a form of a laryngectomy. A total larynge-
                   ctomy includes removal of the supraglottic, glottic, and subglottic portions of the lar-
                   ynx. Suturing the trachea to the skin of the anterior neck creates a permanent opening
                   for breathing, or stoma.

                          There are other types of laryngectomy procedures that can be done to include
                   one or more portions of the larynx without having to remove the entire larynx. How-
                   ever, due to the high rate of laryngeal cancer recurrence, the majority of times the
                   entire larynx is removed in locally advanced laryngeal cancers. This type of surgery,
                   combined with radiation with or without chemotherapy, leads to a high survival rate
                   in addition to improved quality of life.

Regions of the Larynx

                  Supraglottic
                    This region includes the superior tip of the epiglottis to the false vocal cords.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  353

                  Glottic
                    This region includes the true vocal cords along with the anterior and posterior com-

                      missures.

                  Subglottic
                    This region includes the inferior edge of the true vocal cords to the lower border of

                      the cricoid cartilage. NOTE: Most tumors in this region are extensions from tumors in
                        the supraglottic or glottic regions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            But-Hadzic, J., Jenko, K., Poljak, M., Kocjan, B., Gale, N., & Strojan, P. (2011). Sinonasal inverted papil-
                   loma associated with squamous cell carcinoma. Radiation and Oncology, 45(4), 267-272.

            Chadha, N. K., & Forte, V. (2009). Pediatric head and neck malignancies. Current Opinion in Otolaryngol-
                   ogy and Head and Neck Surgery, 17(6), 471-476.

            Kreimer, A., Clifford, G., Boyle, P., & Franceschi, S. (2005). Human papillomavirus types in head and
                   neck squamous cell carcinomas worldwide: A systematic review. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers
                   and Prevention, 14(2), 467-475.

            Lalwani, A. K. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology Head and neck surgery. Chapter 27:
                   Neck neoplasms and neck dissection. New York: McGraw-Hill.

            Mendenhall, W. M. (2000). Squamous cell carcinoma. Metastatic to the neck from an unknown head and
                   neck primary site. American Journal of Otolaryngology, 22(4), 261-267.

            National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
                   lines). (2013). Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Version 1. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/pro-
                   fessionals/physician_gls/pdf/nhl.pdf. June 20, 2013.

            National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
                   lines). (2013). Hodgkin's lymphoma. Version 2. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/profession-
                   als/physician_gls/pdf/hodgkins.pdf. June 20, 2013.

            Pazdur, R., & Wagman L. (2009). Head and neck tumors. In Cancer management: A multidisciplinary
                   approach. Cancer management handbook (11th ed.). London: CMP Medica.

            Perez-Ordonez, B., Beauchemin, M., & Jordan, R. (2006). Molecular biology of squamous cell carcinoma
                   of the head and neck. Journal of Clinical Pathology, 59(5), 445-453.

            Robbins, K. T., Shaha, A. R., Medina, J. E., Califano, J. A., Wolf, G. T., Ferlito, A., et al. (2008). Consensus
                   statement on the classification and terminology of neck dissection. Archives of Otolaryngology--
                   Head and Neck Surgery. Committee for Neck Dissection Classification, American Head and Neck Society,
                   134(5), 536-538.

            Rodriguez, S., Newlands, S., Quinn, F., & Ryan, M. Laryngeal conservation: Grand Rounds Presentation,
                   University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Department of Otolaryngology. February 9, 2005.
                   Retrieved from http://www.edu/otoref/grnds/laryn-conserv-050209/laryn-conserv-050209.doc.
                   August 8, 2013.

            Scarpa, R., & Zevallos, J. (2005). Surgical management of head and neck malignancies. In L. K. Clarke
                   & M. J. Dropkin (Eds.), Head and neck cancer (pp. 49-61). Pittsburgh, PA: Oncology Nursing Society.
                   Retrieved from http://cinjweb.umdnj.edu/network/content/education/documents/6_Chapter-
                   6surgicalManagementofHeadandNeckMalignancies.pdf June 20, 2013.

            Sira, J., & Makura, Z. G. (2011). Differential diagnosis of cystic neck lesions. Annals of Otology, Rhinology
                   and Laryngology, 120(6), 409-413.
