18  Evaluation and
    Management of
    Thyroid Disorders

OVERVIEW: THYROID

                   The thyroid gland consists of two lobes connected by the isthmus. The thyroid gland
                   lies anterior to the trachea with the isthmus overlying the trachea between the second
                   and fifth tracheal ring and the thyroid lobes rest on the lateral tracheal wall. The typical
                   dimensions of the thyroid lobes are 2.5 to 4.0 cm in length and 1.5 to 2.0 cm in width
                   and 1.0 to 1.5 cm in thickness. On average, the normal thyroid gland weighs approxi-
                   mately 10 to 20 g.

                          See Chapter 2: Thyroid and Function of the Thyroid Gland sections.

Useful Websites

                    American Thyroid Association (ATA): www.thyroid.org
                    American Thyroid Association Professional Guidelines: www.thyroidguidelines.

                      net
                    Thyroid Foundation of America: www.allthyroid.org
                    National Graves' Disease Foundation: www.ngdf.org
                    European Thyroid Association (ETA): www.eurothyroid.com
                    EndocrineWeb (patient education): www.endocrineweb.com
                    American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists: www.aace.com
                    The Endocrine Society: www.endo-society.org

UNDERSTANDING THYROID FUNCTION LAB TESTS

                   Thyroid hormones influence almost every tissue and organ system in the body. The
                   most commonly used thyroid function tests are thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
                   and free thyroxine (free T4). TSH can be used alone in screening for thyroid disease;
                   however, both TSH and free T4 are needed for the actual diagnosis.

                          Triiodothyronine (T3) is also a thyroid hormone that is produced by the thyroid
                   gland. Both T3 and T4 are activated by the TSH, which is released from the pitu-
                   itary gland. The hypothalamus produces thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) that
                   prompts the pituitary gland to produce TSH. There is a feedback communication
                   system between the T3/T4 and TSH. If T3 and T4 are elevated, then the production of
                   TSH in the pituitary gland decreases. If T3 and T4 are decreased, then the production
                   of TSH in the pituitary gland increases. Iodine is necessary for the production of T3
                   and T4. There is more T4 circulating in the blood (80%) than T3 (20%). However, T3
356  18. THYROID DISORDERS

                   is more powerful than T4 and has a greater effect on the way the body uses energy
                   than T4. T3 is most commonly used to diagnose and confirm the presence of hyper-
                   thyroidism.

                  TABLE 18.1 COMMON THYROID FUNCTION LAB TESTS
Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH): Normal Range Is Usually: 0.45-4.12 mU/La

Most useful laboratory test for           The American Thyroid Association
    thyroid function and in the initial       recommends screening all adults with
    evaluation of thyroid nodules.            TSH starting at 35 years of age and every
                                              5 years thereafter.
If TSH is decreased  order thyroxine
    (free T4) and triiodothyronine (free  TSH values change depending on the time of
    T3).                                      day. Therefore, variations of TSH values
                                              that are still within the normal range
Necessary to confirm the presence of          do not necessarily reflect a change in
    overt or central hyperthyroidism.         thyroid function. TSH values are lowest
                                              in the late afternoon and highest around
If TSH is increased  order free T4 and        bedtime.
    antithyroid perioxidase antibodies
    (TPOAb).                              During the first trimester of pregnancy,
                                              serum TSH typically decreases but usually
Necessary to confirm the presence of          never below 0.1 mU/L. This is related to
    hypothyroidism                            the stimulatory effect of the pregnancy
                                              hormone.
Higher serum TSH, even the upper
    part of the reference range is
    associated with increased risk of
    malignancy in a thyroid nodule
    (Boelaert et al., 2008)

Free Thyroxine (Free T4)

Free T4 should be the second lab test typically ordered if the serum TSH is outside of the
    reference range.

Free Triiodothyronine (Free T3)

Free T3 is not useful in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.

Reference Chart for Thyroid Dysfunction

Diagnosis                        TSH                       Free T4  Free T3

Euthyroid                        Normal                    Normal   Normal

Central or subclinical                                     Normal   Normal
    hypothyroidismb
                                 Usually > 4.5 mIU/L

Overt hypothyroidism                                                         

                                 Usually > 10 mIU/L                 or Normal

Central hypothyroidism                                     

                                 Usually mildly elevated

Subclinical hyperthyroidism                                Normal   Normal

Overt hyperthyroidism                                      
                                                                                 

                                 Usually < 0.01 mU/L                or Normal

                                                                             (continued)
                    HYPERTHYROIDISM, THYROIDITIS, AND THYROID CRISIS  357

Antithyroid Peroxidase Antibodies (TPOAb)

The diagnosis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis is made by detecting an elevated serum level of
    TPOAb.

Thyroglobulin (Tg)

Elevated levels of Tg could indicate     Tg is an important marker to monitor
    Hashimoto's thyroiditis in               patients for residual thyroid tissue or
    conjunction with an elevated             recurrent thyroid carcinoma. Tg levels
    TPOAb.                                   that rise over time can be an indicator for
                                             growing thyroid tissue or cancer.

Calcitonin

Calcitonin measurement is                Other factors that can cause elevated
    recommended if fine-needle               calcitonin levels include alcohol
    aspiration (FNA) biopsy results are      consumption, smoking, kidney
    suggestive of medullary thyroid          failure, autoimmune thyroid disease,
    carcinoma (MTC) because calcitonin       hypergastrinemia (resulting from proton
    is a serum marker for MTC.               pump inhibitor therapy), etc. Therefore,
                                             if the calcitonin is increased, the test
                                             should be repeated.

aNormal reference range depends on many factors such as age, gender, and the laboratory facilities
method of testing. Check with your laboratory regarding reference values.
bThe presence of elevated TPOAb in patients with subclinical hypothyroidism can help to predict
whether or not they will progress to overt hypothyroidism.

HYPERTHYROIDISM, THYROIDITIS, AND THYROID CRISIS

                   Hyperthyroidism, thyroiditis, and thyroid crisis all involve an overactive thyroid gland
                   in which the thyroid produces excessive amounts of circulating thyroid hormones includ-
                   ing T3 and T4. Graves' disease (GD) is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism.

Hyperthyroidism

                    The prevalence of hyperthyroidism is approximately 1.2% (Bahn et al., 2011).
                    Hyperthyroidism is a type of thyrotoxicosis. The most common causes of hyperthy-

                      roidism include the following:
                       GD
                       Toxic multinodular goiter
                       Toxic adenoma: Distinguished from a multinodular goiter because an adenoma

                         is typically solitary
                    Common symptoms of hyperthyroidism:

                       Anxiety
                       Tachycardia or heart palpitations
                       Hand tremors
                       Increased stool frequency
                       Heat intolerance
                       Weight loss
                       Increased perspiration
358  18. THYROID DISORDERS

Subclinical Hyperthyroidism

                    This condition is defined as a low serum TSH with normal values for both free T3
                      and free T4.

                    The patient may or may not be symptomatic.

Thyroiditis

                   Most common forms of thyroiditis include the following:

                  Chronic Lymphocytic Thyroiditis (Hashimoto's Thyroiditis)
                    Autoimmune disease in which the thyroid gland is attacked by cell and antibody-

                      mediated immune processes
                    More common in people with other autoimmune diseases
                    Usually results in hypothyroidism when there is significant thyroid gland destruc-

                      tion. Until then, there are bouts of hyperthyroidism.
                    Physical examination findings: Symmetric, enlarged, nontender goiter. However, a

                      goiter may or may not be present.
                    Labs: Elevated serum levels of thyroid perioxidase antibody (TPOAb)

                  Subacute Thyroiditis
                    Etiology: It may be caused by a viral infection.
                    Characterized by fever and thyroid gland pain.
                    Physical examination: The gland is firm to hard on palpation and the erythrocyte

                      sedimentation rate (ESR) test is almost always greater than 50 mm/hour and some-
                      times greater than 100 mm/hour.
                    This condition is usually self-limiting and there is no need for any specific treatment
                      in most patients. The condition generally lasts between 4 and 10 weeks. At the end of
                      its course, the patient usually has mild hypothyroidism and no thyroid replacement
                      therapy is usually needed unless the patient is symptomatic. The thyroid follicles
                      will regenerate on their own and an euthyroid state is typically restored within 1 to
                      2 months.

Thyroid Crisis (Thyroid Storm)

                    Represents an extreme case of thyrotoxicosis
                    Most commonly occurs in severe Graves' disease, with a solitary toxic adenoma or

                      toxic multinodular goiter. Usually a precipitating event ignites the transition from
                      thyrotoxicosis to thyroid storm such as with surgery, myocardial infarction, severe
                      infection, and so on. It is thought to be related to an excessive increase in the amount
                      of circulating free thyroid hormones.
                    These patients usually need to be monitored in the intensive care unit.
                    Presentation can include a wide variety of symptoms because the effects are system-
                      wide. Symptoms can include chest pain, dyspnea, palpitations, diarrhea, confusion,
                      anxiety, diplopia, and so on.
                    Thyroidectomy is an appropriate treatment for some forms of thyrotoxicosis and not
                      for others.
                    Beta-blocker medications can be used in almost all forms of thyrotoxicosis.
                    Antithyroid drugs are useful in only some cases of thyrotoxicosis.
                    If thyrotoxicosis is left untreated complications can cause an overall system decom-
                      pensation--arrhythmias, embolic events, congestive heart failure, hepatic failure,
                      and even cardiovascular collapse and death.
                                                                                                GRAVES' DISEASE  359

GRAVES' DISEASE

                   GD is an autoimmune disease and the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. When
                   it affects the thyroid, it causes the gland to enlarge (goiter) and become overactive. This
                   disease can also affect the eyes (causing exophthalmos/proptosis, which is bulging of
                   the eyes), skin, heart, and other body systems. If a patient has a symmetrically enlarged
                   thyroid, GD ophthalmopathy, and moderate to severe hyperthyroidism as determined
                   by lab tests, the diagnosis of GD is confirmed and further evaluation of hyperthyroid-
                   ism is not necessary. Once the diagnosis of GD has been established, there are three
                   effective treatment options: (a) radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, (b) antithyroid medi-
                   cation, and (c) thyroidectomy.

Radioactive Iodine Therapy

                    Most commonly preferred choice. Radioiodine therapy normalizes thyroid function
                      in 85% to 100% of patients with hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules or toxic multi-
                      nodular goiters (Reiners & Schneider, 2002).

                    Goal of RAI therapy is to control hyperthyroidism by making the patient hypothy-
                      roid and to reduce the size of the goiter.

                    In general there is a 40% to 50% decrease in thyroid size after 1 year and a 50% to 60%
                      decrease after 3 to 5 years with RAI therapy (Weetman, 2007).

                    Beta-blocker medication therapy is usually started prior to RAI therapy due to the
                      patient's hyperthyroid symptoms.

                    Contraindications to RAI include:
                       Pregnant or lactating women
                       Females planning a pregnancy within 4 to 6 months of RAI treatment. This is to
                         assure a euthyroid state following thyroid ablation. NOTE: There is no evidence
                            that RAI therapy causes infertility.
                       Coexisting thyroid cancer

Antithyroid Medications

                    When antithyroid medications are given, the goal of therapy is to reduce the produc-
                      tion of thyroid hormones and make the patient euthyroid.

                    The medication used is usually methimazole and is continued for 12 to 18 months
                      before tapered or discontinued once the TSH normalizes.

Thyroidectomy

                    Thyroidectomy has a high cure rate for hyperthyroidism of GD.
                    Total thyroidectomy has a nearly 0% risk of recurrence of hyperthyroidism at 5 years

                      (Palit, Miller, & Miltenburg, 2000).
                    Before a thyroidectomy is considered, the patient should first do either RAI therapy

                      or use antithyroid medications to make them euthyroid. This is because a thyroid
                      storm can be precipitated by the stress of surgery.
                    If it is not possible to render the patient euthyroid before a thyroidectomy, the patient
                      is managed with a beta-blocker and potassium iodide in the preoperative period.
                      The potassium iodide decreases thyroid blood flow, vascularity, and intraoperative
                      blood loss during a thyroidectomy.
                    Following a thyroidectomy for GD, levothyroxine (L-thyroxine), also known as Syn-
                      throid is started.
360  18. THYROID DISORDERS

HYPOTHYROIDISM

                   Hypothyroidism occurs when the thyroid gland does not produce a sufficient amount
                   of thyroid hormones--T3 and T4. The two most common causes of hypothyroidism
                   (excluding iodine deficiency) in developing countries include Hashimoto's thyroiditis
                   (an autoimmune disease) and RAI therapy for hyperthyroidism.

                          The pituitary gland may have a tumor or be damaged by surgery or radiation
                   and may also not create enough TSH. The cause may also be a result of the hypothala-
                   mus not producing enough TRH, which results in no production of TSH because the
                   TRH is not prompting the pituitary gland to produce TSH. These causes of hypothy-
                   roidism are called "central hypothyroidism." Because TSH is not a reliable indicator, in
                   patients with central hypothyroidism, assessment of free T4, not TSH, should be done
                   to diagnose and guide treatment of hypothyroidism.

                          It is best to consult an endocrinologist when managing patients with any type of
                   thyroid-related disorder. The management of pregnant patients with a thyroid-related
                   disorder is beyond the scope of this chapter; these patients should be managed by an
                   endocrinologist.

Signs and Symptoms of Hypothyroidism

                   Most common:

                    Dry skin
                    Cold sensitivity
                    Fatigue
                    Muscle cramps
                    Voice changes
                    Constipation
                    Irritability
                    Nervousness

Treatment of Subclinical Hypothyroidism

                    A mild TSH elevation does not necessarily indicate that the patient requires thyroid
                      hormone therapy.

                    If the patient is symptomatic and thyroid replacement therapy is initiated for sub-
                      clinical hypothyroidism, the dosage is usually less than with patients who have overt
                      hypothyroidism. Doses of 25 to 75 mcg daily of L-thyroxine are usually sufficient to
                      achieve a euthyroid state. Further adjustments should be guided by the patient's
                      symptoms and/or clinical response and follow-up TSH values.

Treatment of Overt Hypothyroidism

                    Patients with primary hypothyroidism, with TSH levels above 10 mIU/L should be
                      treated.

                    L-thyroxine has become the mainstay of treating hypothyroidism. The daily dosage
                      of L-thyroxine is dependent on age and weight.
                       As the patients ages, and following significant weight loss, a decrease in dosage
                         adjustment may need to be made to L-thyroxine.

                    If the patient has little residual thyroid function, replacement therapy usually
                      requires approximately 1.6 mcg/kg of L-thyroxine daily.
                                                                                              THYROID NODULES  361

                    Patients who are hypothyroid related to postoperative total thyroidectomy or RAI
                      therapy may require higher L-thyroxine doses.

                  L-Thyroxine Administration and Storage Instructions
                    Take with water on an empty stomach between 30 and 60 minutes prior to eating

                      breakfast.
                    Protect the medication from light and moisture.

                  L-Thyroxine Dosage Adjustments
                    Dose adjustments are guided by serum TSH level. The TSH lab is drawn 4 to 8 weeks

                      following initiation of therapy, dosage adjustments, or change in the L-thyroxine
                      preparation.
                    If dosage adjustment needs to be made, do small, incremental changes of 12.5 to 25
                      mcg to achieve goal TSH levels.

                  TSH Lab Review Protocol Once the Patient Is Euthyroid
                    The most reliable lab test to determine accurate management of a hypothyroid

                      patient on L-thyroxine is a TSH level.
                    Periodic follow-up evaluations with repeat TSH testing at 6-month to 1-year intervals

                      are appropriate once the patient reaches an euthyroid state and is asymptomatic.

Treatment of Central Hypothyroidism

                    Patients who have central hypothyroidism may require higher L-thyroxine doses.
                    L-thyroxine dosage adjustments to guide therapy in central hypothyroidism are

                      based on free T4 lab level, not TSH.

THYROID NODULES

                   A thyroid nodule is a lesion within the thyroid gland that is different radiologically
                   from the surrounding thyroid tissue. They are clinically important because of the
                   potential for them to be malignant. Nonpalpable thyroid nodules have the same risk of
                   malignancy as palpable nodules. Measure serum TSH and free T4 in the initial evalua-
                   tion of all patients with a thyroid nodule.

                   Common risk factors for thyroid nodules include the following:

                    Iodine deficiency
                    History of head and neck irradiation exposure

                       New nodules develop at a rate of about 0.1% per year, beginning in early life, but
                         develop at a much higher rate (approximately 2% per year) after exposure to head
                         and neck irradiation (Lubin, Ron, & Shore, 1995).

                    Family history of thyroid carcinoma in first-degree relative
                    Presence of thyroid nodules during childhood and adolescence should induce cau-

                      tion because the malignancy rate is 3- to 4-fold higher than in adult patients (Corrias
                      et al., 2001).

Signs and Symptoms

                    Most patients with thyroid nodules are asymptomatic, but the absence of symptoms
                      does not rule out malignant disease.
362  18. THYROID DISORDERS

                    If the thyroid nodule is getting larger over time, it is suggestive of malignant involve-
                      ment.

                    The following symptoms are usually related to a nonthyroid reason but can suggest
                      an underlying malignant process that may or may not be related to the thyroid:
                       Pain
                       Globus sensation or choking sensation
                       Cervical tenderness
                       Hoarseness
                       Dysphagia
                       Cough
                       Dysphonia
                       Dyspnea

Physical Examination Findings

                    A thyroid nodule may or may not be palpable.
                    Physical examination findings that suggest an underlying malignant process include

                      the following:
                       Firm, hard, solitary, or dominant thyroid nodule
                       Growing nodule over time
                       Lateral cervical neck lymphadenopathy (may or may not be thyroid-related)
                       Vocal cord paralysis (may or may not be thyroid-related)

Tests to Evaluate Thyroid Nodules

                  Thyroid Ultrasound
                   An ultrasound is the single most sensitive test to detect thyroid nodules. An ultra-
                   sound also allows for the measurement of the nodule, evaluation of the structure and
                   the associated changes within the thyroid gland.

                    When to Order a Thyroid Ultrasound
                     NOTE: Do not order a thyroid ultrasound as a screening tool. There needs to be a defined,
                     documented indication. Common indications include the following:

                    Cervical lymphadenopathy is present with our without a palpable thyroid nodule.
                        NOTE: This could suggest a malignant thyroid disease process.

                    The patient has risk factors for thyroid nodules (as mentioned earlier).
                    Thyroid disorder is suspected related to physical examination findings, especially if

                      the patient has a palpable thyroid nodule or multinodular goiter.

                    Thyroid Ultrasound Interpretation of Findings
                    Findings on the thyroid ultrasound report can be described in many different ways.

                      There are certain terms/descriptions that can indicate a possible risk of malignancy
                      and therefore, prompt a fine needle asperation (FNA) biopsy of the nodule(s). Fol-
                      lowing is a list of some of those terms:
                       Mixed cystic or solid
                       Solid or hypoechoic
                       Microcalcifications
                       Irregular margins
                       Spongiform
                       Increased intranodular vascularity
                       An absent halo
                                                                                              THYROID NODULES  363

                    Certain ultrasound appearances may also be highly predictive of a benign nodule:
                       A purely cystic nodule
                       A spongiform appearance

                  Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy
                   A FNA biopsy should be performed under ultrasound guidance for the best possible
                   accuracy in the findings. This is because the FNA biopsy results will determine whether
                   the nodule should be managed medically or surgically. Approximately 15% to 30% of
                   thyroid nodules evaluated by FNA are not clearly benign or malignant (Alexander et al.,
                   2012). Thyroid nodules appearing in patients with GD or Hashimoto's thyroiditis should
                   be managed in the same way as in any other patients (Yano et al., 2007).

                    When to Order a FNA Biopsy of a Thyroid Nodule
                     NOTE: It is rarely necessary to biopsy more than two nodules at a time.
                   Choose when to biopsy and which nodule(s) to biopsy based on the following criteria:

                    Nodule greater than 1.0 to 1.5 cm
                    Nodules less than 1.0 cm if:

                       Physical examination findings or ultrasound features are suspicious. See previous
                         section on Thyroid ultrasound Interpretation of Findings.
                       NOTE: For multinodular goiters, it is more important to choose which nodule to
                               biopsy based on suspicious ultrasound findings versus the one that is larger. If none
                               of the nodules are suspicious, then choose the largest nodule for FNA biopsy.

                       Previous history of head or neck radiation
                       Lesion is cystic and suspicious. The ultrasound-guided FNA should sample from

                         the solid component (especially the vascular component) of the cyst and the cyst
                         fluid should be aspirated and submitted for examination.
                       Family history of thyroid carcinoma in a first-degree relative

Thyroid Biopsy Results and Interpretation

                  Nondiagnostic
                    Insufficient number of cells to determine results

                  Benign
                    Most common interpretation
                    Benign thyroid nodules include:

                       Hashimoto's thyroiditis
                       Benign cysts
                       Colloid nodules
                       Hyperplastic nodules

                  Cystic Lesion
                    Cytologically these lesions are benign.

                  Follicular Lesion
                    Currently follicular carcinoma cannot be distinguished from a follicular adenoma

                      (benign) based on FNA results, ultrasound results, or physical examination features
                      alone.
                    The FNA report may mention:
                     1. Follicular lesion or atypical cells of undetermined significance, or
                     2. Follicular neoplasm. NOTE: Both groups have the indication to consider surgical

                            removal of the thyroid gland(s). Follicular neoplasm can be found in 15% to 30%
364  18. THYROID DISORDERS

                            of FNA specimens and carries a 20% to 30% risk of malignancy, whereas lesions
                            reported as follicular lesion or atypical cell of undetermined significance are variably
                            reported as having a 5% to 10% risk of malignancy (Baloch et al., 2008).

                  Suspicious
                    Suggests the lesion is malignant but does not fulfill all of the criteria to call it malignant.

                  Malignant
                    Criteria are met to diagnose the lesion as malignant. The specific type of malignant

                      lesion should be mentioned.

Protocol for Nodule Management Based on Interpretation

                  Nondiagnostic
                   Consider the following:

                    Ultrasound followup and monitoring of the size of the nodule(s) in question
                       The timing to repeat a thyroid ultrasound and the role of routine rebiopsy of benign
                         nodules is still unclear (Orlandi, Puscar, Capriata, & Fideleff, 2005). In most cases,
                         6 months to 1 year is appropriate. If there is evidence of nodule growth, FNA
                         should be repeated.

                    Repeat the ultrasound-guided FNA.

                  Benign
                    There is still a small chance that the benign results are false negative. The risk of

                      overlooking a cancer when the biopsy is benign is generally less than 3%.
                    Consider the following:

                       Ultrasound followup and monitoring the size of the nodule(s) in question. In most
                         cases, 6 months to 1 year is appropriate. If there is evidence of nodule growth,
                         FNA should be repeated.

                       Repeat the ultrasound-guided FNA.
                       Surgical indications include the following:

                       Dysphagia
                       Choking sensation or neck pressure
                       Shortness of breath (especially when supine)
                       Pain
                       Increase in nodule size or change in ultrasound features despite benign FNA

                            biopsy

                  Cystic Lesion
                    Consider monitoring the cystic lesion for reaccumulation of fluid. Fluid reaccumula-

                      tion can be seen in 60% to 90% of patients (Valcavi & Frasoldati, 2004).
                    If the fluid continues to reaccumulate despite aspirating the contents and the patient

                      is symptomatic, surgical removal of the affected thyroid gland can be considered
                      (hemithyroidectomy).
                    Percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI) into the cystic nodule can also be considered.
                      This causes necrosis of the nodule and prevents recurrence.

                  Follicular Lesion
                   Consider the following:
                    Repeat FNA biopsy of the nodule(s) if the interpretation was follicular cells or atypi-

                      cal cells of undetermined significance. At surgical intervention, approximately 20%
                      of such specimens are determined to be malignant lesions (Castro & Gharib, 2005).
                                                                                              THYROID NODULES  365

                    Ordering a thyroid radioactive uptake scan/scintigraphy (RAIU) if the interpretation
                      was follicular neoplasm, especially if the serum TSH is in the low normal range.

                  Suspicious
                    Suspicious findings are an automatic indication to consider removal of the thyroid

                      gland(s).

                  Malignant
                    Malignant findings are an automatic indication for a thyroidectomy.

                  MRI/CT Scan
                   First, if a thyroid nodule is detected as an incidental finding on an MRI/CT scan,
                   the patient should undergo thyroid ultrasound evaluation before considering a FNA
                   biopsy. An MRI and/or CT scan may be ordered in cases when substernal extension or
                   airway compression of the nodular goiter is suspected.

                  Thyroid Radioactive Uptake Scan/Scintigraphy
                   Thyroid RAIU is a test that uses a radioactive tracer dye (usually iodine) to evalu-
                   ate how much of that tracer the thyroid gland absorbs from the blood. This gives an
                   understanding of the function of the thyroid gland and detects certain areas within the
                   thyroid gland that are not functioning properly. NOTE: This test is entirely different than

                     the RAI therapy that is done to destroy cancerous cells.

RAIU: Interpretation

                   Nodules may be classified as the following:

                  Hyperfunctioning
                    Also known as "hot nodule"
                    Almost never represents a malignant lesion

                  Hypofunctioning
                    Also known as "cold nodule"
                    May have a risk of malignancy

                  Indeterminate
                    May have a risk of malignancy.

                   Most thyroid lesions are cold or indeterminate and of those, only a small minority of
                   them are malignant (Meier & Kaplan, 2001). Therefore, this test may lead to a large
                   number patients undergoing unnecessary further testing.

American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists Indications for RAIU

                    Presence of a solitary thyroid nodule and suppressed TSH level. If the nodule is hot,
                      a FNA biopsy is not indicated.

                    Multinodular goiters even without suppressed TSH to identify cold or indetermi-
                      nate areas

                    In the diagnosis of ectopic thyroid tissue such as lingual or thymid ectopia
                    To determine eligibility for radioiodine therapy
                    If the serum TSH is subnormal and subclinical hyperthyroidism is suspected. If there

                      are hyperfunctioning hot nodules present, the patient should be evaluated by an
366  18. THYROID DISORDERS

                      endocrinologist for possible treatment of hyperthyroidism. FNA should be consid-
                      ered for those with isofunctioning or nonfunctioning cold nodules.

OVERVIEW: TYPES OF THYROID CANCER

                   Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy and originates within
                   the thyroid gland. Thyroid cancer is classified by pathological characteristics
                   on FNA. The only known environmental cause of thyroid carcinoma is expo-
                   sure to ionizing radiation; children's thyroid glands are especially vulnerable if
                   exposed.

                          The variants of thyroid carcinoma include the following: papillary, follicular,
                   medullary, and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. The papillary and follicular types can
                   be classified as differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC), which is the majority (90%)
                   of all thyroid cancers (Sherman, 2003). Of the DTC, papillary cancer comprises about
                   85% of cases compared to about 10% that have follicular histology (Hundahl, Flem-
                   ing, Fremgen, & Menck, 1998). In general, the prognosis of papillary thyroid carci-
                   noma (PTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) are similar. There are certain
                   subtypes of PTC that have a worse prognosis then the more highly invasive variants
                   of FTC.

Types of Thyroid Cancer and Overview of Management

                  Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma
                    Most common with overall excellent outcomes.

                    Thyroid Ultrasound: Typical Findings in Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma
                    Solid, hypoechoic, often with infiltrative margins, and increased nodular vascularity.

                      Microcalcifications are highly specific for PTC.

                    Management
                    Surgery followed by RAI treatment and thyroid hormone suppression

                  Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma
                    Second most common with overall excellent outcomes
                    Follicular cancers that are less than 2 cm in diameter have not been shown to be asso-

                      ciated with metastatic disease (Machens, Holzhausen, & Dralle, 2005).

                    Thyroid Ultrasound: Typical Findings in Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma
                    Iso- to hyperechoic, thick, and irregular halo. FTC does not have microcalcifica-

                      tions.

                    Management
                    Surgery followed by RAI treatment and thyroid hormone suppression
                    Surgical options include hemithyroidectomy and isthmusectomy or total thyroidec-

                      tomy, depending on the clinical situation

                  Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma
                    Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) accounts for about 4% of all thyroid cancer

                      cases in the United States (Hundahl et al., 1998).
                                                                       OVERVIEW: TYPES OF THYROID CANCER  367

                    The 10-year disease-specific survival rate of MTC is about 75% (Hundahl et al.,
                      1998).

                    MTC may arise from the calcitonin-secreting parafollicular cells of the thyroid, or
                      C-cells. Because these cells secrete calcitonin, a serum calcitonin lab test can be used
                      as an identifier in MTC.

                    Approximately 25% of MTC is genetic. Inherited MTC syndromes consist of the fol-
                      lowing:
                       Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) I (Wermer's syndrome)
                       MEN IIA (Sipple's syndrome, most common)
                       MEN IIB

                    Management
                    Surgery and external beam radiation therapy

                  Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer
                    Rare but highly lethal form of thyroid carcinoma
                    Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is responsible for 1.7% of all thyroid cancers (Small-

                      ridge & Copland, 2010).
                    ATC patients have a median survival of 5 months and a 20% 1-year survival rate

                      (Smallridge et al., 2012).
                    ATC is most common in the elderly, often with associated malnutrition.
                    ATC frequently occurs in the setting of other benign or malignant thyroid disor-

                      ders.
                    ATC can invade other structures in the neck; therefore, sometimes the type

                      of surgery is dependent upon the extent of local invasions and the structures
                      involved.

                    Management
                    Surgery is considered to avoid current or eventual airway or esophageal obstruc-

                      tion.
                    When a patient presents with a thyroid mass characterized as ATC, there are a num-

                      ber of preoperative staging procedures that are likely to be of value.
                    CT and/or MRI of the neck and chest should be done to assess the extent of the dis-

                      ease and help plan for surgery and/or radiation therapy.
                    PET scan is valuable in evaluating metastatic sites.
                    Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy should be done to evaluate vocal cord function.

                      Vocal cord paralysis is common in patients with ATC.
                    The best results in terms of both local control and survival appear to result from

                      surgical resection followed by radiation therapy, usually in combination with che-
                      motherapy.

Review of TNM Staging System

                    T: Indicates the size of the primary tumor and whether it has spread into nearby
                      areas

                    N: Describes the extent of spread to regional lymph nodes
                    M: Indicates whether the cancer has metastasized to other organs of the body
368  18. THYROID DISORDERS

STAGING CRITERIA

                            TNM STAGING CRITERIA FOR THYROID CANCER

T  Primary Tumora

   TX                       Primary tumor cannot be assessed

   T0                       No evidence of primary tumor

   T1                       Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension limited to the thyroid

                            T1a  Tumor 1 cm or less, limited to the thyroid

                            T1b  Tumor more than 1 cm but not more than 2 cm in greatest

                                 dimension, limited to the thyroid

   T2                       Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 4 cm in greatest dimension

                            limited to the thyroid

   T3                       Tumor more than 4 cm in greatest dimension limited to the thyroid or

                            any tumor with minimal extrathyroid extension (i.e., extension to

                            sternothyroid muscle or perithyroid soft tissues)

   T4a                      Moderately advanced disease. Tumor of any size extending beyond the

                            thyroid capsule to invade subcutaneous soft tissues, larynx, trachea,

                            esophagus, or recurrent laryngeal nerve.

   T4b                      Very advanced disease. Tumor invades prevertebral fascia or encases

                            carotid artery or mediastinal vessel.

                            NOTE: All anaplastic carcinomas are considered T4 tumors.

N  Regional Lymph Nodesb

   NX                       Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

   N0                       No regional lymph node metastasis

   N1                       Regional lymph node metastasis

                            N1a  Metastasis to Level VI (pretracheal, paratracheal, and

                                 prelaryngeal or Delphian lymph nodes)

                            N2b  Metastasis to unilateral, bilateral, or contralateral cervical

                                 (Levels I, II, III, IV, or V) or retropharyngeal or superior

                                 mediastinal lymph nodes (Level VII)

M  Distant Metastasis

   M0                       No distant metastasis

   M1                       Distant metastasis

aAll categories may be subdivided: (s) solitary tumor and (m) multifocal tumor (the largest determines
the classification).
bRegional lymph nodes are the central compartment, lateral cervical, and upper mediastinal lymph
nodes.
Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). (2010). TNM Staging Classification for Thyroid
Cancer (7th ed.).
                              OVERVIEW OF POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS AFTER THYROID SURGERY  369

OVERVIEW OF SURGICAL MANAGEMENT: THYROID

                   The main treatment of choice for DTC is surgery. Controversy exists over how much
                   thyroid tissue should be removed, whether the surgery should be a partial lobectomy,
                   hemithyroidectomy with or without isthmusectomy, and/or total thyroidectomy. Most
                   surgeons, no matter what type of thyroid cancer the patient has, will choose to do
                   a total thyroidectomy. Advanced cancers such as medullary and anaplastic thyroid
                   carcinoma, a total thyroidectomy with neck dissection may be needed. For patients
                   with a FNA biopsy report showing a follicular variant, follicular carcinoma cannot be
                   determined until the entire lesion is excised and reviewed by the pathologist. In these
                   patients, the patient may choose to undergo surgical resection of the affected thyroid
                   gland. During surgery, a frozen section may be considered to help guide in the deci-
                   sion to perform a total thyroidectomy at the time of surgery. A frozen section is a tis-
                   sue sample taken at the time of surgery and given to the pathologist for an immediate
                   interpretation.

Radioactive Iodine Therapy After Thyroidectomy

                   RAI treatment is often used after thyroidectomy to decrease the risk of cancer recurrence
                   by destroying any remaining thyroid tissue and areas of thyroid cancer that were not
                   removed during surgery. RAI can also be considered in lieu of thyroidectomy for a select
                   few patients with thyroid cancers confined to the thyroid who have high risk-associated
                   involvement, like lymph node metastasis. The RAI is excreted via the kidneys.

                          RAI treatment comes as a capsule or liquid that is swallowed. Primarily thyroid
                   cells take up the RAI, so there is a very low risk of the RAI affecting other cells within
                   the body. Complications of therapy include nausea, altered sense of taste or smell,
                   salivary gland damage, dry mouth/eyes, dental caries, and secondary malignancies
                   (such as leukemia).

                          External beam radiation is not used often in the management of thyroid cancer.
                   There are some exceptional cases when it may be considered, especially in advanced,
                   unresectable cases. Chemotherapy is not commonly used in the treatment of thyroid
                   cancer and there are no data to support the use of chemotherapy in the management
                   of disseminated types of thyroid carcinoma. However, it may be helpful in selected
                   populations that do not respond to other, more standard conventional therapies.

OVERVIEW OF POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS
AFTER THYROID SURGERY

                   Potential major complications of thyroid surgery can include the following:

                    Bleeding
                    Infection
                    Complications related to general anesthesia
                    Hypothyroidism
                    Thyrotoxic storm
                    Surgical site seromas
                    Injury to the recurrent or superior laryngeal nerve (can be temporary or perma-

                      nent)
                    Hypoparathyroidism
                    Hypocalcemia (can be temporary or permanent)
370  18. THYROID DISORDERS

                          The surgeon performing the thyroid surgery will take all necessary precautions
                   to preserve the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve during surgery. How-
                   ever, despite all of these precautions, nerve damage is still possible leading to vocal
                   cord paresis (weakness of one or both vocal folds) and vocal cord paralysis. These con-
                   ditions can be transient and in some cases permanent.

                          A postoperative surgical site seroma (pocket of clear fluid that sometimes devel-
                   ops in the body after surgery) can occur. This happens when small blood vessels rup-
                   ture and blood plasma oozes out in the thyroid bed. If the seroma is small, the body
                   usually absorbs the plasma. Larger seromas may be aspirated.

                          Following thyroid surgery, serum calcium levels or the parathyroid hor-
                   mone (PTH) level is measured and usually oral calcium supplementation is given.
                   Hypocalcemia can occur secondary to hypoparathyroidism related to irritation
                   of one or more of the parathyroid glands during surgery. The calcium level is
                   usually evaluated 6 hours and 12 hours postoperatively before the patient is dis-
                   charged. If the serum calcium levels are 7.8 mg/dL or above and are not falling
                   and the patient is asymptomatic, they can be discharged. When and if symptoms
                   of hypocalcemia develop, patient complaints can range from mild parasthesias to
                   painful tetany and even life-threatening complications such as heart arrhythmias
                   and laryngeal spasms. Automatic calcium supplementation in the postoperative
                   period reduces the chance for the development of these symptoms. If persistent
                   hypocalcemia exists in the postoperative period despite replacement therapy,
                   serum magnesium and possibly magnesium repletion should be considered. The
                   patient may be discharged with calcium supplementation with either calcium car-
                   bonate or calcitriol.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Alexander, E. K., Kennedy, G. C., Baloch, Z. W., Cibas, E. S., Chudova, D., Diggans, J., . . . Haugen, B.
                   R. (2012). Preoperative diagnosis of benign thyroid nodules with indeterminate cytology. New
                   England Journal of Medicine, 367(8), 705-715.

            American Thyroid Association (ATA). (2012). Thyroid nodules patient education handout. Retrieved from
                   http://www.thyroid.org/wp-content/uploads/patients/brochures/Nodules_brochure.pdf. June
                   30, 2013.

            Ananthakrishnan, S., Braverman, L. E., Levin, R. M., Magnani, B., & Pearce, E. N. (2008). The effect of
                   famotidine, esomeprazole, and ezetimibe on levothyroxine absorption. Thyroid: Official Journal of
                   the American Thyroid Association, 18(5), 493-498.

            Bahn, R., Burch, H., Cooper, D., Garber, J., Greenlee, C., Klein, I., . . . Ross, D. (2011). Hyperthyroidism
                   and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: Management guidelines of the American Thyroid Association
                   and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Thyroid, 21(6), 593-646. Retrieved from
                   http://thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thyroidguidelines.net/files/file/THY_2010_0417.pdf.

            Baloch, Z. W., LiVolsi, V. A., Asa, S. L., Rosai, J., Merino, M. J., Randolph, G., . . . Frable, W. J. (2008). Diag-
                   nostic terminology and morphologic criteria for cytologic diagnosis of thyroid lesions: A synopsis
                   of the National Cancer Institute Thyroid Fine-Needle Aspiration State of the Science Conference.
                   Diagnostic Cytopathology, 36(6), 425-437.

            Boelaert, K., Horacek, J., Holder, R. L., Watkinson, J. C., Sheppard, M. C., & Franklyn, J. A. (2006). Serum
                   thyrotropin concentration as a novel predictor of malignancy in thyroid nodules investigated by
                   fine-needle aspiration. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 91(11), 4295-4301.

            Carling, T., Carty, S., Ciarleglio, M., Cooper, D., Doherty, G., Kim, L. T. . . . Udelsman, R. (2012). American
                   Thyroid Association design and feasibility of a prospective randomized controlled trial of prophylac-
                   tic central lymph node dissection for papillary thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid, 22(3), 237-244. Retrieved
                   from http://thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thyroidguidelines.net/files/file/thy.2011.0317.pdf.

            Carty, S., Doherty, G., Inabnet, W., Pasieka, J., Randolph, G., Shaha, A., et al. (2012). American Thyroid
                   Association statement on the essential elements of interdisciplinary communication of perioperative
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  371

      information for patients undergoing thyroid cancer surgery. Thyroid, 22(4), 395-399. Retrieved from
      http://www.thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thyroidguidelines.net/files/file/thy.2011.0423.pdf.
Castro, M. R., & Gharib, H. (2005). Continuing controversies in the management of thyroid nodules.
      Annals of Internal Medicine, 142(11), 926-931.
Ceccarelli, C., Bencivelli, W., Vitti, P., Grasso, L., & Pinchera, A. (2005). Outcome of radioiodine-131
      therapy in hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules: A 20 years' retrospective study. Clinical Endocrinol-
      ogy, 62(3), 331-335.
Cooper, D., Doherty, G., Haugen, B., Kloos, R., Lee, S., Mandel, S., et al. (2009). Revised American Thy-
      roid Association management guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated
      thyroid cancer. Thyroid, 19(11), 1167-1214. Retrieved from http://thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thy-
      roidguidelines.net/files/file/ATA_DTC_Guidelines_2009.pdf.
Corrias, A., Einaudi, S., Chiorboli, E., Weber, G., Crin, A., Andreo, M., . . . Bona, G. (2001). Accuracy of
      fine needle aspiration biopsy of thyroid nodules in detecting malignancy in childhood: Compari-
      son with conventional clinical, laboratory, and imaging approaches. Journal of Clinical Endocrinol-
      ogy and Metabolism, 86(10), 4644-4648.
Evans, T. C. (2003). Thyroid disease. Primary Care, 30(4), 625-640.
Frates, M. C., Benson, C. B., Doubilet, P. M., Kunreuther, E., Contreras, M., Cibas, E. S., . . . Alexander, E.
      K. (2006). Prevalence and distribution of carcinoma in patients with solitary and multiple thyroid
      nodules on sonography. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 91(9), 3411-3417.
Garber, J., Cobin, R., Gharib, H., Hennessey, J., Klein, I., Mechanick, J., et al. (2012). Clinical practice
      guidelines for hypothyroidism in adults: Cosponsored by the American Association of Clinical
      Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association. For the American Association of Clinical
      Endocrinologists and American Thyroid Association Taskforce on Hypothyroidism in Adults. Thy-
      roid, 22(12), 1200-1235. Retrieved from http://www.thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thyroidguide-
      lines.net/files/file/thy.2012.0205.pdf.
Gharib, H., Papini, E., Paschke, R., Duick, D., Valcavi, R., Hegedus, L., et al. (2010). American Asso-
      ciation of Clinical Endocrinologists, Associazione Medici Endocrinologi, and European Thyroid
      Association Medical guidelines for clinical practice for the diagnosis and management of thyroid
      nodules. AACE/AME/ETA Guidelines. Endocrine Practice, 16(1), 1-43.
Hundahl, S. A., Fleming, I. D., Fremgen, A. M., & Menck, H. R. (1998). A National Cancer Data Base
      report on 53,856 cases of thyroid carcinoma treated in the U.S., 1985-1995 [see commetns]. Cancer,
      83(12), 2638-2648.
Jeh, S. K., Jung, S. L., Kim, B. S., & Lee, Y. S. (2007). Evaluating the degree of conformity of papillary
      carcinoma and follicular carcinoma to the reported ultrasonographic findings of malignant thyroid
      tumor. Korean Journal of Radiology: Official Journal of the Korean Radiological Society, 8(3), 192-197.
Kloos, R., Eng, C., Evans, D., Francis, G., Gagel, R., Gharib, H., et al. (2009). Medullary thyroid cancer:
      Management guidelines of the American Thyroid Association. Thyroid, 19(6), 565-612. Retrieved
      from http://thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thyroidguidelines.net/files/file/ATA_MTC_Guide-
      lines_2009.pdf.
Lubin, J., Ron, E., Shore, R., et al. (1995). Thyroid cancer after exposure to external radiation: A pooled
      analysis of seven studies. Radiation Research, 141, 259-277.
Machens, A., Holzhausen, H. J., & Dralle, H. (2005). The prognostic value of primary tumor size in
      papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma. Cancer, 103(11), 2269-2273.
Meier, D. A., & Kaplan, M. M. (2001). Radioiodine uptake and thyroid scintiscanning. Endocrinology and
      Metabolism Clinics of North America, 30(2), 291-313, viii.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guilde-
      lines). (2013). Thyroid carcinoma. Version 2. Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/professionals/
      physician_gls/pdf/thyroid.pdf.
Nayak, B., & Burman, K. (2006). Thyrotoxicosis and thyroid storm. Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics
      of North America, 35(4), 663-686. Retrieved from http://www.med.illinois.edu/internalMed/resi-
      dency/Curriculum/Critical%20Care%20Literature/Endocrine/Thyrotoxicosis.pdf.
Orlandi, A., Puscar, A., Capriata, E., & Fideleff, H. (2005). Repeated fine-needle aspiration of the thyroid
      in benign nodular thyroid disease: Critical evaluation of long-term follow-up. Thyroid: Official Jour-
      nal of the American Thyroid Association, 15(3), 274-278.
Palit, T. K., Miller, C. C., & Miltenburg, D. M. (2000). The efficacy of thyroidectomy for Graves' disease:
      A meta-analysis. Journal of Surgical Research, 90(2), 161-165.
Popoveniuc, G., & Jonklaas, J. (2012). Thyroid nodules. Medical Clinics of North America, 96(2), 329-349.
372  18. THYROID DISORDERS

            Reiners, C., & Schneider, P. (2002). Radioiodine therapy of thyroid autonomy. European Journal of Nuclear
                   Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 29 (Suppl 2), S471-S478.

            Sherman, S. I. (2003). Thyroid carcinoma. Lancet, 361(9356), 501-511.
            Sisson, J., Freitas, J., McDougall, I., Dauer, L., Hurley, J., et al. (2011). Radiation safety in the treatment

                   of patients with thyroid diseases by radioiodine 131I: Practice recommendations of the American
                   Thyroid Association. Thyroid, 21(4), 335-346. Retrieved from http://thyroidguidelines.net/sites/
                   thyroidguidelines.net/files/file/thy.2010.0403.pdf.
            Smallridge, R., Ain, K., Asa, S., Bible, K., Brierley, J., Burman, K., . . . Tuttle, M. (2012). American Thy-
                   roid Association guidelines for management of patients with anaplastic thyroid cancer. For the
                   American Thyroid Association Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer Guidelines Taskforce. Thyroid, 22(11),
                   1104-1139. Retrieved from http://www.thyroidguidelines.net/sites/thyroidguidelines.net/files/
                   file/thy.2012.0302.pdf.
            Smallridge, R. C., & Copland, J. A. (2010). Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: Pathogenesis and emerging
                   therapies. Clinical Oncology (Royal College of Radiologists (Great Britain)), 22(6), 486-497.
            Valcavi, R., & Frasoldati, A. (2004). Ultrasound-guided percutaneous ethanol injection therapy in thy-
                   roid cystic nodules. Endocrine Practice: Official Journal of the American College of Endocrinology and the
                   American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 10(3), 269-275.
            Weetman, A. P. (2007). Radioiodine treatment for benign thyroid diseases. Clinical Endocrinology, 66(6),
                   757-764.
            Yano, Y., Shibuya, H., Kitagawa, W., Nagahama, M., Sugino, K., Ito, K., & Ito, K. (2007). Recent outcome
                   of Graves' disease patients with papillary thyroid cancer. European Journal of Endocrinology/Euro-
                   pean Federation of Endocrine Societies, 157(3), 325-329.
