19       Evaluation and
         Management of
         Parathyroid Disorders

OVERVIEW: PARATHYROID

                   See Chapter 2: Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands.

Anatomy

         The parathyroid glands are of the endocrine system and are tan, oval-shaped glands
         the size of a grain of rice. There are typically four parathyroid glands located behind
         the thyroid gland (usually two behind each thyroid lobe). However, in rare cases, there
         can be more or fewer glands present and they could be located in other locations such
         as within the thyroid gland itself and near the mediastinum. In most cases, two of the
         parathyroid glands are located posterior to the superior lobe of the thyroid gland, near
         the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The other two parathyroid glands are usually located in
         close proximity to inferior pole of the thyroid gland.

Understanding the Function of the Parathyroid

                   Calcium is the most abundant mineral in the body. Calcium levels in the human body
                   have a huge impact on many bodily functions.
                   Examples of calcium job responsibilities include the following:

                    Vascular contraction or vasodilation
                    Nerve transmission
                    Hormone secretion
                    Helps to regulate vitamin D
                    Muscle function
                    Intracellular permeability and signaling
                    Firmness of bones and teeth
                    Plays a role in blood clotting

                          The cells of the parathyroid have calcium-sensing receptors. These receptors act
                   to increase the concentration of calcium in the blood by stimulating the production of
                   the parathyroid hormone (PTH). NOTE: Calcitonin, a hormone produced by the thyroid
                   gland, acts to decrease serum calcium concentration. Although the parathyroid glands
                   are located next to (and sometimes inside) the thyroid gland, they have no related
                   function to the thyroid gland itself. The PTH functions to increase serum calcium levels
                   via its actions on three target organs--the bone, kidney, and gut.
374  19. PARATHYROID DISORDERS

                  Bone
                   Bones are the main storage place for calcium. Within minutes to hours, the PTH can
                   cause the bones to release calcium and phosphorus into the blood in an attempt to
                   increase the serum concentrations of calcium. If there is too much PTH, bones will
                   continue to release calcium into the blood, potentially leading to osteopenia and even-
                   tually osteoporosis.

                  Kidney and Gut
                   The PTH can stimulate the kidneys to reabsorb calcium and also stimulate the kidneys
                   to convert 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 to the active form, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, which
                   stimulates the gastrointestinal (GI) tract to become more efficient at absorbing calcium
                   normally from the ingestion of food.

                  Overview of How the Parathyroid Hormone Responds to
                  Low Blood Calcium Levels
                   Low blood calcium levels  Stimulate the parathyroid glands to secrete PTH  The
                   PTH:

                   1. Moves calcium from bones
                   2. Makes the kidneys reabsorb calcium
                   3. Makes GI tract absorb calcium

                   If the serum calcium is too high, the parathyroid glands stop producing PTH.
                          The secretion of the PTH is not only controlled by the serum calcium level;

                   magnesium can also exert similar control over the PTH. Low levels of magnesium
                   (hypomagnesium) stimulate the release of PTH, just as when the calcium levels are
                   too low. However, very low serum magnesium levels can cause a paralysis of PTH
                   release and lead to further hypoparathyroidism. Just as with high serum calcium lev-
                   els, hypermagnesium levels cause the parathyroid glands to stop producing PTH.

                          The PTH also regulates phosphorus levels in the blood because calcium and
                   phosphorus are inversely related. When serum levels of calcium are low, phosphorus
                   is high. If phosphorus is high, the PTH is not only working with the bones, kidneys,
                   and gut to increase calcium levels in the blood, but it also is simultaneously working
                   to reduce the high phosphorus level by decreasing the ability of the kidney to absorb
                   phosphate. Instead, the phosphate gets excreted through the urine.

                          Calcium in the blood can be "bound" or "free/ionized." Approximately 50% of
                   the total serum calcium is free/ionized, while the other half is bound to albumin (40%)
                   and other circulating substances (10%). When the calcium is bound, it is not able to
                   have an affect on other cells within the body. Free/ionized calcium is the active cal-
                   cium in the blood. This is the calcium that can move in and out of cells and have an
                   affect on them.

                          The "total serum calcium" lab test is the most frequently ordered lab test to eval-
                   uate the status of calcium. Almost all persons have a total serum calcium level within
                   9.0 to 10.1 mg/dL. It is normal for children and teenagers to have calcium levels up to
                   10.4 mg/dL, mainly due to the fact that they are still growing and building bones. An
                   adult with a persistent calcium level above 10.1 mg/dL needs further workup to rule
                   out hyperparathyroidism (too much circulating PTH).

                          Unlike total serum calcium, measurement of serum free/ionized calcium reflects
                   the true available calcium within the body. The normal range of ionized calcium is 4.4
                   to 5.6 mg/dL. When a calcium disorder is suspected, ionized calcium should be done
                   because this level can show abnormal calcium status when at the same time, a total
                   serum calcium level is within normal range. In patients with chronic kidney disease or
                   patients who recently received gadolinium-containing MRI imaging contrast material,
                                                                    OVERVIEW: PARATHYROID  375

the serum ionized calcium level provides a more accurate assessment of hypocalcemia
than total serum calcium level because these conditions can block the ability to accu-
rately detect true free unbound calcium status.

Signs and Symptoms of Hypocalcemia

                   The hallmark sign of acute hypocalcemia is neuromuscular irritability. Patients will
                   often complain of numbness and tingling in their fingers, toes, and/or the perio-
                   ral region. Chronic hypocalcemia patients may have a different presentation. These
                   patients usually develop cardiovascular and neuropsychiatric symptoms.

Organ System      Signs and Symptoms of Hypocalcemia
Neuromuscular
                   Nervousness/twitching
    symptoms       Myalgias
                   Muscle stiffness
Cardiovascular     Paresthesias around the mouth (perioral) and fingers/toes
    symptoms       Confusion, delirium
                   Seizure
Neuropsychiatric
    symptoms      Chvostek's sign:
                   Tap the facial nerve at the angle of the jaw (over the
Autonomic
    symptoms         masseter muscle).
                   Positive sign: The facial muscles on the same side of the
Other symptoms
                     face will contract/twitch due to hyperexcitability of the
                     nerves in hypocalcemic patients.

                  Trousseau's sign:
                   Inflate blood pressure cuff around the patient's arm to a

                     pressure greater than their systolic blood pressure and
                     hold in place for 3 minutes. This occludes the brachial
                     artery. This causes neuromuscular irritability and spasms
                     of the hands and forearm in hypocalcemic patients.

                   Heart arrhythmias (due to prolonged QT interval)
                   Hypotension
                   Congestive heart failure

                   Dementia
                   Emotional problems (depression, anxiety)
                   Parkinsonism

                   Laryngospasm and/or bronchospasm (can lead to
                     respiratory compromise)

                   Diaphoresis

                   Cataracts
                   Dry skin, dermatitis

Signs and Symptoms of Hypercalcemia

                   Most patients are asymptomatic or have nonspecific symptoms and hypercalcemia.
                   Symptoms can usually be described as "kidney stones, painful bones, abdominal
                   groans, psychic moans, and fatigue overtones."
376  19. PARATHYROID DISORDERS

Organ System                    Signs and Symptoms of Hypercalcemia
Neurological
                                High calcium levels affect the brain and slow the nervous system
    symptoms                        leading to chronic fatigue, poor concentration, memory loss,
Cardiovascular                      and depression.

    symptoms                    The excess calcium in the blood can contribute to atherosclerosis
Musculoskeletal                     and other cardiovascular disorders including hypertension,
                                    cardiac arrhythmias, and even a myocardial infarction.
    symptoms
                                The elevated serum calcium level occurs as a result of the
Gastrointestinal                    PTH activating the osteoclast cells within the bones. These
    symptoms                        osteoclasts cells start eating away at the bone and releasing
                                    calcium from the bones into the blood. This can contribute to
Urinary symptoms                    osteopenia, osteoporosis, and bone pain.

                                Other symptoms can include
                                 Myalgia
                                 Arthralgia
                                 Muscle weakness

                                Hypercalcemia has an effect on the stomach and intestines
                                    often leading to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and
                                    abdominal discomfort.

                                Other symptoms can include:
                                 Constipation
                                 Nausea
                                 Vomiting
                                 Pancreatitis

                                The excess blood calcium can build up in the kidneys leading to
                                    kidney stones and eventually contributing to kidney failure.

Parathyroid Carcinoma

                   Parathyroid carcinoma is a parathyroid adenoma (benign parathyroid tumor) that pro-
                   gresses into carcinoma. Patients with parathyroid carcinoma are usually symptomatic
                   and present with a serum calcium level of greater than 15 mg/dL and markedly ele-
                   vated PTH levels. On physical examination there may be a large, firm palpable mass.
                   It is sometimes diagnosed during surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism. In para-
                   thyroid cancer, death is usually caused by excessive secretion of PTH with resulting
                   severe hypercalcemia and not by the spread of the tumor. Parathyroid carcinoma usu-
                   ally involves invasion of the surrounding tissue. To achieve the best outcome possible,
                   surgery for parathyroid carcinoma usually entails doing a wide local resection of the
                   involved parathyroid gland in addition to resecting the ipsilateral thyroid lobe. A neck
                   dissection may be indicated if neck nodes are involved. Recurrence of the parathyroid
                   carcinoma is common in these patients. The reduction of mortality is greatly affected
                   by early diagnosis and appropriate, aggressive surgery.

HYPOPARATHYROIDISM

                   Hypoparathyroidism results when the parathyroid does not produce enough PTH or
                   when the target tissues (bone, kidney, and gut) become resistant to the action of PTH
                                         HYPOPARATHYROIDISM  377

(called pseudohypoparathyroidism). Other than postsurgical hypoparathyroidism, true
hypoparathyroidism related to a deficiency in the PTH is very uncommon. As discussed
earlier in this chapter, the PTH is responsible for increasing serum calcium when there
is a deficiency and the normal PTH functions to increase serum calcium levels via its
actions on three target organs--the bone, kidney, and gut. However, in hypoparathy-
roidism, the loss of PTH causes hypocalcemia because the kidneys cannot convert 25-hy-
droxyvitamin D3, to the active form, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, resulting in the inability
to absorb dietary calcium; there is also excess calcium excretion via the kidneys.

       Causes of hypoparathyroidism (i.e., hypocalcemia) include the following:

 Congenital or genetic syndromes
 Postsurgical usually related to bruising or damage to the parathyroid glands as with:

    Thyroid surgery
    Parathyroid surgery
    Head and neck surgery
 Autoimmune attack on the parathyroid glands
 Accumulation of copper (Wilson's disease) or iron (hemochromatosis) in parathy-
   roid cells
 Parathyroid carcinoma
 Magnesium disorders
 Radioactive iodine therapy for thyroid cancer
 Idiopathic

       The diagnostic workup for hypocalcemia usually includes the following lab
tests: PTH, phosphorus, total serum calcium, and/or ionized calcium levels. Serum
magnesium levels should be measured to evaluate patients who have coexisting hypo-
magnesemia. Very low serum magnesium levels can cause a paralysis of PTH release
and lead to further hypoparathyroidism.

                                         Total Serum  Ionized

Condition               PTH  Phosphorus  Calcium      Calcium

                                                                                           
                                                                      

                        
Suggestive of                
    hypoparathyroidism

       The standard treatment of hypoparathyroidism attempts to correct hypocalce-
mia with oral vitamin D and calcium. If the patient is magnesium deficient, magnesium
replacement is also given. PTH levels are known to improve (increase) within minutes of
magnesium replacement. Large doses of oral calcium are given to replace what the kidneys
are excreting and large doses of vitamin D to mimic the missing 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3.
The combined goal is to force the serum calcium to increase. Underdosing and overdos-
ing is common with this type of therapy. Symptoms of hypo- or hypercalcemia can easily
occur including kidney stones and renal failure as a result of too much calcium.

       Hypoparathyroidism related to causes other than postsurgical are often very diffi-
cult to manage and require a multidisciplinary team, primarily endocrinology manage-
ment. Studies are currently being done to see if there is a place for supplemental oral or
injectable PTH for hypoparathyroidism and also parathyroid gland transplantation.

Postsurgical Hypoparathyroidism

                   Postsurgical hypoparathyroidism can occur after thyroid, parathyroid, or any head and
                   neck surgery that can contribute to inadvertent removal, bruising, or agitation of the
378  19. PARATHYROID DISORDERS

parathyroid glands. Most of the time, the hypoparathyroidism/hypocalcemia event is
transient and if it occurs it usually does so within 1 to 3 days after surgery. Very rarely does
the patient develop permanent hypoparathyroidism. Patients who experience immedi-
ate postoperative hypoparathyroidism recover parathyroid function within 6 months of
thyroid surgery and very few patients (4.4%) develop permanent hypoparathyroidism
(hypoparathyroidism that persists 6 months after surgery; Bergenfelz et al., 2008).

Patients at Risk for Developing Postsurgical Hypoparathyroidism
 Low serum or ionized calcium level not detected or evaluated prior to surgery
 Failure to identify all parathyroid glands during thyroid or parathyroid surgery
 Extensive surgery and/or surgical difficulty
 Extensive lymph node dissection done for thyroid or head/neck cancer
 Although rare, hypoparathyroidism can occur after surgery for hyperparathyroidism

How to Identify Postsurgical Hypoparathyroidism                   after total thyroidec-
 Measure early in the postoperative period:                       normocalcemia after

    PTH: May be low or low-normal
    Ionized calcium: May be low or low-normal

     · A serum calcium level increase between 6 and 12 hours
         tomy has a 100% positive predictive value for attaining
         surgery (Nahas, Farrag, Lin, Belin, & Tufano, 2006).

    Phosphate: May be high or high-normal

NOTE: Postsurgical hypoparathyroidism can present as hypocalcemia (with low ionized
calcium and PTH levels) or as hyperphosphatemia (with an elevated or high-normal phos-
phate level).

Symptoms
Symptoms depend on the degree of hypocalcemia. See previous section on symptoms
of hypocalcemia.

Treatment
Treatment is recommended for patients who exhibit symptoms of hypocalcemia or
whose serum calcium is less than 7.5 mg/dL.

 Acute symptomatic hypocalcemic patients may need IV calcium gluconate. This is
   done in the hospital setting and requires continuous cardiac monitoring.

 Calcium supplements may be started postoperatively and continued as an outpa-
   tient depending on the degree of hypocalcemia and the patient's symptoms (calcium
   carbonate [e.g., Tums] 1 to 2 g three times daily)

 Vitamin D deficiency may also be seen postoperatively. Vitamin D supplements
   along with calcium supplements may be started and continued as outpatient.

 The patient may also have a magnesium deficiency postoperatively. IV magnesium
   sulfate may need to be administered and the patient may continue oral magnesium
   supplementation postoperatively, usually only if unable to maintain normal magne-
   sium levels with a regular diet.

HYPERPARATHYROIDISM

                   Hyperparathyroidism is when there is overactivity of the parathyroid glands and too
                   much PTH is produced regardless of the level of calcium. Hyperparathyroidism is the
                   most common cause of hypercalcemia in nonhospitalized patients. Almost all persons
                                                                                        HYPERPARATHYROIDISM  379

                   have a total serum calcium level within 9.0 to 10.1 mg/dL. Mild hypercalcemia is when
                   the total serum calcium levels are between 10.1 and 12 mg/dL. Levels higher than 14
                   mg/dL can be life-threatening.

Primary Hyperparathyroidism

                   Primary hyperparathyroidism is characterized by too much production and release of
                   PTH. Usually this condition progresses very slowly.

                  Etiology
                    The vast majority of cases of primary hyperparathyroidism (80%-90%) are due to

                      a single hyperfunctioning adenoma (benign tumor). Multigland hyperplasia and
                      double adenomas account for approximately 10% of cases, whereas parathyroid car-
                      cinomas occur in only 1% to 3% of cases (Greenspan et al., 2012).

                             NOTE: When a single hyperfunctioning adenoma occurs, the adenoma takes over
                     and secretes PTH (in excess amounts) while the other parathyroid glands become dor-
                     mant. The parathyroid adenoma, when excreting too much PTH, causes abnormally high
                     levels of calcium in the blood.

                          Other causes and/or associated factors can include the following:

                    Medications: Lithium, thiazide diuretics, vitamin A intoxication
                    Genetics may play a role. There are forms of familial hypercalcemia and parathyroid

                      hyperplasia.
                    Hyperparathyroidism is also associated with low-dose radiation therapy.

                  Incidence
                   Primary hyperparathyroidism occurs in 0.2% to 0.5% of the population, with approxi-
                   mately 100,000 new cases appearing in the United States each year (Eigelberger et al.,
                   2004).

                  Symptoms
                   Symptoms depend on the degree of hypercalcemia. (See Symptoms of hypercalcemia
                   section.)

                  Lab Findings
                    An elevated serum PTH in the setting of an elevated calcium level is virtually diag-

                      nostic for primary hyperparathyroidism.
                    PTH tends to increase the renal excretion of phosphate, causing the serum level of

                      phosphate to be decreased in hyperparathyroidism.

                  Imaging
                    Sestamibi Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) Scan
                   Sestamibi SPECT scans have been reported to have a sensitivity of 87%, an accuracy of
                   94%, and a positive predictive value of 86% (Lalwani, 2008).

                    Sestamibi is a small protein that is a radioactive agent. During the scan, it is injected
                      into the patient's veins and taken up by both the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
                      Over time, sestamibi is washed out of the thyroid and is retained by the parathyroid
                      adenoma or hyperplasia (abnormal enlargement of a parathyroid gland), if present.
                      However, it is unable to detect adenomas less than 5 mm and coexisting thyroid
                      pathology may interfere with sestamibi washout.
380  19. PARATHYROID DISORDERS

                    Before ordering a sestamibi scan, an elevated level of serum calcium and PTH should
                      be documented.

                    In the order for a sestamibi scan, it is important to document important history such
                      as the following:
                       The presence of concurrent thyroid disease
                       History of thyroid or prior parathyroid surgery

                  Treatment
                    Hypercalcemic crisis is a life-threatening emergency. Aggressive IV rehydration is

                      the mainstay of management in severe hypercalcemia in addition to antiresorptive
                      agents such as calcitonin and bisphosphonates.
                    Usually a subtotal parathyroidectomy with removal of the parathyroid adenoma is
                      done, leaving the remaining parathyroid glands intact.
                    Surgery is the only effective treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism; however,
                      surgery for a parathyroid adenoma should only be considered if the patient meets
                      recommended criteria by the National Institutes of Health Consensus Development
                      Conference (see below).
                    It is generally accepted that all patients with or without symptoms of hyperparathy-
                      roidism will benefit from parathyroidectomy surgery. The disease will progress in
                      approximately one fourth of patients who do not undergo surgery (Silverberg, Shane,
                      Jacobs, Siris, & Bilezikian, 1999). Therefore, early surgical intervention can prevent
                      the onset of symptoms and in some cases reverse some associated bone loss.

                  Surgical Criteria
                    Criteria for Parathyroidectomy From the National Institutes
                    of Health Consensus Development Conference
                    Marked elevated serum total calcium greater than 12 mg/dL
                    History of an episode of life-threatening hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroid crisis
                    Marked hypercalciuria: Urinary calcium excretion greater than 400 mg/day
                    Nephrolithiasis
                    Impaired renal function
                    Age below 50 years
                    Osteitis fibrosa cystica
                    Substantially reduced bone mass as determined by direct measurement (i.e., bone

                      mass greater than 2 Standard Deviations below controls matched for age, gender,
                      and ethnic group)
                    Neuromuscular symptoms: Documented proximal muscle weakness, atrophy,
                      hyperreflexia, and gait disturbance

                  Intraoperative Parathyroid Hormone Monitoring
                    The normal half-life of PTH is approximately 3 to 5 minutes. Therefore, it is easy to

                      evaluate a decrease in serum PTH following removal of an adenomatous or hyper-
                      plastic parathyroid tissue.
                    Surgical success is defined as a decrease in the baseline PTH level by 50% or more 10
                      minutes after excision of the mass.

                  Surgical Complications
                   Following a parathyroidectomy, the following complications can occur:

                    Hypocalcemia because the now normal PTH level causes bones to reuptake calcium,
                      which can result in a fall in serum calcium levels

                    Hypercalcemia is rare, although possible. Generally caused by:
                       Failure during surgery to find a second adenoma
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  381

                       Failure to recognize parathyroid carcinoma and excise the lesion
                       Ectopic locations of parathyroid adenomas present elsewhere.
                    Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
                    Neck hematoma
                    Infection

Secondary Hyperparathyroidism

                   Secondary hyperparathyroidism is primarly seen in patients with renal failure or dis-
                   ease. This is because normally in hyperparathyroidism, PTH tends to increase the renal
                   excretion of phosphate, causing the serum level of phosphate to be decreased. How-
                   ever, in patients with renal failure or disease, phosphate cannot be easily excreted and
                   accumulates. Treatment of this disorder is focused on treating the underlying renal
                   failure or disease.

Tertiary Hyperparathyroidism

                   Tertiary hyperparathyroidism is a condition in which the parathyroid glands remain
                   hyperfunctioning and secrete PTH despite correction of the underlying cause of sec-
                   ondary hyperparathyroidism. In tertiary hyperparathyroidism, PTH levels can be nor-
                   mal or high in the setting of hypercalcemia.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Bergenfelz, A., Jansson, S., Kristoffersson, A., Mårtensson, H., Reihnér, E., Wallin, G., & Lausen, I. (2008).
                   Complications to thyroid surgery: Results as reported in a database from a multicenter audit compris-
                   ing 3,660 patients. Langenbeck's Archives of Surgery/Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chirurgie, 393(5), 667-673.

            Carroll, M., & Schade, D. (2003). A practical approach to hypercalcemia. American Family Physician,
                   67(9), 1959-1966. Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/2003/0501/p1959.html.

            Diagnosis and Management of Asymptomatic Primary Hyperparathyroidism. NIH Consensus State-
                   ment Online. (1990). 8(7), 1-18. Retrieved from http://consensus.nih.gov/1990/1990Asymptoma
                   ticHyperparathyroidisim082html.htm. July 5, 2013.

            Eigelberger, M. S., Cheah, W. K., Ituarte, P. H., Streja, L., Duh, Q. Y., & Clark, O. H. (2004). The NIH cri-
                   teria for parathyroidectomy in asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: Are they too limited?
                   Annals of Surgery, 239(4), 528-535.

            Fang, S. H., & Lal, G. (2011). Parathyroid cancer. Endocrine Practice: Official Journal of the American College
                   of Endocrinology and the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 17 Suppl, 36-43.

            Greenspan, B. S., Dillehay, G., Intenzo, C., Lavely, W. C., O'Doherty, M., Palestro, C. J., . . . Tulchinsky, M.
                   (2012). SNM practice guideline for parathyroid scintigraphy 4.0. Journal of Nuclear Medicine Technol-
                   ogy, 40(2), 111-118.

            Hindie, E., Ugur, D., Fuster, D., O'Doherty, M., Grasetto, G., Urena, P., . . . Rubello, D. (2009). 2009 EANM
                   parathyroid guidelines. European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 36, 1201-1216.

            Horwitz, M. J., & Stewart, A. F. (2008). Hypoparathyroidism: Is it time for replacement therapy? Journal
                   of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 93(9), 3307-3309.

            Khan, M. I., Waguespack, S. G., & Hu, M. I. (2011). Medical management of postsurgical hypoparathy-
                   roidism. Endocrine Practice: Official Journal of the American College of Endocrinology and the American
                   Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 17 (Suppl 1), 18-25.

            Lalwani, A. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment: Otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery (2nd ed., pp.
                   572-575). New York, NY: McGhaw-Hill.

            Nahas, Z. S., Farrag, T. Y., Lin, F. R., Belin, R. M., & Tufano, R. P. (2006). A safe and cost-effective short
                   hospital stay protocol to identify patients at low risk for the development of significant hypocalce-
                   mia after total thyroidectomy. Laryngoscope, 116(6), 906-910.
382  19. PARATHYROID DISORDERS

            Silverberg, S. J., Shane, E., Jacobs, T. P., Siris, E., & Bilezikian, J. P. (1999). A 10-year prospective study of
                   primary hyperparathyroidism with or without parathyroid surgery. New England Journal of Medi-
                   cine, 341(17), 1249-1255.

            Walker Harris, V., & Jan De Beur, S. (2009). Postoperative hypoparathyroidism: Medical and surgical
                   therapeutic options. Thyroid: Official Journal of the American Thyroid Association, 19(9), 967-973.
