2 Ear, Nose, and Throat
               Anatomy and Physiology
               Normal Findings

TEMPORAL BONE

Figure 2.1:   Hardest bone in the body
Skull         Surrounds the ear
bone and      The temporal bone is composed of four parts. These four parts contribute to the
landmarks.
                strength of the bone:
                 Tympanic bone
                 Petrous bone
                 Squamous bone
                 Styloid or mastoid bone
              Although there are four parts to the temporal bone, the tympanic bone and petrous
                bone can be subdivided into three major, clinically relevant compartments:
                 External auditory canal (EAC)
                 Middle ear cavity
                 Inner ear

Tympanic Bone

                    Contains the EAC and middle ear.
                    Forms the roof and floor of the middle ear.

Petrous Bone

                  Inner Ear
                    Think: Petrous portion = pyramid. This part of the temporal bone is a wedge (pyra-

                      mid shaped) between the sphenoid and occipital bones.
                    Contains:

                       Inner ear (labyrinth), which includes the cochlea and semicircular canals.
                       Internal acoustic meatus, which includes the facial nerve, vestibulocochlear nerve,

                         internal auditory artery, and vein.
                    The internal carotid artery passes through the carotid foramen/fossa here.

Squamous Bone
                    Anterior and upper part of the temporal bone
34  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

              Frontal bone

                  Nasal bone                                     Parietal bone
                                                                 Sphenoid bone
                   Zygomatic                                     Temporal bone
                           arch
                                                                 Occipital bone
              Maxilla

              Mandible                                  Mastoid
                                                        process

                                                Styloid
                                                process

              FIGURE 2.1 Skull bone landmarks.

Styloid Process or Mastoid Process

Figure 2.2:    Some neck muscles, including the sternocleidomastoid muscle, attach here.
Trigeminal     Comprises the mastoid process, mastoid antrum, and mastoid air cells.
nerve and      Upon palpation it may be felt as a bony protuberance behind the lower portion of
facial nerve
branches.        the auricle.
               A mastoidectomy is performed to remove infected mastoid air cells and cholesteatoma.

              Temporal bone nerve innervation includes the following cranial nerves (CNs): trigemi-
              nal, facial, acoustic (also called cochleovestibular), glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves.

Trigeminal Nerve (CN V)

                    The trigeminal nerve controls facial sensation and masticatory movements on the
                      same side of the face.

                    It contains both sensory and motor components.
                    The nerve splits into three divisions:

                       V1: Ophthalmic branch
                       V2: Maxillary branch
                       V3: Mandibular branch

Facial Nerve (CN VII)

                    The facial nerve is responsible for functions of facial expression. There are five major
                      branches of the facial nerve:
                       Buccal branch: Innervates the muscles in the cheek and above the mouth
                       Cervical branch: Innervates the platysma (superficial muscle that overlaps the
                         sternocleidomastoid)
Figure 1.3:                                                                                TEMPORAL BONE  35
External,
middle, and    Mandibular branch: Innervates the muscles of the lower lip and chin
inner ear.     Temporal branch: Innervates the muscles that wrinkle the forehead, close the eye-

                 lids, and wiggle the ears
               Zygomatic branch: Innervates the muscles that close the eye and raise the corners

                 of the mouth

   Temporal                                             Trigeminal
      branch                                            nerve

Ophthalmic                                              Facial
branch (V1)                                             nerve

   Maxillary                                            Buccal
branch (V2)                                             branch

 Zygomatic                                              Mandibular
      branch                                            branch

Mandibular                                              Cervical
branch (V3)                                             branch

FIGURE 2.2 Trigeminal nerve and facial nerve branches.

Acoustic Nerve or Cochleovestibular Nerve (CN VIII)

                    CN VIII is the cochlear and vestibular nerve, which equals the cochleovestibular nerve.
                    Includes the vestibular nerve (nerve of balance) and the cochlear nerve (nerve of

                      hearing)
                    The cochleovestibular nerve is also known as the acoustic nerve.

Glossopharyngeal Nerve (CN IX)

Figure 2.3:    The word "glossopharyngeal" derives from the Latin word glosso (meaning "tongue")
Glosso-          and pharyngeal (meaning "throat").
pharyngeal
nerve.         CN IX supplies the tongue, throat, and the parotid salivary gland.
36  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

 It controls both sensory and motor functions.
 Problems with CN IX results in difficulty with taste and swallowing.

Functions of the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) are:

Sensory Functions                                  Motor Functions

Information regarding pain, touch, and             Visceral motor input (not under
    temperature are received from:                     conscious control):

 One third posterior part of the tongue             Sends information to the
 Middle and outside part of the ear                   parotid gland
 Walls of the pharynx
                                                    Controls the amount of saliva
Visceral sensory input (information regarding CO2
    levels and blood pressure) are received from:  Motor control over the:
                                                    Stylopharyngeus muscle
 Carotid sinus, which is near the carotid vein,
   running down both sides of the neck                (which controls the elevation
                                                      of the pharynx), which helps
 This helps to control breathing rate and             in the ability to talk
   blood pressure.

Taste sensation/sensory input is received from:
 Posterior one-third tongue

                  To parotid gland

  Superior and
inferior ganglia

                   To pharynx

         Glossopharyngeal
                          nerve

           To palatine tonsil

             To carotid body
           and carotid sinus

         To tongue for taste
    and general sensation

       To stylopharyngeus
                        muscle

FIGURE 2.3 Glossopharyngeal nerve.
                              EAR--TYMPANIC MEMBRANE AND MIDDLE EAR  37

Vagus Nerve (CN X)

Chapter 3:       The vagus nerve is the longest CN and enjoys the most extensive distribution in the
Physical           body.
Examination
of the Cranial   It contains motor and sensory fibers.
Nerves for
the Head and
Neck.

EAR--EXTERNAL

Pinna/Auricle

Figure 1.3:      Made up of elastic cartilage
External,        Collects sound and channels it into the ear canal
middle, and
inner ear.

External Auditory Canal

                 Extends from the external pinna to the tympanic membrane (TM).
                 The skin covering the outer portion of the EAC has sebaceous glands, ceruminous

                   glands, and hair follicles.
                 The inner portion of the EAC has no subcutaneous tissue except periosteum. NOTE:

                   This is the most sensitive area of the EAC.
                 The EAC has a slight bend where the outer cartilaginous part joins the bony, thin-

                   skinned inner portion.
                 The EAC meatus (opening into the EAC) is located anterior to the temporomandibu-

                   lar joint (TMJ). NOTE: This is important because many patients will describe "ear pain"
                   in this area, but the pain may actually be from the TMJ.

EAR--TYMPANIC MEMBRANE AND MIDDLE EAR

Tympanic Membrane or Eardrum

Figure 1.4:      The TM separates the ear canal from the middle ear.
Tympanic         Sound waves hit the TM and cause it to vibrate.
membrane.        The TM is normally translucent.
                 The two chief landmarks of the TM are the handle and the short process of the malleus.
                 Above the short process is a small portion of the TM called the pars flaccida. The rest

                   of the TM is the pars tensa.
                 Although sometimes you can see the incus through the TM, usually it is not readily

                   visible without a microscope.
                 The TM has three layers:

                    The outer TM layer consists of a thin layer of skin (squamous epithelium). It is the
                      same type of skin layer as is found in the EAC.

                    The middle TM layer consists of a thick fibrous layer.
                    The inner TM layer consists of the same type of mucosal lining as is found in the

                      middle ear.

Middle Ear

                    The middle ear is an air-filled space behind the TM.
                    It is connected to the back of the nose by the eustachian tube (ET).
                    It contains three ossicles (bones): malleus, incus, and the stapes.
38  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Figure 1.3:   Sound is transmitted from the TM to the malleus, then the incus, followed by the
External,       stapes, and finally, to the cochlea via the oval window. See Figure 1.3 for the location
middle, and     of the oval and round windows.
inner ear.
              Both the oval window and the round window in the middle ear provide access to
                the inner ear:
                 The oval window provides an opening for vibrations to enter the inner ear.
                 The round window provides an opening for vibrations to exit the inner ear.
                 If the oval or round window is ruptured, the inner ear fluid can leak into the
                   middle ear and form a "perilymph fistula."

             The middle ear can be divided into three areas:

              Epitympanum--top or attic portion
                 Includes the head of the malleus and the body and short process of the incus.
                 "Prussak space" (most common area for cholesteatomas) is the space between the
                   lateral wall of the epitympanum and the neck of the malleus.

              Mesotympanum--middle portion
                 Includes the manubrium of the malleus, the long process of the incus, and the
                   stapes.
                 Two muscles in this area help to dampen sound transmission: the stapedius and
                   tensor tympani muscles.
                   The stapedius muscle is the smallest skeletal muscle in the human body (barely
                      over 1 mm in length).
                      - It stabilizes the stapes.
                      - It helps to control the amplitude of sound waves to the inner ear.
                   Sounds that both muscles help to dampen include those produced by chewing
                      food and talking.

              Hypotympanum--bottom or lower portion
                 Contains no structures.

              The floor of the middle ear covers the jugular bulb. NOTE: A high-riding abnormal jugu-
                lar bulb is one of the causes of pulsatile tinnitus.

              The ET is bony as it leaves the middle ear, but when it enters the nasopharynx, it
                consists of cartilage and muscle.
                 Normally the ET is closed.
                 Muscle contraction opens the ET and allows air pressure in the middle ear and
                   nose to equalize.
                   If the pressure in the middle ear is unable to equalize, this could lead to nega-
                      tive pressure behind the TM, which can distort sound and can also lead to mid-
                      dle ear fluid accumulation.

EAR: INNER EAR

Figure 2.4:   The function of the inner ear is to turn vibrations into nerve impulses and send those
Middle and      nerve impulses to the brain for interpretation.
inner ear.
              Contains important structures for hearing and balance
                 Cochlea (organ for hearing)
                 Semicircular canals (organ for balance)

              The inner ear is composed of two parts:
                 Bony labyrinth:
                   Filled with a fluid called the perilymph
                   Divided into the cochlea, the vestibule, and the semicircular canals
                 Membranous labyrinth:
                   Suspended in the perilymph and follows the shape of the bony labyrinth
                                                                            EAR: INNER EAR  39

 Filled with a thicker fluid called the endolymph
 Endolymphatic sac (located in the membranous labyrinth):

   - Acts as an absorption mechanism for endolymph
   - If excess pressure occurs in this sac, it can cause symptoms consistent with

      Meniere's

 Anterior (superior) semicircular canal and duct  Ampullae
Common crus and duct

Posterior semicircular                                                     Dura mater
         canal and duct                                                    Endolymphatic sac

       Lateral semicircular                                                Endolymphatic duct
              canal and duct                                               in vestibular aqueduct
                                                                           Utricle
               Stapes in oval
        (vestibular) window                                                Saccule
                                                                           Vestibule
                          Incus                                            Cochlear aqueduct
                       Malleus
                                                        Auditory
Round (cochlear) window                           (eustachian) tube
     (closed by secondary
     tympanic membrane)

            Tympanic cavity

External acoustic meatus
     Tympanic membrane

FIGURE 2.4 Middle and inner ear.

HOW EACH AREA OF THE INNER EAR COMMUNICATES TO THE BRAIN

Cochlea (Hearing)                                 Semicircular Canals      Vestibule (Balance)
                                                  (Balance)

Sound waves reach the                             When the head            Connects the cochlea and
    cochlea through vibrations                        is rotated, the          semicircular canals.
    of the TM, ossicles, and oval                     fluid inside the
    window.                                           semicircular canals  Contains the maculae, which
                                                      moves in the             are receptors essential to
This sets the cochlear fluid                          direction, opposite      the body's sense of static
    in motion and the fluid                           the head's               equilibrium.
    stimulates the hair cells                         movement.
    within the organ of Corti                                              As the head moves, otoliths
    (in the cochlea).                             The hair cells are           (small pieces of calcium
                                                      stimulated and           salts) move in response
The hair cells transmit impulses                      impulses are             to changes in the pull of
    along the cochlear nerve to                       transmitted              gravity.
    the auditory cortex of the                        through the
    temporal bone in the brain                        vestibular nerve to  Nerve impulses in the hair
    where interpretation of                           the brain.               cells are stimulated
    sound occurs.                                                              and this information is
                                                                               transmitted to the brain.
40  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Semicircular Canal

                    Composed of bony canals and membranous ducts
                    There are three bony semicircular canals:

                       Posterior semicircular canal
                       Horizontal semicircular canal (also known as the lateral semicircular canal)
                       Superior semicircular canal (also known as the anterior semicircular canal)
                    Each canal is filled with a fluid called the endolymph and contains motion sensors
                      within the fluid.
                    The function of the semicircular canals is to sense rotational movement and angular
                      acceleration.

NOSE: EXTERNAL

Figure 1.7:      Composed of two parts:
External nose.      Upper bony part (upper one third)
                      Composed of the nasal process of the maxillary bones and the nasal process of the
                         frontal bone (forehead) that articulate together in the middle with two nasal bones
                    Lower cartilaginous part (lower two thirds)
                      Flexible
                      Framed by the lateral, greater alar, and lesser alar cartilages

                 Dense fibrous connective tissue supports the rounded lateral walls of the nostrils,
                   which are called ala

NOSE: INTERNAL

                       SINUS CT SCAN: CORONAL VIEW
                                                          NASAL SEPTUM

                MAXILLARY SINUS CAVITIES

                                                                        FIGURE 2.5 Maxillary sinuses.

Figure 1.8:      The internal nose is divided into two cavities called vestibules by a bony nasal sep-
Paranasal          tum.
sinuses.
                 The floor of the nasal cavity is the superior portion of the hard palate.
Figure 2.5:      The roof of the nasal cavity is the ethmoid bone.
Maxillary        Covered by a vascular mucous membrane lined with small hairs and mucous
sinuses.
                   secretions
                                  NOSE: INTERNAL  41

                       The soft tissue inside the nose tends to vary greatly in thickness, altering its resis-
                         tance, pressure, and volume related to environmental triggers (i.e., allergies,
                         viruses, etc.), and mucosal secretions.

                    The lateral walls of the internal nose are formed by turbinates. The turbinates curl
                      medially and downward into the nasal cavity. They have airflow pressure and tem-
                      perature detecting nerve receptors that allow for congestion and decongestion in
                      response to allergies, climatic conditions, or the changing needs of the body. The tur-
                      binates are also responsible for filtration, heating, and humidification of air inhaled
                      through the nose.
                       There are three inferior turbinates (in each nasal cavity separated by the nasal
                         septum): inferior, middle, and superior turbinates.
                       Each turbinate has a corresponding space called the meatus, which receives drain-
                         age from specific areas:
                       Inferior meatus receives drainage from the nasolacrimal duct.
                       Middle meatus receives drainage from the maxillary, anterior ethmoid, and
                            frontal sinuses.
                       Superior meatus receives drainage from the posterior ethmoid sinuses.

Nasal Septum

                    Bony portion that separates the two sides of the nasal cavities in half.
                    A deflection of the septum from midline can block or partially block the nasal pas-

                      sageways. NOTE: More than 80% of the population has a deviated septum. Not all devi-
                        ated septums are problematic or symptomatic.

Internal Nose Blood Supply

Figure 2.6:     Two vascular trunks of the common carotid artery:
Arteries of
nasal cavity.      External carotid artery, which has the following branches:
                     Sphenopalatine artery
                     Greater palatine artery
                     Superior labial artery
                     Angular artery

                   Internal carotid artery, which has the following branches:
                     Anterior ethmoid artery
                     Posterior ethmoid artery from the ophthalmic artery

                Kiesselbach's plexus (Little's area):

                   Most common site for anterior epistaxis

                   Four arteries anastomose to form this area:
                     Anterior ethmoidal artery (from the ophthalmic artery)
                     Sphenopalatine artery (terminal branch of the maxillary artery)
                     Greater palatine artery (from the maxillary artery)
                     Septal branch of the superior labial artery (from the facial artery)

                Woodruff's plexus:

                   Most common site for posterior epistaxis

                   Located off the sphenopalatine artery

Internal Nose Lymphatic Drainage

Figure 1.16:    Anterior one third of the nose drains in to the submental and submandibular nodes
Neck:           Posterior two thirds of the nose and sinuses drain in to the retropharyngeal nodes
lymphatic
system and        and superior deep cervical nodes
node groups.
42  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

                                          Septal branch of
                                             facial artery

             Nasal septum                 Lateral wall of                      Branches of posterior
         turned superiorly                 nasal cavity                        ethmoidal artery

    Branches of anterior                                                       Septal branch of
          ethmoidal artery                                                     nasopalatine artery
                                                                               Nasopalatine artery
             Kiesselbach's                                                    Sphenopalatine
                      Plexus                                                  foramen
                                                                               Lateral nasal branch
      Lateral nasal                                                            of nasopalatine artery
        branches of
        facial artery                                                         Maxillary artery

       Anastomosis between                                                     External carotid artery
               septal branch of
                                                            Lesser palatine artery
     nasopalatine artery and
       greater palatine artery
                in incisive canal

                 Greater palatine artery

FIGURE 2.6 Arteries of nasal cavity.

Internal Nose Cranial Nerve Innervation

Figure 2.7:   Internal nose CN innervation is supplied by the following CNs: CN I, olfactory nerve;
Olfactory     CN V, trigeminal nerve; and CN VII, facial nerve.
nerve.

              CN I: Olfactory Nerve
               Passes through the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone into the olfactory bulb lying

                 in the anterior cranial fossa
               Carries the sense of smell from the olfactory mucosa in the roof of the nose

Figure 2.2:   CN V: Trigeminal Nerve
Trigeminal
nerve and      Ethmoidal branches of the ophthalmic division of CN V:
facial nerve
branches.         Responsible for sensory innervation to:
                    The lining of the anterior part of the nasal cavity
                    To the surrounding olfactory mucosa in the roof of the nose
                    To the lining of the frontal sinus

               Maxillary division of CN V:
                  Responsible for sensory innervation to:
                    The lateral wall of the nose
                                                                NASOPHARYNX  43

Figure 2.2:         The nasal septum
Trigeminal          The maxillary sinus
nerve and
facial nerve  CN VII: Facial Nerve
branches.      Responsible for movement of external nose.

              Olfactory bulb
                           Olfactory nerves
                                               Olfactory tract

                                                                FIGURE 2.7 Olfactory nerve.

NASOPHARYNX

Figure 1.12:   The nasal part of the pharynx is called the nasopharynx.
Oropharynx,    It continues anteriorly through the nasal cavity (choana).
hypopharynx,   The floor of the nasopharynx is the soft palate.
trachea, and   The roof of the nasopharynx is closely related to the base of the skull.
larynx.        The nasopharynx slopes downward and back and becomes contiguous with the pos-

                 terior wall of the pharynx.
                  The posterior pharyngeal wall overlies the retropharyngeal space. NOTE: Infections

                     in this space are deep neck infections and can cause potential airway compromise.
               The ETs are present in the lateral aspects of the nasopharynx. NOTE: Nasopharyngeal

                 masses, including hypertrophic adenoids, have the potential to block or obstruct the

                 ETs.
               Adenoid tissue (pharyngeal tonsils) are located in the superior recess of the nasophar-

                 ynx:
                  Adenoid tissue is lymphatic tissue in the posterior nasal cavity.
                  Adenoid tissue usually starts shrinking after the age of 5, and by adolescence, it

                    often disappears.
                  Role of adenoids is controversial with regard to preventing infections.
               Rosenmuller's fossa or lateral pharyngeal recess
               Deep recess posterior to the ET orifice in the nasopharynx. NOTE: Clinically signifi-
                 cant area for nasopharyngeal cancers.
44  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Nasopharynx Lymphatic Drainage

Figure 1.16:   Lymph node tissue is abundant in the nasopharynx.
Neck:          Drains to the retropharyngeal nodes and superior deep cervical chain.
Lymphatic      Adverse effects generally do not occur after removal of lymphatic tissue in this
system and
node groups.     area.

PARANASAL SINUSES

Figure 1.8:    The paranasal sinuses are air-filled and, therefore, the presence of the sinus cavities
Paranasal        decreases the weight of the skull.
sinuses.
               Inaccessible unless functional endoscopic sinus surgery is performed.
               When sinuses are infected, swelling of the nasal mucosa around the orifices slows

                 drainage.
               Includes the following sinus cavities: sphenoid, frontal, ethmoid, and maxillary
               All sinuses are lined with respiratory epithelium capable of producing mucus.
               The cilia in the sinus cavities help to empty secretions into the nasal cavities.

Sphenoid Sinus

Figure 2.8:    The degree of pneumatization of the sphenoid sinus varies:
Frontal,          Important if evaluating surgical approach to the pituitary gland
ethmoid,          The optic nerve is superior to the sphenoid sinus.
and               The internal carotid artery is lateral to the sphenoid sinus.
sphenoid
sinuses.

              SINUS CT SCAN: SAGITTAL VIEW
                                         FRONTAL SINUSES

                                   SPHENOID SINUSES

                   ETHMOID SINUSES

                                                          FIGURE 2.8 Frontal,
                                                          ethmoid, and sphenoid
                                                          sinuses.
                           ORAL CAVITY AND OROPHARYNX  45

Frontal Sinus

Figure 2.8:   Two, three, or even more frontal sinuses can potentially develop.
Frontal,      Some persons have no frontal sinus.
ethmoid,      Frequently, asymmetric frontal sinuses may appear falsely opacified on plain x-rays.
and           The degree of frontal sinus pneumatization varies.
sphenoid      Drains into the anterior aspect of the middle meatus.
sinuses.

Ethmoid Sinus

Figure 2.8:   Consists of a variable number of separate cavities:
Frontal,         Frontal recess cells
ethmoid,           Drains into the frontal recess of the middle meatus
and              Infundibular cells
sphenoid           Drains into the ethmoid infundibulum
sinuses.         Bullar or middle ethmoid cells
                   Drains into the middle meatus on or above the ethmoid bulla
                 Posterior ethmoid cells
                   Drains into the superior meatus
                   Plays a pivotal role in sinonasal function

              The "cribriform plate" of the ethmoid bone separates the roof of the nose from the
                cranial cavity.
                 The cribriform plate is also the exit for the olfactory nerve (CN I).
                 The lateral lamella of the cribriform plate is the thinnest part and is at high risk
                   for fracture during function endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS), especially when the
                   olfactory fossae are asymmetric or at different depths. Variation in the depth is com-
                   mon and this risk factor should be discussed with all patients undergoing FESS.

Maxillary Sinus

Figure 2.5:   Only sinus routinely present at birth
Maxillary     Largest of the paranasal sinuses
sinuses.      Roof of the sinus is also the floor of the orbit
              Drains into the middle meatus of the nasal cavity
              Roots of the posterior molar teeth may extend into the sinus
              The anterior maxillary sinus wall houses the infraorbital nerve, which runs along the

                roof of the sinus and supplies sensory innervation to the lower eyelid, the side of the
                nose, and the upper lip.

Ostiomeatal Complex (OMC)

              Area that drains the frontal, anterior ethmoid, and maxillary sinuses.
              The OMC drains into the middle meatus and then into the nasopharynx.

ORAL CAVITY AND OROPHARYNX

Oral Cavity

                    The oral cavity extends from the lips to the junction of the hard and soft palates and
                      to the line of circumvallate papillae (dome-shaped structures of the tongue).

                    The oral cavity includes the following:
                       Lips
                       Supplied by the facial nerve.
46  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Figure 1.10:       Vestibule of mouth
Oral cavity and      Region between the internal mucosa of the cheek and the teeth.
oropharynx;          The parotid duct (Stensen's duct) opens here.
1.12:
Oropharynx,        Buccal mucosa
hypopharynx,         Inside lining of the cheeks.
trachea, and
larynx; and 2.9;   Hard palate
Oral cavity,         Bony plate that forms a partition between the nasal passages and the mouth.
tongue, and          Important for feeding and speech. NOTE: In a cleft palate birth defect, the left
oropharynx.             and right portions of the hard palate are not joined, which forms a gap between the

                        mouth and the nasal passage.

                   Upper alveolar ridge
                     Jaw ridge on the roof of the mouth between the upper teeth and hard palate.

                   Lower alveolar ridge
                     Jaw ridge on the bottom of the mouth behind the teeth.

                   Retromolar trigone or retromolar space
                     Firm area between the upper and lower posterior molars.

                   Tongue
                     Surface anatomy:
                        - Papillae cover the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
                        - Circumvallate papillae (dome-shaped structures of the tongue) are at the
                           junction of the anterior and posterior portions of the tongue.
                        - Sulcus terminalis: a groove at the anterior margin of the circumvallate papil-
                           lae.
                        - Frenulum: attaches to the anterior inferior aspect of the tongue to the floor of
                           mouth (FOM). NOTE: Look for ankyloglossia (tongue tie or short frenulum).
                     Nerve innervation:
                        Nerves involved include:
                        - Lingual nerve: fibers from trigeminal nerve (CN V) and facial nerve (CN VII);
                           provides taste sensation to the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
                        - Glossopharyngeal (CN IX) nerve; general sensation and taste sensation to the
                           posterior one third of the tongue.
                        - Vagus (CN X) nerve: sensation.
                        - Hypoglossal (CN XII) nerve: muscle of the tongue
                     Sensation:
                        - Anterior two thirds of the tongue is supplied by the lingual nerve, which is a
                           branch of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve.
                        - Posterior one third of the tongue is supplied by the glossopharyngeal
                           nerve.
                     Taste:
                        - Anterior two thirds of the tongue is supplied by the chorda tympani, which
                           is a nerve that branches from the facial nerve.
                        - Posterior one third of the tongue is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve.
                     Blood supply:
                        - The tongue is one of the most vascular muscles in the human body.
                        - Blood supply to the tongue is from the lingual branch of the external carotid
                           artery.

                   FOM
                     Between tongue and teeth.
                     Contains sublingual and part of the submandibular salivary glands.
                     The submandibular ducts (Wharton's duct) open on either side of the lingual
                        frenulum.
                     Highly vascular with rapid absorption of sublingual medication.
                           Palatine tonsil                     ORAL CAVITY AND OROPHARYNX  47

              Base of                                                  Epiglottis
               tongue
                                                                                   Median
                                                                                   glossoepiglottic fold

                                                                                          Lateral
                                                                                          glossoepiglottic fold

                                                                                           Vallecula
                                                                                          Lingual tonsil
                                                                                          (lingual follicles)
                                                                                  Foramen cecum
                                                                               Sulcus terminalis
                                                                              Vallate papillae

                       Body                                       Foliate papillae
                                                                  Filiform papillae
              FIGURE 2.9 Oral cavity, tongue, and oropharynx.    Fungiform papilla
                                                               Median sulcus
                                                               Apex

Oropharynx

Figure 2.9:    Soft palate
Oral cavity,      Composed of muscle and connective tissue. It does not contain bone.
tongue,           Adjacent to hard palate.
and oro-          Separates the mouth from the pharynx.
pharynx.          Contains the palatine tonsils.
                  The soft palate plays a role in:
                    Swallowing
                    Sucking
                    Speech and articulation
                    When the soft palate is elevated, it creates a vacuum in the oral cavity and
                       keeps food out of the nasal cavity.
48  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Figure 2.10:        Mallampati Classification Score:
Mallampati            Used to predict the ease of intubation. However, this tool is good to use in the
Classification           workup process in evaluating a patient with sleep apnea.
Score.                   - Class 1 = Full visibility of tonsils, uvula, and soft palate
                         - Class 2 = Visibility of hard and soft palate, upper portion of tonsils, and uvula.
                         - Class 3 = Soft and hard palate and base of tongue are visible.
                         - Class 4 = Only hard palate visible.

                 Palatine tonsils
                    Mass of lymphoid tissue on each side of the oral pharynx.
                    In between the palatoglossal and palatopharyngeal arches.
                    The role of the tonsils remains controversial with regard to preventing infection.
                      There is no proven immunologic effect from a tonsillectomy.
                      Blood supply:
                         - Primary blood supply is from the facial artery.
                      Nerve innervation:
                         - The glossopharyngeal nerve goes past the palatine tonsils and innervates the
                            tongue to provide general sensation and taste sensation. NOTE: Although rare,
                             this nerve is most likely to be damaged during a tonsillectomy, which can lead to

                             reduced or lost general sensation and taste sensation to the posterior one third

                             of the tongue.

                I                  II

                III                IV  FIGURE 2.10 Mallampati

                                       Classification Score.
                                                                                     LARYNX AND HYPOPHARYNX  49

                         Tonsillar crypts:
                            - Palatine tonsils are filled with numerous cryps (holes) within them.
                            - Food, debris, squamous epithelium, and various minerals can get entrapped
                               inside the crypts of the tonsils leading to tonsillolith formation.

                       Tonsillar Hypertrophy Grading Scale:
                         Grade 0 = Tonsil fits within the tonsillar fossa.
                         Grade 1+ = Tonsils < 25% of space between pillars.
                         Grade 2+ = Tonsils < 50% of space between pillars.
                         Grade 3+ = Tonsils < 75% of space between pillars.
                         Grade 4+ = Tonsils are > 75% of space between pillars.

                    Lingual tonsils
                       The posterior one third of the tongue contains collections of lymphoid tissue
                         called lingual tonsils.
                       Size of lingual tonsils may vary among individuals.
                       Blood is supplied by the lingual branch of the external carotid artery.
                       The lymphatic system of the lingual tonsils aids in forming white blood cells
                         (WBCs) and filtering out bacteria. NOTE: Be sure to evaluate for asymmetric lingual
                          tonsils. This could indicate an underlying base of tongue lesion/mass.

                    Valleculae
                       Also called "epiglottic vallecula."
                       Pockets/depressions in-between the median glossoepiglottic fold and the lateral
                         glossoepiglotic fold, anterior to the epiglottis.
                       The vallecula is a "spit trap" and saliva is temporarily held here.

LARYNX AND HYPOPHARYNX

Figure 1.12:       The larynx, or "voicebox," is involved in three main functions: breathing, sound
Oropharynx,        production, and in protecting the trachea from aspiration. In an adult, the larynx
hypopharynx,       is found in the neck at the level of the C3-C6 vertebrae. In a child, it is at the level
trachea, and       of the C2-C3 vertebrae and descends as the child grows. The inferior part of the
larynx; 1.15:      pharynx is called the hypopharynx. The larynx connects the hypopharynx to the
Cartilages of      trachea.
larynx, and 2.11:
Larynx.

                   PIRIFORM RECESS

                         ARYTENOID   ARYEPIGLOTTIC FOLD
                   TRUE VOCAL FOLDS
                                           FALSE VOCAL FOLDS
                                     ANTERIOR COMMISSURE      FIGURE 2.11 Larynx.
50  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Laryngeal Skeleton

Figure 1.15:   The laryngeal skeleton consists of one bone (hyoid bone) and nine cartilages.
Cartilages of
larynx.

               Three Single Cartilages                        Three Paired Cartilages

               Epiglottis                                     Arytenoid
               Fibroelastic cartilage                         NOTE: Important because it influences the

                                                                  position and tension of the vocal cords.

               Thyroid                                        Corniculate
               Encloses the larynx anteriorly and laterally.  Small cartilages above the arytenoid and in
               NOTE: This forms the Adam's apple.
                                                                  the aryepiglottic folds.

               Cricoid                                        Cuneiform
               Directly below the thyroid cartilage.          Fibroelastic cartilages in the aryepiglottic
               It is the only complete annular (ring-
                                                                  folds.
                   shaped) support of the larynx.

                   The larynx extends vertically from the tip of the epiglottis to the inferior border of the
                   cricoid cartilage. The interior of the larynx can be divided into three sections:

                    Supraglottis: The area above the vocal cords. Includes the epiglottis
                    Glottis: Includes the vocal cords and the space in between the vocal folds (anterior

                      and posterior commissures)
                    Subglottis: The area below the vocal cords that contains the cricoid cartilages and

                      continues down the trachea

Midline Structures in the Neck

                    Hyoid bone
                       Key landmark in the neck.
                       Horse shoe-shaped bone situated in the anterior midline of the neck between the
                         chin and thyroid cartilage.
                       The hyoid bone is only attached to other bones by muscles or ligaments.
                       It helps with tongue movement and swallowing.
                       It provides attachment to the muscles of the floor of the mouth, tongue, larynx,
                         epiglottis, and pharynx.

                    Thyrohyoid membrane
                       Connects the hyoid bone to the thyroid cartilage. NOTE: This is the most common
                            site for a thyroglossal duct cyst.

                    Thyroid cartilage
                       The largest of the nine cartilages that make up the laryngeal skeleton.
                       Encloses the larynx anteriorly and laterally.
                       It serves to protect the vocal cords, which are located directly behind it. NOTE:This
                            forms the Adam's apple.

                    Cricothyroid ligament
                       Flat band of tissue joining the cricoid and thyroid cartilages.
                       This ligament is cut during an emergency cricothyrotomy.

                    Cricoid cartilage
                       First ring of the trachea.
                       Directly below the thyroid cartilage.
                       It is the only complete annular (ring-shaped) support of the larynx.
                       It is anatomically related to the thyroid gland.
                                                         LARYNX AND HYPOPHARYNX  51

               The isthmus is inferior to the cricoid cartilage.
               The lobes of the thyroid gland extend superiorly on each side.

Laryngeal Innervation

Figure 2.12:   The larynx is innervated by branches of the vagus nerve (CN X) on each side.
Anomalous      Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) is a branch of the vagus nerve. The RLN supplies
neural and
vascular         motor function and sensation to the larynx. NOTE: It is called the "recurrent" laryn-
anatomy of       geal nerve because the branches of the nerve descend into the thorax before rising up
the larynx.
                 between the trachea and esophagus to reach the neck.

                    The left RLN loops under the arch of the aorta and the right branch of the RLN
                       hooks around the subclavian artery or aorta.

                    If there is weakness (vocal cord paresis) or paralysis with one or both of the
                       vocal cords, it is important to evaluate whether this was due to damage to the
                       RLN. This is because injury to the RLN can lead to vocal cord paresis or paral-
                       ysis. This can happen during any surgery in the neck, but more commonly
                       thyroid surgery because the RLN runs immediately posterior to the thyroid
                       gland.

                    If the patient has vocal cord paresis or paralysis without history of recent sur-
                       gery to give explanation, further workup must be done to rule out tumors or
                       masses that can affect the RLN. This is done by ordering a computed tomogra-
                       phy of the neck and chest with and without contrast.

                                          Anterior View

                            Right vagus                                Left vagus
                               nerve (X)                               nerve (X)
                                                                       Left common
             Anomalous right inferior                                  carotid artery
     laryngeal nerve (not recurrent)                                 Left inferior
                                                                     laryngeal nerve
Anomalous (retroesophageal)
          right subclavian artery                                 Left recurrent
                                                                  laryngeal nerve
              Right common
               carotid artery                                            Left subclavian artery

                      Arch of aorta                                 Anomalous (retroesophageal)
                                                                    right subclavian artery originating
                                                                    from left side of aortic arch

                                                                     Left recurrent
                                                                     laryngeal nerve

FIGURE 2.12 Anomalous neural and vascular anatomy of the larynx.
52  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Laryngeal Lymphatic Drainage

Figure 1.16:  Laryngeal lymphatics drain in to the infrahyoid, superior deep cervical, prelaryngeal,
Neck:         pretracheal, and paratracheal lymph nodes.
Lymphatic
system and
node groups.

Hypopharynx

                    Hypopharynx is the part of the throat that connects to the esophagus.
                    The hypopharynx is divided into three sites:

                       Piriform sinus or recess
                       A common place for food to become trapped.
                       If this area is injured (e.g., by a fish bone) it can cause a globus sensation or feel-
                            ing that something is still stuck in the throat.

                       Postcricoid area
                       Posterior pharyngeal wall

TRACHEA

                    The trachea, or "windpipe," is a tube that connects the pharynx and larynx to the
                      lungs, allowing the passage of air.

                    The trachea should be midline in the neck and be freely moveable.
                    There are around 15 to 20 incomplete C-shaped cartilaginous rings that rein-

                      force the anterior and lateral sides of the trachea to protect and maintain the
                      airway. NOTE: The reason why the trachea has incomplete C-shaped rings is to
                        allow for airway expansion during inhalation and for the esophagus to expand dur-
                        ing swallowing. The posterior wall of the esophagus is soft, which allows for this
                        expansion.
                       The only complete ring of cartilage around the trachea is the cricoid cartilage.
                    The esophagus is posterior to the trachea.
                    The epiglottis closes the opening to the larynx during swallowing to protect any-
                      thing from entering the trachea.
                    The trachea starts at the larynx (specifically at the cricoid cartilage) and extends to its
                      bifurcation (carina) into the right and left mainstem bronchi.
                    One half of the trachea is in the neck, and the other half is in the mediastinum.
                    The thyroid gland lies anterior to the trachea with the isthmus overlying the trachea
                      between the second and fifth tracheal rings.

Trachea Innervation

                    Occurs from two sources: the vagus nerve (CN X) and the sympathetic system.

LYMPHATIC TISSUE FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

Figure 1.16:  One must know the position as well as the drainage areas of node groups since lymph
Neck:         nodes act as filters for the body with both infectious materials and metastatic cells.
Lymphatic     Swelling of regional nodes may be the first sign detected in a deep-lying malignant
system and    neck structure.
node groups.
                                         LYMPHATIC TISSUE FOR THE HEAD AND NECK  53

Lymphatic Drainage Pathways of the Head

Lymph Glands         Location                              Drainage Pathway
Occipital            Back of the head
Posterior auricular                                        Occipital region of the
                     Behind the ear                            scalp.
Anterior auricular
Parotid              In front of the tragus                Deep cervical glands.

Facial               Overlying and imbedded within         Posterior part of the
                         the parotid gland itself. Also        temporoparietal
Deep facial              includes subparotid glands            region.
Lingual                  lying on the lateral wall of the
Retropharyngeal          pharynx.                          The upper part of the cranial
                                                               surface of the pinna.
                     Three groups:
                     Infraorbital or maxillary: around     The back of the ear
                                                               canal.
                         the eye between the nose and
                         cheek.                            Lateral surface of the pinna.
                     Buccinator: opposite the angle of     The skin adjacent to the
                         the mouth.
                     Supramandibular: on the outer             temporal region.
                         surface of the mandible.
                     Beneath the mandible.                 Top of the nose.
                                                           Frontotemporal region.
                     Under the chin to the tongue.         External ear canal.
                     Behind the upper part of the          Tympanic cavity of the ear.
                                                           Posterior soft palate.
                         pharynx.                          Floor of the nasal cavity.
                                                           Nasal part of the pharynx.
                                                           Posterior parts of the nasal

                                                               cavities.
                                                           NOTE: Tumors that invade

                                                               the ET, EAC, or TM may
                                                               occasionally drain to the
                                                               intraparotid lymph
                                                               nodes.

                                                           Eyelids.
                                                           Conjunctiva.
                                                           Skin and mucous membranes

                                                               of the nose and cheek.

                                                           Temporal and infratemporal
                                                               fossa.

                                                           Nasal part of the pharynx.

                                                           Tongue.

                                                           Nasal cavities.
                                                           Nasal part of the pharynx.
54  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Lymphatic Drainage Pathways of the Nasal Cavities

Figure 1.16:  NOTE: Lymphatic drainage is often bilateral, so remember that both sides of the neck are
Neck:         at risk for cervical nodal metastases from nasopharyngeal cancer.
lymphatic
system and
node groups.

              Location                               Drainage Pathway

              Lateral nasopharynx                    Drains laterally to the retropharyngeal
                                                         lymph nodes:
                                                        High Level II lymph nodes.
                                                        High Level V lymph nodes.

              Posterior wall and roof of the         Drains medially to the retropharyngeal
                  nasopharynx                            lymph nodes.

Lymphatic Drainage Pathways of the Floor of Mouth

                     NOTE: Lymphatic drainage is often bilateral, so remember that both sides of the neck are
                     at risk for cervical nodal metastases from FOM cancer.

              Location                               Drainage Pathway
              Anterior FOM and the sublingual gland
              Posterior FOM                          Level I nodes

                                                     Level II nodes and occasionally Level III
                                                         nodes

Lymphatic Drainage Pathways of the Tongue
                   A superficial and deep lymphatic network drains the tongue.

              Location             Drainage Pathway
              Anterior tongue
              Lateral tongue       Drains the tip of the oral tongue  Level III nodes.

              Central tongue       Drains the lateral one third from the tip to the circumvallate
                                       papillae  Level I, II, or III nodes.

                                   Drains the central two thirds of the tongue  Level I or
                                       III nodes.

Lymphatic Drainage Pathways of the Oropharynx and Nasopharynx

              Location             Drainage Pathway
              Palatine tonsil
                                   Drains to Level II lymph nodes.
                                   Retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
                                   NOTE: Lymphatic drainage usually remains on the same side

                                       as the affected tonsil. Cross-lymphatic drainage for this
                                       area generally does not occur.

                                                                                                                    (continued)
                                               EVALUATING THE PHYSIOLOGY OF SWALLOWING  55

              Soft palate            Anterior soft palate:
              NOTE: Drainage         Drains to Level I lymph nodes.

                  from these         Middle soft palate:
                  areas can cross    Drains to Level II lymph nodes.
                  other lymphatic
                  drainage           Posterior soft palate:
                  pathways--         Drains to retropharyngeal space and lateral retropharyngeal
                  thereby placing
                  both sides of the      lymph nodes.
                  neck at risk for
                  nodal metastases.  Ring of lymphatic tissue that includes the oropharynx and
                                         nasopharynx.
              Waldeyer's ring
                                     It consists of (from superior to inferior):
                                      Pharyngeal tonsils (adenoids)
                                      Tubal tonsils (bilaterally where the ET opens into the

                                        nasopharynx)
                                      Palatine tonsils (located in the oropharynx)
                                      Lingual tonsils (located on the posterior part of the

                                        tongue)
                                     Drains to lingual vein  then to the pharyngeal vein  then

                                         to the internal jugular vein.

Lymphatic Drainage Pathways of the Larynx

              Location                         Drainage Pathway
              Supraglottic larynx
                                               The lymphatic drainage system in this area is linked
              Glottic larynx                       with the lymphatic drainage system of the pharynx.

              Pyriform sinus                   Level II and III lymph nodes are most involved.
              NOTE: The pyriform sinus
                                               The lymphatic drainage system in this area is linked
                  region has an extensive          with the supraglottic and subglottic larynx.
                  drainage system. The
                  skull base and the base      Anterior pyriform sinus primarily drains into Level II, III,
                  of the neck are at risk for      and VII lymph nodes. Advanced disease may involve
                  metastases from this area.       Level IV and V lymph nodes.

                                               Posterior pyriform sinus drains into the lateral
                                                   retropharyngeal lymph nodes and the internal
                                                   jugular chain.

EVALUATING THE PHYSIOLOGY OF SWALLOWING

Figure 2.13:  Swallowing is a very complex muscular action that involves several activities all at
Normal        the same time. In order for swallowing to work properly, these functions need to
swallowing.   work in a systematic order, without fail. It is important to understand the normal
              swallow because many diseases and conditions can affect this basic, yet complex
              function.
56  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Food
bolus

A                               B                        C

D                               E                        F

FIGURE 2.13 Normal swallowing.

              There are three stages of swallowing: oral, pharyngeal, and esophageal.

Figure 2.13A  Oral phase                                 Oral transport phase (see Figure 2.13B
to C: Normal  Is under voluntary neuromuscular control.      and C)
swallowing.
              Oral preparatory phase (see Figure 2.13A)   Lips and cheeks contract followed by
               The lips, tongue, mandible, palate,          tongue contraction against the hard
                                                            palate.
                 cheeks, and salivary flow work to
                 grind and manipulate the food            The tongue and hard palate come into
                 bolus so that it is safe and ready to      contact and the soft palate elevates,
                 swallow.                                   drawing the food bolus against the
                                                            posterior pharyngeal wall.

                                                            (continued)
                                                                                            SALIVARY GLANDS  57

                Normal movement of the anterior two thirds of the tongue is essential for carrying out
                    this stage.

                The posterior one third of the tongue is important in the generation of force that
                    propels a food bolus posteriorly toward the pharynx.

                Without a functioning tongue base, tongue and soft palate contact cannot be made.
                With impaired tongue to soft palate contact, the nasopharynx cannot be sealed from

                    the oral cavity. As a result, food can enter into this space.

                Pharyngeal phase: Images D and E show the pharyngeal phase of swallowing.
                Under involuntary neuromuscular control.
                Occurs in less than 1 second.
                Once the food bolus comes in contact with the anterior tonsillar pillars, the pharyngeal

                    phase of swallowing reflex begins.
                Pressure-sensitive receptors (CN IX and X) on the anterior tonsillar pillars trigger the

                    involuntary pharyngeal swallow.
                Velopharyngeal closure occurs, which is when the soft palate and uvula raise to close off

                    the nasal cavity.
                There is true vocal fold adduction to close off the airway. NOTE: This is the primary

                    laryngopharyngeal protective mechanism that prevents aspiration during swallowing.
                At the same time, there is an elevation of the larynx and hyoid bone toward the base of

                    the tongue and the epiglottis inverts over the airway. This closes off the trachea from
                    the pharynx.
                The suprahyoid muscles are responsible for elevating the hyoid bone and larynx.
                At the same time, the intrinsic laryngeal muscles contract to prevent aspiration.
                The final portion of the pharyngeal phase is when the food bolus enters the cervical
                    esophagus.

                Esophageal phase: Image F shows the esophageal phase of swallowing.
                Under involuntary neuromuscular control.
                Occurs in 3 to 6 seconds with the fastest movement of the food bolus occurring in the

                    upper one third of the esophagus.
                When the food bolus passes through the upper esophageal sphincter, a contraction is

                    initiated in the upper esophagus, which progresses distally to the lower esophagus.
                    This is called primary peristalsis.
                The peristaltic wave continues throughout the esophagus propelling the food bolus to
                    the lower esophageal sphincter, which relaxes and allows the food bolus to enter the
                    stomach.
                The lower esophageal sphincter has a tendency to relax periodically at times,
                    independent from swallowing.
                These periodic relaxations are called transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations.
                    The cause is unknown but gastric distension may play a role.
                NOTE: Transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations can allow for a small amount
                    of gastroesophageal reflux to occur.
                Upright posture and gravity are important factors for facilitating lower esophageal
                    transport.

SALIVARY GLANDS

Parotid Glands

Figure 1.9:   Largest salivary glands in the human body.
Salivary      Located anterior to the mastoid process and external auditory meatus.
glands.       Extends as deep as the pharyngeal wall.
58  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

                    The inferior tail of the parotid is between the ramus of the mandible and sterno-
                      cleidomastoid muscle.

                    Superficial and deep portions of the parotid gland are divided by the facial nerve
                      (CN VII).

                    Secretes saliva through Stensen's ducts into the oral cavity.
                    The parotid duct (Stensen's duct) passes over the masseter muscle and can be pal-

                      pated just in front of a clenched masseter muscle.
                       It goes into the oral cavity through the buccinators muscle and opens in the buccal

                         mucosa opposite the second molar tooth.
                    Structures that pass through the parotid gland include the:

                       Facial nerve
                       Retromandibular vein
                       External carotid artery
                    Lymphatic drainage of the parotid gland:
                       There are numerous lymph nodes within the parotid gland. These lymph nodes

                         drain into the preauricular or parotid lymph nodes, which ultimately drain into
                         the deep cervical chain.
                    Blood supply:
                       External carotid artery

Submandibular Glands (SMGs)

                   These are the second largest salivary glands in the human body:

                    Beneath the floor of the mouth/beneath the mandible
                    Secretes saliva through Wharton's ducts into the oral cavity
                    The submandibular duct (Wharton's duct) opens at the base of the frenulum of the

                      tongue.
                    Nerve innovation:

                       Facial nerve (CN VII):
                       When the SMG is surgically removed, the facial vein is sacrificed, but the ramus
                            mandibularis branch of the facial nerve is preserved, which prevents motor dis-
                            ruption to the corner of the mouth.

                       Lingual nerve (sensory nerve):
                       Traverses the FOM

                       Hypoglossal nerve (CN XII):
                       Medial to the submandibular gland
                       CN XII provides motor function to the tongue

                    Blood supply:
                       Facial artery

Sublingual Gland (SLG)

                    The smallest of the major salivary glands
                    Unlike the parotid and SMGs, no actual capsule surrounds the SLG.
                    Lies below the tongue in the anterior FOM
                    The SLG creates a sublingual fold (which is a fold of mucous membrane) that lies

                      along the FOM.
                       The SLG has multiple ducts along the sublingual fold.

                       Saliva enters the FOM from these multiple short ducts.
                    The submandibular duct (Wharton's duct) and lingual nerve travel between the

                      SLG. NOTE: Mucoceles of the SLG are called ranulas.
                    Blood supply:
                                                              THYROID AND PARATHYROID GLANDS  59

          Sublingual branch of the lingual artery and the submental branch of the facial
            artery

THYROID AND PARATHYROID GLANDS

Thyroid

          One of the largest endocrine glands
          It is normally not visible or palpable.
          Butterfly-shaped organ found below the thyroid cartilage. Anterior to the trachea

            and midway between the apex of the thyroid cartilage and suprasternal notch
             Includes two lobes (right and left). The isthmus connects the two lobes.

               The isthmus is located inferior to the cricoid cartilage.
             The base of the thyroid gland is at the fifth or sixth tracheal ring.
          The thyroid usually grows posteriorly and inferiorly. NOTE: It is possible in large

            thyroid goiters to have substernal extension.

          The thyroid gland has a rich blood supply.
             Provided by the superior, inferior, and middle thyroid arteries.

          RLN is present bilaterally and lies in grooves between the trachea and the esopha-
            gus.
               In some patients, the RLN can actually penetrate the thyroid gland.

Functions of the Thyroid

                    Controls how quickly the body uses energy. It does this by producing thyroid hor-
                      mones, which regulate the rate of metabolism.
                       The thyroid hormones--triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4)--are secreted
                         from follicular cells.
                       Calcitonin is a hormone produced by parafollicular cells of the thyroid.
                       It regulates calcium levels in the blood by decreasing serum calcium levels
                            (whereas the parathyroid hormone [PTH] acts to increase the concentration of
                            calcium in the blood).

                    The thyroid also produces calcitonin, which plays a role in calcium homeostasis.
                    Hormone output from the thyroid gland is regulated by the thyroid-stimulating hor-

                      mone (TSH), which is produced in the anterior pituitary.

Parathyroid

                    Small endocrine glands
                    Situated behind the thyroid gland
                    Usually four (or more) separate glands that are located in pairs--superiorly and

                      inferiorly, posterior to the thyroid gland
                       In rare cases, parathyroid glands can be located within the thyroid gland itself or

                         in the chest. NOTE: In a thyroidectomy, it is important to avoid the recurrent laryngeal
                            nerves and to preserve some thyroid tissue.

Functions of the Parathyroid

                    The parathyroid gland controls the amount of calcium in the blood and within the
                      bones.
60  2. ENT ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

                    PTH is a protein that takes part in the control of calcium levels.
                       PTH acts to increase the concentration of calcium in the blood (whereas calcitonin,
                         a hormone produced by parafollicular cells of the thyroid, regulates calcium lev-
                         els in the blood by decreasing serum calcium levels).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Curtis, D. J., Cruess, D. F., Dachman, A. H., & Maso, E. (1984). Timing in the normal pharyngeal swal-
                   low: Prospective selection and evaluation of 16 normal asymptomatic patients. Investigative Radiol-
                   ogy, 19, 523-528.

            Family practice notebook. Tonsillar Hypertrophy Grading Scale. Retrieved from http://www.fpnotebook.
                   com/ent/exam/TnslrHyprtrphyGrdngScl.htm. Accessed January 27, 2013.

            Flowers, C., & Morris, H. (1973). Oral-pharyngeal movement during swallowing and speech. Cleft Pal-
                   ate Journal, 10, 181-191.

            Hallowell, D., & Silverman, S. R. (Ed.). (1970). Hearing and deafness (3rd ed.). Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
            Lalwani, A. K. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery. New York,

                   NY: McGraw-Hill.
            Lee, K. J. (1999). Essential otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
            Mukherji, S., Armao, D., & Joshi, V. (2001). Cervical nodal metastases in squamous cell carcinoma of the

                   head and neck: What to expect. Head and Neck, 23, 995-1005.
            Netter, F. H. (1989). Atlas of human anatomy (Plate 91). West Caldwell, NJ: Pharmaceuticals Division,

                   CIBA-GEIGY Corporation.
            Palmer, J., Rudin, N., Lara, G., & Crompton, A. (1992). Coordination of mastication and swallowing.

                   Dysphagia, 7, 187-200.
            Pansky, B. (1984). Review of gross anatomy (5th ed.). New York: Macmillan.
            Rouviere, H. (1938). Lymphatic system of the head and neck. M. Tobias (Trans.). Ann Arbor, MI: Edwards

                   Brothers.
