20  Evaluation and
    Management of
    Trachea Disorders
    and Conditions

TRACHEITIS

                   Tracheitis is inflammation of the trachea. Most conditions that contribute to inflamma-
                   tion of the trachea are bacterial or viral infections. Irritants such as chlorine, smoke, and
                   gas can injure the lining of the trachea, leading to an increased likelihood of infections.

Tracheitis: Bacterial and Viral Causes

                   Bacterial tracheitis (BT) is an uncommon, acute, infectious, potentially life-threatening
                   inflammatory condition of the trachea. It is associated with pathogens that produce an
                   accumulation of purulent debris, erythema, and edema in the larynx and subglottic
                   area (trachea). This can cause a rapid decline and airway compromise. BT can occur as
                   a primary bacterial infection or a secondary infection to viral tracheitis (VT). VT is more
                   common than BT. It is possible that these patients may have had a primary VT first,
                   followed by secondary bacterial colonization. BT most commonly affects children in
                   the same age range as those with viral croup, that is, between 2 and 6 years of age. BT
                   should be considered in children who present with acute life-threatening upper airway
                   infection.

                  Common Pathogens
                    Viruses
                    Influenza
                    Parainfluenza
                    Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)

                    Bacteria
                    Staphylococcus aureus (most common)
                    Streptococcus pyogenes
                    Streptococcus pneumoniae
                    Moraxella catarrhalis
                    Haemophilus influenzae
                     NOTE: Routine childhood immunizations with H. influenzae type B, influenza, and pneu-
                     mococcal vaccines have significantly reduced the number of cases of BT.
384  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

Other Causes

                    Damage to the epithelial lining of the trachea from mechanical trauma such as endo-
                      tracheal intubation, suctioning, or surgical procedures can result in damaged tis-
                      sues, which are more susceptible to bacterial invasion.

Signs and Symptoms

                   Patients typically have a brief prodrome of symptoms such as rhinorrhea, sore throat,
                   and a cough consistent with a viral upper respiratory infection (URI). However, these
                   symptoms rapidly progress and become more symptomatic. Symptoms can include the
                   following:

                    Barking, seal-like cough with respiratory distress (most common)
                    Inspiratory and expiratory stridor/chest retractions/increased work of breathing
                    Hoarseness
                    Drooling
                    Higher fever (hyperpyrexia)
                    Airway compromise and toxic appearance

Complications of Tracheitis

                    Respiratory and cardiopulmonary arrest
                    Pulmonary edema and pneumonia
                    Septic shock and toxic shock syndromes (S. aureus and S. pyogenes are toxin-producing

                      bacterial strains)
                    Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and respiratory failure
                    Death

Confirming Diagnosis

                    The diagnosis can be made by direct visualization with bronchoscopy; however,
                      most cases are diagnosed and treated based on clinical presentation.
                       Bronchoscopy allows for suctioning obstructed airway secretions and obtaining a
                         tracheal culture for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria.

                    Lateral and anteroposterior neck films may show findings of subglottic narrowing
                      and irregularity of the tracheal wall related to significant mucosal edema.

Treatment

                    Intubation and mechanical ventilation relative to the rapid onset of respiratory fail-
                      ure and airway compromise

                    Early onset use of corticosteroids: This has been shown to decrease the chance of
                      intubation and makes a huge impact on reducing the overall morbidity of the dis-
                      ease. NOTE: Due to the significant impact corticosteroids have on reducing airway
                        inflammation, there are data that support recommendations for the use of corticoster-
                        oids early on, even in cases of mild croup.

                    Racemic epinephrine (mixture of epinephrine and a bronchodilator) delivered by
                      aerosol is commonly used in the emergency setting for patients with stridor; how-
                      ever, this medication will not produce symptomatic improvement in patients with
                      tracheitis.
                                                                         FOREIGN BODY IN TRACHEA  385

        Oxygen supplementation
        Antibiotic therapy based on culture results of tracheal secretions, if possible. Exam-

          ples include:
           Augmentin (amoxicillin-clavulanic acid)
           Second-generation cephalosporins: Ceftin (cefuroxime axetil), Ceclor (cefaclor),

             for example.
           Cleocin (clindamycin)

FOREIGN BODY IN TRACHEA

                   Foreign bodies (FBs) in the aerodigestive tract are subdivided into regions--glottic, tra-
                   cheal, bronchial, and esophageal. FB in any of these regions has the potential to be life-
                   threatening and frequently require emergency management. FBs are usually located in
                   the bronchial region and lodged in the right main stem of the right bronchi and right
                   lower lobe of the lung. Even with one bronchus completely occluded by a FB, it is still pos-
                   sible to ventilate the contralateral lung. FB that occurs proximal to the right and left main
                   stem (in the trachea itself) poses a greater risk for airway compromise. Most airway FB
                   aspirations occur in children younger than 15 years and children aged 1 to 3 years (Mur-
                   ray, Meyers, Kelley, Talavera, & Allen, 2011). Peanuts are the most commonly aspirated
                   material in children. In adults, meat, plant seeds, vegetable matter, and bones rank the
                   highest materials aspirated.

Signs and Symptoms

                   FB aspiration has a wide variety of presentations:

                    The patient may have minimal symptoms (especially if the FB is small and in the
                      bronchi).

                    Choking or sudden bursts of coughing
                    Inspiratory stridor (important sign of tracheal occlusion)
                    Unilateral expiratory wheezing
                    Respiratory compromise or distress/respiratory failure
                    Tachypnea
                    Nasal flaring
                    Death

Tests

        Lateral and anteroposterior neck and chest films are usually done initially.
        CT is the imaging study of choice if lateral neck films are normal and the patient

          exhibits signs and symptoms of FB. The majority of tracheal FB (e.g., plant seeds)
          will not show up on lateral neck films but will be seen on a CT scan.

Management

                    Initially, abdominal thrusts/Heimlich maneuver and back blows are tried to dis-
                      lodge the FB.

                    In the emergency department setting:
                       Oxygen is administered.
                       Racemic epinephrine is given if stridor is present.
386  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

                       Laryngoscopy and/or bronchoscopy is done under general anesthesia to remove
                         the FB.

                       In unstable patients, intubation may be needed.
                       If the FB is larger than the subglottic region and cannot be removed, a tracheos-

                         tomy may be needed.

TRACHEAL STENOSIS

                   Tracheal stenosis or subglottic stenosis is narrowing of the trachea. It often affects soft
                   tissue and cartilage support. There are two types: congenital and acquired.

Congenital

                  Etiology
                    Rare. Usually occurs secondary to a deformity of the cricoid cartilage during devel-

                      opment
                    Usually associated with other congenital malformations such as cardiac anomalies,

                      pulmonary anomalies, and so on

                  Symptoms
                    Present at Birth
                    Severe stridor and respiratory distress
                    Mild tracheal stenosis may not be apparent until the child has the first URI.

                   Management
                    Mild cases may be managed with cricoid decompression, called a cricoid split. The

                      cricoid is the only complete ring of cartilage around the trachea. Cutting across the
                      cartilage, usually anterior, enlarges the subglottic airway and therefore improves
                      airflow. Newer endoscopic techniques with balloon dilation are being tried.
                    Severe cases are managed with a tracheostomy until the patient gets older and laryn-
                      gotracheal reconstruction (LTR) can be done. Usually the cricoid can be augmented
                      with a cartilage graft from the child's own rib cage.

                    Acquired
                   Etiology
                    Trauma from endotracheal tube or cuff erosion injuries. This can occur related to

                      pressure necrosis of the tracheal mucosa, which leads to tracheal narrowing. NOTE:
                        Suspect tracheal stenosis in patients with onset of respiratory symptoms following
                        intubation, regardless of the duration of intubation. Obesity and the use of endotracheal
                        tubes more than 7.5 in size are major risk factors for the development of airway stenosis
                        (Halum et al., 2012).
                    Tumor
                    Infection
                    Thermal or chemical injury
                    High tracheostomy (trach placed in the region of the first tracheal ring and cricoid
                      cartilage has a greater risk for causing subglottic stenosis).
                    Inflammatory conditions:
                       Wegener's granulomatosis, for example.
                    Gastroesophageal reflux: The reflux acid can affect the glottis and subglottis causing
                      further airway edema.
                    Radiation therapy can increase the risk for ongoing inflammation and injury.
                                                                                              TRACHEOMALACIA  387

                   Symptoms
                    Dyspnea
                    Stridor
                    Wheezing
                    Hoarseness

                   Management
                    Tracheal dilation is used to temporarily enlarge the airway, which can last from a few

                      days to a few months.
                    May require tracheal resection and/or reconstruction.

TRACHEOMALACIA

                   The trachea normally dilates slightly during inspiration and expiration. Tracheomal-
                   acia (TM) is a rare condition that occurs when a partial segment or more than one
                   segment of the trachea collapses, causing airway obstruction during expiration. If the
                   airway collapse extends into the bronchi, it is called tracheobronchomalacia.

                          TM can be encountered in both pediatric and adult populations and can be con-
                   genital or acquired. Death from TM may be prevented through early diagnosis, assess-
                   ment, and aggressive management.

Congenital Tracheomalacia

                   Normally an infant's tracheal cartilage is soft and becomes firm over 1 to 3 years after
                   birth. Congenital tracheomalacia (CTM) is when the tracheal cartilaginous framework
                   remains softened and collapse of the trachea occurs during expiration, resulting in
                   airway obstruction.

                  Associated Conditions
                   It is possible that the patient may have the following conditions in addition to CTM:
                    Esophageal atresia (EA)
                    Distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
                    Laryngeal or tracheobronchial malformations
                    Vascular malformations

                  Symptoms
                    Symptoms may only be apparent during feeding, crying, or coughing.
                    Coarse wheezing begins at approximately 4 to 8 weeks of age and can worsen with

                      the use of bronchodilators.
                    Barking cough
                    Expiratory stridor
                    Varying degrees of dyspnea/respiratory distress

                  Tests
                    Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy (FFL) can be used to visualize the subglottic region;

                      however, bronchoscopy can be more easily done to visualize the trachea.
388  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

                  Management
                    Surgical management is through a pediatric cardiothoracic surgeon, not an otolar-

                      yngologist.
                    Mild cases of CTM can improve with time as the trachea matures.
                    Severe cases may need tracheostomy and continuous positive airway pressure

                      through the tracheostomy because the trachea can still collapse despite the insertion
                      of a tracheostomy.
                    Stenting, repair of tracheal rings are an option.
                    Chest physiotherapy if recurrent retained secretions are a problem

Acquired Tracheomalacia

                   Acquired tracheomalacia (ATM) is a rare condition that involves a problem with the
                   structural integrity of the trachea. For example, there is usually a decrease in the elas-
                   ticity of tracheal rings that have been damaged; during exhalation these sections are
                   not strong enough to fully support the trachea, so they collapse.

                  Etiology
                   Localized damage may be caused as a result of the following:

                    Trauma
                       From postintubation injuries (most common)
                       Secondary to surgical intervention of TEF repair

                    Chronic external compression

                   Generalized pathologic damage may be caused as a result of the following:

                    Emphysema/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
                    Relapsing polychondritis

                  Symptoms
                    Trouble exhaling air associated with wheezing, expiratory stridor, and a barking

                      cough
                    Inability to cough up or clear respiratory secretions
                    Exercise intolerance

                  Tests
                    CT scan is the diagnostic test of choice.
                    FFL can be used to visualize subglottic region; however, bronchoscopy can be more

                      easily done to visualize the collapsed segment.

                  Management
                    If the patient has coinciding COPD or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), these

                      conditions optimally should be managed first.
                    Surgical management is done through a cardiothoracic surgeon, not an otolaryn-

                      gologist.
                    Stenting the collapsed segment is an option.
                    In severe cases, segmental resection of the trachea (removing the collapsible seg-

                      ment) can be done.
                    Tracheostomy may be needed in addition to continuous positive airway pressure

                      through tracheostomy because the trachea can still collapse despite the insertion of
                      a tracheostomy.
                    Chest physiotherapy if recurrent retained secretions are a problem
                                          TRACHEAL NEOPLASMS  389

TRACHEAL NEOPLASMS

Neoplasms of the trachea can be benign or malignant. Primary tumors of the trachea
are rare. Malignant tracheal tumors are more common in adults, whereas benign tra-
cheal tumors are more common in children. Squamous cell papillomas, chondromas,
and hemangiomas are the most common benign tracheal neoplasms. Of malignant
tracheal lesions, more than 75% are either squamous cell carcinoma or adenoid cystic
carcinoma (Lalwani, 2008). Carcinoma of the breast and mediastinal lymphoma can
invade the trachea as well.

       Often a tracheal mass is picked up on an incidental chest x-ray or CT scan done
for another reason. Patients can present with symptoms consistent with a variety of
disorders. Therefore, patients are usually initially suspected as having a respiratory
condition such as asthma or COPD based on their symptoms and treated for these
conditions first before further workup is done and a tracheal neoplasm is discovered.
However, the lack of symptom improvement in managing these suspected disease pro-
cesses should clue the provider into doing further workup.

Signs and Symptoms

                    Some patients may be asymptomatic or have subtle symptoms. Because tracheal
                      neoplasms can present with subtle symptoms, the diagnosis may not be made for
                      many months or even years.

                   Symptoms can include:

                    Dyspnea: The tumor must generally advance to a size that obstructs more than half
                      of the cross-sectional area of the airway before dyspnea is experienced (Meyers &
                      Mathisen, 1997).

                    Cough
                    Hemoptysis
                    Hoarseness
                    Wheeze
                    Stridor
                    Unexplained weight loss

        TABLE 20.1 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF TRACHEAL TUMORS

Benign                                    Malignant

 Squamous cell papilloma: Papillomatosis   Squamous cell carcinoma
 Carcinoid                                 Adenocarcinoma
 Pleomorphic adenoma                       Melanoma
 Fibrous histiocytoma                      Papillary squamous carcinoma
 Chondroma                                 Epidermoid carcinoma
 Hamartoma                                 Rhabdomyosarcoma
 Pseudosarcoma                             Small cell carcinoma
 Schwannoma                                Spindle cell sarcoma
 Granuloma: Granular cell tumor            Adenoid cystic carcinoma
 Leiomyoma                                 Lymphoma
 Nerve sheath tumor                        Adenosquamous carcinoma
 Inflammatory pseudotumor                  Mucoepidermoid carcinoma
 Hemangioma                                Carcinoid tumor
 Lipoma                                    Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
                                           Chondrosarcoma
                                           Malignant histiocytoma
390  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

Tests

                 A chest x-ray may or may not show any signs of a tracheal mass.
                 A CT scan of the neck and chest are the tests of choice and can evaluate:

                    Extratracheal involvement/metastatic disease
                    Extent of mediastinal spread of the tumor
                    Tumor relationship to the larynx and carina
                 Bronchoscopy in conjunction with biopsies is the test of choice to:
                    Confirm presence of a tracheal mass/tumor
                    Provide a tissue diagnosis
                    Allow for direct visualization of the tumor
                    Determine the extent of the lesion
                    Determine how much of the uninvolved trachea is available for reconstruction

Management

                    Once the diagnosis is made, referral should be to a cardiothoracic surgeon experi-
                      enced at managing tracheal neoplasms who will the determination for surgery and
                      determine the resectability of the tumor.

                    The decision to resect and/or use radiation therapy to irradiate a tracheal neoplasm
                      depends on:
                       Tumor location
                       Tumor type
                       Amount of viable airway after resection (if resection were to be done)
                       The patient's current health status

                    Prior to surgical resection, workup is done to determine if any systemic spread has
                      occurred. These tests usually include (if not already done at this point) the following:
                       Chest x-ray
                       CT scan of neck and chest
                       PET scan
                       Bronchoscopy
                       Esophagoscopy to determine if there is any esophageal involvement

                    For unresectable tracheal neoplasms, as an adjunct to resection of malignant neo-
                      plasms, radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy can be used.

TRACHEOSTOMY AND TRACHEOTOMY

Figure 20.1:    A tracheostomy is a surgically created opening in the trachea to provide an airway. The
Tracheostomy    term for the surgical procedure to create the opening into the trachea is called a tra-
tube insertion  cheotomy. A cricothyroidotomy is a procedure performed in an emergency for upper
site.           airway obstruction--a small-bore cannula is placed through the cricothyroid ligament.
                NOTE: The cricothyroid ligament membrane is relatively superficial and easy to penetrate,

                which makes it the preferred location for an emergency tracheotomy (called a cricothy-

                roidotomy), but it is not a good location for longer-term airway management.
                       A tracheostomy may be temporary or permanent. Permanent tracheostomy

                is done related to an underlying cancer of the head and neck. Other indications
                include obstructive tumors of the head and neck, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA),
                aspiration, neurological disorders, true vocal cord (TVC) paralysis, trauma, stroke
                (cerebrovascular accident), and patients requiring prolonged intubation (greater
                than 1 to 2 weeks).
                                                                        TRACHEOSTOMY AND TRACHEOTOMY  391

Tracheotomy Indications

                    Difficulty weaning off a ventilator or chronic ventilator dependency (most common)
                    By-passing upper airway obstruction (FB, tumor) and including congenital anoma-

                      lies (vascular web, laryngeal hypoplasia, etc.)
                    Providing an airway after neck trauma that results in severe injury
                    Bilateral vocal cord paralysis
                    Enabling more efficient pulmonary hygiene due to chronic aspiration or the inability

                      to expel secretions
                    Temporarily securing an airway in patients undergoing major head and neck surgery
                    Trauma from infection, burns, and so on, leading to airway compromise
                    Relieving obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) (to be used as last resort in OSA patients)
                    Inability to intubate

Cricothyroidotomy                              Thyroid cartilage
                                               Cricothyroid membrane
     Percutaneous
            dilational                         Cricoid cartilage
                                               Subcricoid space
tracheostomy site                              First tracheal cartilage
                                               Second tracheal cartilage
            Standard
tracheostomy site

FIGURE 20.1 Tracheostomy tube insertion site.
392  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

Tracheostomy Procedure

                    A tracheotomy can be performed in an emergency with local anesthesia; however,
                      most are surgically performed in the operating room.

                    Usually the tracheostomy incision is made between the second and third or third
                      and fourth tracheal cartilage rings.

                    If the tracheotomy site is too high (too close to the cricoid), there is a risk of subglot-
                      tic stenosis. NOTE: This is also the reason why a cricothyroidotomy is an emergency
                        procedure only for establishing an airway.

                    In order to facilitate exposure of the site, the thyroid isthmus may need to be retracted
                      or ligated.

Tracheostomy Tube Insertion Posttracheotomy

                    The smallest tracheostomy (trach) tube is chosen to fit the surgically created airway.
                      The trach tube should be roughly three fourths the diameter of the trachea and the
                      ideal length is a tube that lies a few centimeters above the carina. NOTE: A trach tube
                        with an outer diameter of 10 mm for adult women and 11 mm for adult men are usu-
                        ally suitable sizes. If the tube is too short, it can hit the posterior tracheal wall causing
                        ulceration and obstruction of the tube. If the tube is too long, it can erode the anterior
                        tracheal wall.

                    The original trach tube is sutured in place for 5 to 7 days. After that time the sutures
                      are removed and the tube is replaced. This interval between the initial trach tube
                      placement to the first tube change allows a tract to form between the skin and tra-
                      chea, called an endotracheal-cutaneous tract.

                    The time from when the original trach tube is sutured in place to when it is changed
                      can vary; however, it is usually done approximately 7 days postoperatively. This is
                      to allow enough time for the stoma to heal.

TRACHEOSTOMY TUBES

                   The length of time a tracheostomy trach tube is in place within the stoma depends on
                   why it was required in the first place. Postoperatively, a new stoma needs a trach tube
                   or otherwise the stoma can constrict rapidly (within hours) or can heal over within 5 to
                   7 days. However, not all well-established tracheostomy or laryngectomy stomas need
                   a trach tube.

Types of Tracheostomy Tubes

                   Trach tubes vary in shape, length, and diameter. Trach tubes are available in standard
                   length or extra-long length (horizontal or distal). This is especially useful in obese
                   patients with large necks. The trach tube can also be angled or curved, which helps
                   to improve the fit of the tube in the trachea. The shape of the tube should match and
                   conform as close to the anatomy of the airway as possible. Trach tube sizes are not
                   standardized among models or manufacturers; therefore, when choosing a size make
                   sure you base it on the shape, length, and diameter of the trach tube needed. There are
                   a wide variety of trach tubes available and knowing what type to use and when can be
                   very confusing. The following information will help to clarify.
                                                       TRACHEOSTOMY TUBES  393

TABLE 20.2 POSTOPERATIVE TRACHEOSTOMY COMPLICATIONS: EARLY AND LATE

Complication         Etiology/Contributing Factors     Management
                     and Associated Findings

Early Postoperative

Wound infection       Presence of retained              Antibiotic coverage for
    (most common)       secretions                        respiratory pathogens

                      Immunocompromised                 Frequent trach care to
                        patients and those with           cleanse tracheal stoma
                        ineffective cough effort are
                        at increased risk               Replace tracheal dressings
                                                          when soiled
                      Assess stoma for erythema,
                        edema, pain, and/or
                        drainage

Trach tube            Dried blood or mucous             Meticulous trach care
    obstruction         secretions blocking trach       Adequately position the
                        tube
                                                          trach. If this does not help,
                      Displacement of the trach           the entire trach or just the
                        tube into surrounding soft        inner cannula may need to
                        tissues or up against the         be replaced
                        tracheal wall                   Make sure the humidifier is
                                                          used postoperatively and
                      Continuous oxygen                   the trach tube is suctioned
                        desaturation events               frequently after instillation
                                                          of 1-2 mL sterile saline
                                                          solution
                                                        Increase hydration

Decannulation or      In the early postoperative        It may help to
    dislodgement        period, if accidental             hyperextend the neck
    with possible       decannulation occurs, the         to locate the retracted
    loss of airway      tracheal stoma can retract        stoma and reinsert
    (medical            deep into the neck where it       the trach tube (using
    emergency)          can be very difficult to find     obturator)

                                                        Make sure trach ties are
                                                          properly secured

Subcutaneous          Positive pressure                 Subcutaneous emphysema
    emphysema           ventilation                       usually resolves
                                                          spontaneously within a
                      Too tight of a sutured              few days postoperatively.
                        closure of tissue around the
                        trach tube                      Get a chest x-ray if a
                                                          pneumothorax is suspected
                      Too tight of packing
                        material around the
                        stoma

                      False endotracheal-
                        cutaneous tract leading into
                        the pretracheal tissue

                      Palpate the neck and
                        upper chest for edema and
                        crepitus

                                                                   (continued)
394  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

TABLE 20.2 POSTOPERATIVE TRACHEOSTOMY COMPLICATIONS: EARLY AND LATE
                                                  (continued)

Complication        Etiology/Contributing
                    Factors and Associated Findings Management

Hemorrhage           Hypertension in association           Be sure the trach cuff is
                       with coughing                         inflated--to help control
                                                             the bleeding
                     Ulceration from an ill-fitted
                       trach tube                          Apply pressure to the site of
                                                             bleeding, if needed
                     Overzealous suctioning
                     Tracheitis                            Cauterization of the site of
                     Can be associated with                  bleeding may be needed

                       the isthmus of the thyroid
                       rubbing against the trach
                       tube

Late Postoperative

Tracheal stenosis    Tracheal stenosis typically           Management involves:
                       occurs at the trach stoma site         Maintaining adequate
                       or at the area irritated by the           trach cuff pressures, which
                       trach cuff. Causes include:               should be kept less than
                        Ischemia related to                      20-25 mmHg
                           hyperinflation of the              Replacing trach tube as
                           trach cuff                            needed
                        Injury to the cricoid cartilage,      Formal resection or
                           which can occur if the                reconstruction or
                           tracheotomy incision was              tracheal stenting in
                           made too high                         worst case scenarios

Tracheoesophageal    Hyperinflated trach cuff              Maintaining adequate trach
    fistula            pressing up against the               cuff pressures
                       posterior tracheal wall
                                                           Evaluate by ordering a chest
                     May initially manifest as               x-ray (which may show an
                       a problem with recurrent              air-filled esophagus)
                       aspiration
                                                           Almost always requires
                                                             surgical repair

Tracheo-             A lower than normal                   A properly fitting trach tube
    innominate         trach tube (farther down              can prevent this condition
    artery fistula     the trachea toward the
    (medical           carina) NOTE: The tracheo-          Catastrophic bleeding can
    emergency)         innominate artery is also             occur if the artery is ruptured.
                       called the brachiocephalic            If the diagnosis is made
                       artery and is the first branch        when the bleeding occurs,
                       off the aortic arch. The fistula      management to control the
                       occurs related to direct              bleeding includes:
                       pressure of the trach tube             Fully inflating the trach
                       against the artery                        cuff distal to the site of
                                                                 the bleeding (to protect
                                                                 the airway)
                                                              A well-placed finger over
                                                                 the site of bleeding can
                                                                 temporarily control the
                                                                 bleeding

                                                                (continued)
                                                     TRACHEOSTOMY TUBES  395

Complication       Etiology/Contributing             Management
Vocal cord         Factors and Associated Findings
                                                      Definitive treatment
    paralysis       Injury to the recurrent             involves the surgeon
Granuloma             laryngeal nerve during            dividing and suture
                      surgery                           ligating the two ends of
    formation                                           the innominate artery
                    Can occur:
Ischemic necrosis      At the site of the stoma      See Chapter 22: Evaluation
                       As a result the trach             and Management of
                          tube causing chronic           Larynx and Hypopharynx
                          irritation of the airway       Disorders--Vocal Cord
                          leading to the growth of       Paralysis (Unilateral and
                          inflammatory tissue. The       Bilateral)
                          granuloma formation is
                          usually at the tip of the   Evaluate for granuloma
                          trach tube                    formation by doing
                                                        a flexible fiberoptic
                    Granuloma tissue is very            laryngoscopy examination
                      friable and can bleed easily      into the stoma or trachea

                    As granuloma tissue               Granulation at the site of
                      matures it turns into             the stoma can be managed
                      a fibrous scar and can            with silver nitrate
                      contribute to stenosis            cauterization

                   Ischemic necrosis can occur        Granulation at the tip of
                       months or years after            the trach tube, inside the
                       the initial tracheostomy         trachea can be treated
                       procedure:                       with excision or cautery
                                                        via bronchoscope in the
                    The pressure used to inflate        operating room
                      trachea tube cuffs can cause
                      damage to the surrounding       Bronchoscopy confirms
                      tissues. If the pressure          diagnosis
                      is too high, it can block
                      off capillary blood flow        Keep trach cuff pressures
                      leading to ischemia, tissue       less than 20-25 mmHg
                      ulceration, and ultimately
                      necrosis will occur             In severe cases,
                                                        management options
                    Necrosis can also lead              include:
                      to tracheomalacia with             Tracheal stent
                      functional obstruction                placement
                      during exhalation or erosion       Tracheal resection with
                      and fistula formation                 end-to-end anastomosis
                      with the esophagus or              Tracheoplasty with
                      innominate artery                     cartilage, etc.
396  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

Description of a Tracheostomy Tube

Figure 20.2:  "Cuffed" Versus "Uncuffed"
Tracheostomy  Cuffed
tube.          The cuff has one purpose--to seal the airway to control mechanical ventilation.

                 Keeping the cuff inflated allows all of the air to be delivered from the ventilator into
                 the lungs.
               With a cuffed trach tube, because the air is only allowed to and from the lungs and
                 not past the vocal cords, the patient will not be able to speak.
               An inflated cuff does not fully protect the airway and prevent aspiration from saliva
                 and other secretions. However, in a patient who is at high risk for aspiration, a cuffed
                 trach tube is better than an uncuffed tube to protect the airway and minimize mate-
                 rial entering the lower airway.
               An inflated cuff can make it more difficult to swallow (because the inflated cuff
                 impairs normal laryngeal movement during swallowing).
               With cuffed trach tubes, even low-pressure cuffs should be deflated regularly (four
                 times a day) to prevent pressure necrosis.

              Uncuffed
               As the patient becomes more stable, an uncuffed trach tube can be introduced. If the

                 patient does not need the cuff for ventilation, the trach tube cuff should be deflated
                 or the patient evaluated for a cuffless tube.
               An uncuffed trach tube is usually used for patients who have an adequate cough
                 reflex and can protect their own airway from saliva and other secretions. NOTE: It is
                 important that the patient has an adequate cough reflex, as the uncuffed tube provides

                 no protection from aspiration but does facilitate improved pulmonary toilet.
               If the tube is uncuffed and the upper airway is not swollen, a person can speak with

                 the trach tube opening covered with a finger or a valve.

              "Single Cannula" Versus "Dual Cannula"
              Single Cannula
               A single cannula is a trach tube without an inner cannula.

                     Outer cannula

                                            Inner cannula  Obturator
                                     Cuff
Cuff inflation line
     Pilot balloon

                               Plug
                     Fenestration

                                                                      FIGURE 20.2 Tracheostomy
                                                                      tube.
                                                            TRACHEOSTOMY TUBES  397

Figure 20.2:  Dual Cannula
Tracheostomy   Most trach tubes have an inner cannula that slides within the outer tube. These trach
tube.
                 tubes are called "dual cannula" tubes. The inner cannula can be disposable or reus-
                 able. The dual cannula tubes are considered safer because the inner cannula can be
                 easily removed in cases of a mucous plug blocking the airway.
               With an uncuffed trach tube, a dual cannula is preferred for safety and comfort. It is
                 easy to remove the inner cannula and it is not traumatic to the patient.

              "Fenestrated" Versus "Nonfenestrated"
              Fenestrated
               A fenestrated trach tube will come with an outer cannula, inner cannula, and a plas-

                 tic plug.
               A fenestration is a "hole" or penetration in the posterior/superior portion of the

                 trach tube, above the cuff, that allows the patient to breath and vocalize through the
                 upper airway.
               When the inner cannula is removed, the cuff deflated, and the normal air passage
                 occluded with the plastic plug, the patient can inhale and exhale through the fen-
                 estration and around the tube. This permits air to pass by the vocal cords allowing
                 phonation. NOTE: Some patients require oxygen supplementation. If so, make sure that
                 when the plastic plug is in place the patient receives oxygen supplementation through

                 a nasal cannula.
               When the inner cannula is removed, the outer cannula safely maintains patency of

                 the airway tract.
               If the inner cannula is in place, it may occlude the fenestrations of the outer can-

                 nula, unless there are also fenestrations in the inner cannula. NOTE: Suctioning with a
                 fenestrated tube should only be done with the inner cannula in place to ensure correct

                 guidance of the suction catheter into the trachea.
               A fenestrated tube allows for assessment of the patient's ability to breathe through

                 the normal oral/nasal route in preparation for decannulation (removing the trach
                 tube).
               A fenestrated trach tube is not recommended in newly formed stomas until the
                 wound has healed.
               Proper position of the fenestrations in the airway should be checked regularly. They
                 can become obstructed by the formation of granulation tissue, which can result in
                 airway compromise. Granulation tissue formation is common, occurring in 10% to
                 80% of cases and it typically appears as pink fleshy protuberant tissue (Yaremchuk,
                 2003). Granulation tissue is prone to bleeding.

              Nonfenestrated
               A nonfenestrated trach tube is essentially an inner cannula without holes.

              There are many different manufacturers of trach tubes. Regardless of the manufacturer,
              the options of trach tubes types are the same:

              Cuffed
               Cuffed tube with disposable inner cannula
               Cuffed tube with reusable inner cannula
               Cuffed tracheostomy tube: Fenestrated

              Cuffless (Uncuffed)
               Cuffless tube with disposable inner cannula
               Cuffless tube with reusable inner cannula
               Cuffless tracheostomy tube: Fenestrated
398  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

Tracheostomy Tubes and Voice Production

                   Voice production with a tracheostomy in place is possible with either an uncuffed or
                   fenestrated trach tube by allowing airflow into the upper airway on expiration.

                    Uncuffed trach: Some air will still pass out of the open tracheostomy if the trach is
                      not intermittently fully occluded.

                    Fenestrated trach: The fenestration in the trach tube needs to be patent in order for
                      airflow to pass through and voice production to occur. The fenestrations can some-
                      times be blocked if the tube is in contact with the tracheal wall. Repositioning the
                      trach tube can resolve this problem.

                   Phonation with a trach tube in place can be achieved in the following ways:

                  Intermittent Finger Occlusion
                    The patient can start by intermittently blocking off the trach tube with the finger to

                      allow air passage between the tube and tracheal walls on exhalation. This requires
                      an increase in the work of breathing.

                  One-Way Speaking Valve
                    The device fits into the hub of the tracheostomy tube.
                    Ideally speaking, valves should be used with a fenestrated tube and only when the

                      inner cannula is in place; example Passy-Muir valve.
                    A one-way speaking valve opens on inspiration and allows air to pass through the

                      trach. The valve closes on expiration and all exhaled air goes up through the vocal
                      cords to allow for voice production.
                    Remove the speaking valve during periods when the patient is using a nebulizer for
                      medications and overnight because moisture from medications, secretions, or the
                      sleeping position can occlude the valve. NOTE: The patient can still wear oxygen over
                        a one-way speaking valve.
                    The patient can choose when and how long to wear the speaking valve, but if there is
                      oxygen desaturation, increased work of breathing, or if the patient becomes fatigued,
                      it should be removed.
                    Tolerating a long period of time with the one-way valve in place is a good indica-
                      tor for how well the patient will do without the trach and puts the patient one step
                      closer to decannulation.

                   The following are contraindications for one-way speaking valve use:

                    Tracheal stenosis
                    Severe shortness of breath during use
                    Inability to tolerate an uncuffed or fenestrated trach
                    Airway obstruction
                    Severe anxiety or cognitive function
                    Laryngectomy (obviously because these patients do not have a larynx to allow for

                      phonation)

Tracheostomy Tube Decannulation

                   If the patient can tolerate an extended period of time (4 hours or more) with cuff deflation
                   or a one-way speaking valve without any signs of respiratory distress or increased work
                   of breathing, the patient may be ready for decannulation. Removal of the tracheostomy
                   tube should be considered only if the original upper-airway obstruction is resolved, if
                   airway secretions are controlled, and if mechanical ventilation is no longer needed.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  399

                          Before the trach is removed, an interim trial of a "physiological decannulation"
                   is done. First, the trach tube (preferably an uncuffed fenestrated trach tube) is capped
                   off. This allows the chance to monitor the patient's cough effectiveness, swallowing
                   ability, voice quality, and adequacy of breathing through the upper airway before the
                   trach is completely removed. Before inserting the decannulation cap, it is helpful to
                   change the trach tube to a smaller size (i.e., 4 mm inner diameter or smaller) and/
                   or, if the patient is wearing an uncuffed trach, change to a fenestrated tube to reduce
                   the work of breathing before the decannulation process can begin. Keep in mind
                   that with a patient who requires supplemental oxygen, when the tube is capped,
                   supplemental oxygen administration to the upper airway (i.e., nasal cannula) may
                   be needed.

                          Plugging trials or even decannulation can sometimes fail. Possibilities for failure
                   include obstruction from granuloma previously held out of the way with the trach
                   tube, bilateral vocal cord paralysis, or anxiety. It may be necessary to evaluate with a
                   flexible fiberoptic scope through the stoma to examine the airway down to the carina
                   and up to the glottis. Then the supraglottic airway can be examined through the nose
                   or mouth.

                          If the patient can tolerate a capped trach tube for 24 hours or more (includ-
                   ing overnight) without oxygen desaturation, respiratory distress, increased work of
                   breathing, or aspiration, the trach can be removed. During the time the trach is out, but
                   before the hole has closed, air will leak out when the patient talks. Therefore, it is best
                   to keep the opening covered with a Vaseline gauze occlusive dressing when talking or
                   coughing. The opening will usually close within 5 to 7 days.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Bandar, A., & Kirk, V. (2004). Bacterial tracheitis in children: Approach to diagnosis and treatment. Jour-
                   nal of Pediatrics and Child Health, 9, 25-30.

            Bjornson, C. L., Klassen, T. P., Williamson, J., Brant, R., Mitton, C., Plint, A., & Johnson, D. W. (2004).
                   A randomized trial of a single dose of oral dexamethasone for mild croup. New England Journal of
                   Medicine, 35, 1306-1313.

            Carden, K. A., Boiselle, P. M., Waltz, D. A., & Ernst, A. (2005). Tracheomalacia and tracheobronchomala-
                   cia in children and adults: An in-depth review. Chest, 127(3), 984-1005.

            Cataneo, A. J., Cataneo, D. C., & Ruiz, R. L. Jr. (2008). Management of tracheobronchial foreign body in
                   children. Pediatric Surgery International, 24(2), 151-156.

            Christopher, K. L. (2005). Tracheostomy decannulation. Respiratory Care, 50(4), 538-541.
            Deutsch, E. S. (2010). Tracheostomy: Pediatric considerations. Respiratory Care, 55(8), 1082-1090.
            Halum, S. L., Ting, J. Y., Plowman, E. K., Belafsky, P. C., Harbarger, C. F., Postma, G. N., & Merati, A. L.

                   (2012). A multi-institutional analysis of tracheotomy complications. Laryngoscope, 122(1), 38-45.
            Hess, D. (2005). Tracheostomy tubes and related appliances. Respiratory Care, 50(4), 497-510.
            Hopkins, A., Lahiri, T., Salerno, R., & Heath, B. (2006). Changing epidemiology of life-threatening upper

                   airway infections: The reemergence of bacterial tracheitis. Pediatrics, 118(4), 1418-1421.
            Horn, D. L., Maguire, R. C., Simons, J. P., & Mehta, D. K. (2012). Endoscopic anterior cricoid split with

                   balloon dilations in infants with failed extubation. Laryngoscope, 122(1), 216-219.
            Kent, C. (2005). Tracheostomy decannulation. Respiratory Care, 50(4), 538-541.
            Lalwani, A. K. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery (pp. 510-

                   513). New York, NY: The McGraw-Hill.
            Mallick, A., Bodenham, A., Elliot, S., & Oram, J. (2008). An investigation into the length of standard

                   tracheostomy tubes in critical care patients. Journal of ClinicalAnesthesia, 63(3), 302-306.
            Meyers, B., & Mathisen, D. (1997). Management of tracheal neoplasms. The Oncologist, 2, 245-253.
            Munter, D., Kulkarni, R., Hooker, E., Talavera, F., Blackburn, P., & Halamka, J. (February 14, 2011).

                   Trachea foreign bodies. Medscape Reference. Updated February 14, 2011. Retrieved from http://
                   emedicine.medscape.com/article/764615-overview.
400  20. TRACHEA DISORDERS AND CONDITIONS

            Murray, A., Meyers, A., Kelley, D., Talavera, F., & Allen, G. (August 19, 2011). Foreign bodies of the
                   airway. Medscape Reference. Updated August 19, 2011. Retrieved from http://emedicine.medscape.
                   com/article/872498-overview#a0199.

            Shah, R. K., Patel, A., Lander, L., & Choi, S. S. (2010). Management of foreign bodies obstructing the
                   airway in children. Archives of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 136(4), 373-379.

            Shargorodsky, J., Whittemore, K. R., & Lee, G. S. (2010). Bacterial tracheitis: a therapeutic approach.
                   Laryngoscope, 120(12), 2498-2501.

            Thotathil, Z. S., Agarwal, J. P., Shrivastava, S. K., & Dinkshaw, K. A. (2004). Primary malignant tumors
                   of the trachea--the Tata Memorial Hospital experience. Medical Principles and Practice Journal, 13(2),
                   69-73.

            Wright, C. D. (2003). Tracheomalacia. Chest Surgery Clinics of North America, 13(2), 349-357.
            Yaremchuk, K. (2003). Regular tracheostomy tube changes to prevent formation of granulation tissue.

                   Laryngoscope, 113(1), 1-10.
