21        Evaluation and
          Management of
          Esophageal Disorders

ZENKER'S DIVERTICULUM

                   Zenker's diverticulum (ZD) is a defect in the posterior pharyngeal wall (the weakest
                   portion of the pharyngeal wall) at the junction of the pharynx and the esophagus. A
                   false pouch/herniation occurs in this section of the pharyngeal mucosa, just above
                   the cricopharyngeus (CP) muscle (i.e., above the upper sphincter of the esophagus).
                   ZD can affect a patient's quality of life because it reduces the ability to swallow food.
                   It is seen mainly in the elderly and should be considered as one of the rare causes of
                   dysphagia in this population.

Etiology

           Unknown, but theories focus upon a structural or physiological disorder of the CP
             muscle. ZD could be related to a chronic spasms or stricture of this muscle.

Signs and Symptoms

                    Classic presentation: Regurgitation of undigested food hours after a meal
                    Other complaints include the following:

                       Longstanding history of gradually increasing dysphagia of both liquids and
                         solids

                       Choking episodes or globus sensation
                       Hoarseness
                       Chronic cough
                       Weight loss
                       Halitosis (as stagnant food is digested by microorganisms in the pouch)
                       Recurrent pneumonia due to aspiration

Tests

           A barium esophagram is helpful in determining the area and degree of obstruction.
             ZD will show as a blind pouch that fills with contrast.

           CT neck: ZD will present as an air-filled sac. A CT scan can also help to rule out other
             causes of obstruction.

           Upper endoscopy (EGD) can show the diverticulum.
402  21. ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS

Treatment

                    In some cases if the pouch is small and the patient is asymptomatic, no treatment
                      is necessary. NOTE: Regardless of what treatment modality is used, the CP muscle is
                        located near the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Therefore, recurrent laryngeal nerve paresis
                        or paralysis is rare, but possible.

                  Pharmacological Treatment
                    Botulinum toxin (Botox) injected in the CP muscle can provide temporary relief of

                      the CP spasm. Reinjection is necessary only when symptoms recur.

                  Surgical Treatment
                    Surgical treatment requires general anesthesia and tracheal intubation.
                    Lysis of the CP muscle via endoscopic approach is called "myotomy of the cricopha-

                      ryngeal muscle." This procedure involves cutting the common wall between the
                      esophagus and the pouch. This allows a common room between the sac of the diver-
                      ticulum and the esophagus so that food can pass more easily into the esophagus.
                      When the lysis of the muscle is done, there is no longer an obstacle blocking the food
                      and it also reduces the muscle spasms that likely originally caused the diverticulum
                      to begin with.
                    If symptoms are persistent despite the above treatment modalities or if the sac is too
                      large, surgical excision of the sac may need to be done. This option is saved as a last
                      resort because of the risks to the recurrent laryngeal nerve and possible develop-
                      ment of an esophageal fistula and/or leaks at the site of the sac excision.

ESOPHAGEAL ACHALASIA

                   Esophageal achalasia (EA) is an esophageal motility disorder in which there is an
                   absence of normal peristaltic movement of the middle and distal third of the esoph-
                   agus and failure of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) to completely relax after
                   swallowing, preventing food and liquids from passing into the stomach. This causes
                   gradual dilation of the esophagus and can lead to large quantities of food particles
                   being trapped within the esophagus. Although EA can occur at any age, most people
                   are diagnosed between the ages of 25 and 60 years old.

Etiology

           The exact cause is unknown; however, it is believed to be related to degeneration of
             nerve cells in the esophagus.

Signs and Symptoms

                    Most common symptom: Dysphagia with solids and liquids
                    Chest pain: Because of food accumulation within the esophagus
                    Sensation of fullness after a small intake of food or water
                    Regurgitation: Occurs most often in the supine position and can lead to aspiration
                    Heartburn: Caused by stasis and fermentation of undigested food in the esophagus
                    Globus sensation
       ESOPHAGEAL ACHALASIA  403

Complications

                    Aspiration can cause repeated episodes of pneumonia.
                    Patients with EA are also at risk for esophageal cancer, particularly squamous cell

                      carcinoma (SCC). SCC is thought to occur because of the continuous irritation of the
                      mucosa by the retained fermented food.

Tests

        Barium swallow: Study of choice to confirm the diagnosis. Characteristic finding
          in is a narrowed region at the LES with a dilated esophagus above the narrowed
          region.

        EGD: Should be done by the gastroenterologist to rule out other pathology such as
          a tumor at the gastroesophageal junction or in the stomach.

Treatment

                    The condition cannot be cured. Gastric peristalsis is absent and gravity becomes the
                      key factor in allowing the food to empty into the stomach. It is important that these
                      patients eat slowly, chew very well, drink plenty of water with meals, and avoid
                      eating near bedtime.

                    Treatments are directed at weakening the LES muscle to the point that it no lon-
                      ger poses a problem for food to get into the stomach. The following therapies can
                      attempt to make this happen.

       Balloon Dilation
        Mainstay of treatment for most patients
        A balloon is positioned at the LES and inflated in order to tear the muscles of the

          sphincter.
        Although rare, there is a possibility that the balloon dilation can lead to a perforation

          within the esophagus.
        Patients usually require more than one balloon dilation to obtain relief of symptoms.

          A single balloon dilation continues to relieve symptoms of achalasia in about 60% of
          people 1 year after the procedure and in about 25% of people 5 years after the proce-
          dure (Spechler, LaMont, & Grover, 2013). NOTE: Patients often develop gastroesopha-
          geal reflux disease (GERD) following balloon dilation related to absence of the barrier

          preventing reflux contents into the esophagus. GERD can be easily managed with diet

          modifications and acid-reducing medications.

       Surgery (Myotomy)
        Myotomy is a laparoscopic procedure done to weaken the LES by cutting the muscle

          fibers at the end of the esophagus and at the top of the stomach followed by a fun-
          doplication to prevent reflux. NOTE: A fundoplication procedure strengthens the valve
          between the esophagus and stomach by taking the upper curve of the stomach (the fun-
          dus) and wrapping it around the esophagus so the lower portion of esophagus passes
          through a small tunnel of stomach muscles.

        With the myotomy procedure, symptom relief is sustained in about 85% of people
          10 years after surgery and in about 65% of people 20 years after surgery (Spechler
          et al., 2013).
404  21. ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS

                  Medications
                    Due to drug side effects and the fact that drugs for this problem tend to be less effec-

                      tive over time, drug therapy is usually reserved for patients who have contraindica-
                      tions to either balloon dilation or surgery (myotomy).
                    Calcium channel blockers can decrease LES pressure and cause a muscle-relaxing
                      effect.

                  Botulinum Toxin Injection (Botox)
                    Botox temporarily paralyzes the nerves that cause the LES to contract. This injection

                      is done endoscopically through the lining of the esophagus directly into the LES
                      muscle. Prolonged effectiveness requires recurring multiple injections.

ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODY

                   For additional information, see Chapter 20: Evaluation and Management of Trachea
                   Disorders and Conditions section on Foreign Body in Trachea.

                          The definition of a foreign body (FB) within the esophagus for the purpose of
                   this discussion is an object other than food or food impaction. Patients with a FB in the
                   esophagus or GI tract commonly present to the emergency department. Esophageal
                   FBs tend to lodge in areas of physiological narrowing such as the upper esophageal
                   sphincter (CP muscle), the level of the aortic arch, or the LES. Past medical history of
                   previous surgery for a tracheoesophageal fistula poses an increased risk as a site for
                   obstruction.

                          The main presenting symptom of patients with an esophageal FB includes the
                   sensation of not being able to swallow. Even scratches or abrasions to the mucosal sur-
                   face of the esophagus can create a FB sensation. The patient may also be asymptomatic.
                   If asymptomatic and the FB is known not to be a sharp object, lead, magnet, or battery,
                   then the patient can be discharged and followed for a period of observation. NOTE:
                     Batteries can cause necrosis, ulceration, and perforation of the esophagus. Two or more
                     magnets ingested (especially at different times) can attract across layers of tissue leading
                     to pressure necrosis, fistula, obstruction, and, possibly, perforation. Chemical lead inges-
                     tion can cause lead toxicity.

                          If there is suspicion that the FB is a sharp or dangerous object such as a battery
                   or magnet, it constitutes a medical and surgical emergency. Esophageal perforation is
                   the main risk with a FB. If a FB is suspected, the initial study of choice should be an
                   anteroposterior and lateral x-ray of the neck, chest, and abdomen. A CT scan can help
                   to identify the object and determine the exact location. EGD is the standard treatment
                   option for removing the FB; however, before the procedure is performed, it is impor-
                   tant to know the type of object that is obstructing the esophagus because the methods
                   of removing the object can vary.

GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE

                   GERD is caused by an abnormal retrograde of gastric contents into the esophagus or
                   beyond (larynx, oral cavity, and/or lung). It is the most common upper GI disorder
                   that accounts for approximately 75% of esophageal diseases (Lalwani, 2008). GERD can
                   result in mucosal damage over time and symptoms. Gastroesophageal reflux (GER)
                   occurs several times per day, especially in the pediatric population; however, in most
                   infants and children, GER has not necessarily reached the point to cause mucosal dam-
          GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE  405

          age leading to the disease process we know of as GERD. Relying on symptom-based
          diagnosis of GERD in infants and young children can be difficult because symptoms
          may not always improve with acid-suppression therapy. Older children (school aged)
          and adolescents are more likely to resemble the adult population in their symptom pre-
          sentation and response to therapy. The discussion of GERD in the infant and first-few-
          years-of-life population is beyond the scope of this book.

Etiology

           Defective LES
           Forty to sixty percent of patients also have esophageal peristalsis (Lalwani, 2008).

Risk Factors

                    Obesity: There is a well-documented association between body mass index (BMI)
                      and carcinoma of the esophagus and at the opening of the esophagus into the stom-
                      ach (Lagergren, Bergström, & Nyrén, 1999)

                    Hiatal hernia: Can interfere in the competence of the LES
                    Pregnancy: Related to hormone effects on the LES and the increased intraabdominal

                      pressure of the enlarging uterus
                    Smoking
                    Alcohol

Complications

                    Barrett's esophagus: A change in the lining of the esophagus that can increase the
                      risk for adenocarcinoma. NOTE: Barrett's esophagus is the only complication of GERD
                        with malignant potential.

                    Erosive esophagitis/esophageal ulceration
                    Esophageal stricture
                    Bronchospasms contributing to chronic cough, wheezing, and shortness of breath
                    Dental problems
                    Aspiration pneumonia
                    Chronic sinusitis/chronic otitis media

Symptoms

                  Typical
                    The diagnosis of GERD can be established based on typical symptoms:

                       Heartburn/indigestion (dyspepsia) is seen in about 38% of the general population
                         (Katz, Gerson, & Vela, 2013).

                       Regurgitation
                       Dysphagia. NOTE: Other complications such as gastric motility disorder, gastric

                            stricture, obstruction, or malignancy can also cause dysphagia.

          Atypical
           The diagnosis of GERD cannot be made based on atypical symptoms alone; however,

             if a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) trial is done for these patients, symptom improve-
             ment is less predictable and further workup may need to be done to rule out other
             non-GERD etiologies. Atypical symptoms can include the following:
              Cough
              Wheezing
406  21. ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS

        Excess saliva production
        Chronic sore throat
        Globus sensation
        Halitosis
        Chest pain: Rule out other noncardiac causes of chest pain before doing a PPI

          trial
        Epigastric pain
        Nausea
        Bloating
        Hoarseness
        Dental erosion/cavities/inflammation of the gums

Tests

        A beneficial response to a therapy trial with a PPI is a good predictor of the presence
          of abnormal reflux.

        Screening for Helicobacter pylori infection is not recommended in GERD.

       Barium Swallow
        This test is not diagnostic for GERD; however, it provides information about the

          following:
           The presence and size of a hiatal hernia
           The presence of an esophageal stricture

       Endoscopy
        Only 50% of patients with GERD have esophagitis (Lalwani, 2008); therefore, this

          test is not 100% diagnostic for GERD. An EGD is not recommended for patients with
          typical GERD symptoms. Save this procedure for patients who present with atypical
          symptoms or do not respond to therapy. This procedure does provide information
          about the following:
           The complications of GERD (i.e., Barrett's esophagus, etc.)
           Whether or not erosion or strictures exist
           Whether other pathology exists (i.e., eosinophilic esophagitis [EoE], determined

             through biopsy)
        For a patient who has GERD, a repeat EGD is not necessary in the absence of Bar-

          rett's esophagus or in the absence of new symptoms.

Treatment: Nonpharmacological

                  Life-Style Modifications
                    Elevate the head of bed 6 to 8 inches using blocks or sleep elevated with foam

                      wedges.
                    Lose weight.
                    Stop smoking.

                  Dietary Modifications
                    Do not lie down 2 to 3 hours after eating.
                    Limit meal size and avoid heavy evening meals.
                    Decrease caffeine, alcohol, and carbonated drinks.
                    Avoid fatty foods, citrus foods, spicy foods, and chocolate--these foods lower LES

                      pressure.
                                                                        GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE  407

Treatment: Pharmacological

                  H2 Blockers
                   An H2 blocker emulsifies the acid already produced.

                    Useful for intermittent mild symptoms or mild esophagitis
                    H2 therapy can be added to daytime PPI therapy in patients with nighttime symp-

                      toms, although continued use of an H2 blocker can be associated with the devel-
                      opment of tachyphylaxis (decrease in response to the drug) after several weeks of
                      usage (Katz et al., 2013).

                  Proton Pump Inhibitors
                   PPIs have more control over acid secretion and control the amount of acid produced
                   to begin with.

                    Medical therapy trial for 6 to 8 weeks with a PPI is recommended for those patients
                      with typical GERD symptoms. A positive response to therapy would confirm the
                      diagnosis.

                    Maintenance PPI therapy should be administered for patients with GERD, who con-
                      tinue to have symptoms after the PPI is discontinued and in patients with Barrett's
                      esophagus and erosive esophagitis.

                    Healing occurs in 80% to 90% of patients with esophagitis; however, once patients
                      remove therapy, symptoms tend to recur (Lalwani, 2008). This is why chronic main-
                      tenance therapy is often needed.

                    The FDA issued warnings in 2010 regarding the risk for fractures among PPI users.
                      Multiple analysis and reviews have been published since then. According to Katz
                      et al., (2013), patients with known osteoporosis can remain on PPI therapy and con-
                      cern for hip fractures and osteoporosis should not affect the decision to use PPI long
                      term, except in patients with other risk factors for hip fracture.

                    Recent studies have suggested that in elderly, long-term PPI users, vitamin B12 defi-
                      ciency is likely to develop and vitamin B12 supplementation should be considered
                      in this population.

                    There was concern regarding PPI use in patients who were also taking Plavix (clopi-
                      dogrel). Because Plavix requires activation by CYP 2C19, the same pathway required
                      for metabolism of some PPIs. It was thought that PPIs reduced Plavix's ability to
                      inhibit platelet aggregation, thus placing the patient at increased cardiovascular
                      risk. However, after a thorough investigation, the conclusion is PPI therapy does
                      not need to be altered in patients taking Plavix, because the clinic data so far do not
                      support this proposed risk.

                    Pregnancy: PPIs are safe in pregnant patients if clinically indicated.
                    There are no major differences in efficacy among the different PPIs.

                  Dosing
                    In order for the medication to be efficacious, it should be taken on an empty stomach

                      30 to 60 minutes before meals.
                    If the patient has a partial response to once-daily therapy, consider adjusting the

                      dose timing, increasing to twice daily, or switching to a different PPI.

                  Immediate-Release Proton Pump Inhibitor: Over-the-Counter
                    Zegerid (omeprazole-sodium bicarbonate)

                  Delayed-Release Proton Pump Inhibitors: Over-the-Counter
                   Administer 30 to 60 minutes before meal for maximal pH control.
408  21. ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS

                    Prilosec (omeprazole)
                    Prevacid (lansoprazole)

                  Delayed-Release Proton Pump Inhibitors: Prescription
                   Administer 30 to 60 minutes before meals for maximal pH control.

                    Aciphex (rabeprazole)
                    Protonix (pantoprazole)
                    Nexium (esomeprazole)

                  Dual-Release Proton Pump Inhibitor: Prescription
                    Offers flexibility relative to meal timing. It is possible to take the medication any

                      time of day regardless of food intake.
                    Dexilant (dexlansoprazole)

                  Other Pharmacotherapy Options
                    Reglan (metoclopramide) has been shown to increase LES pressure, enhance esoph-

                      ageal peristalsis, and improve gastric emptying. However, Reglan can cause central
                      nervous system side effects including irritability, depression, dystonic reactions, and
                      tardive dyskinesia. Unless the patient has gastroparesis, there is no clear role for
                      Reglan in patients with GERD. Therefore, a gastroenterologist should evaluate the
                      patient and prescribe this medication, if needed.

Treatment: Surgical

                    Surgical therapy is a treatment option for patients with longstanding history of
                      GERD who respond well to PPI therapy. Reasons for surgery consideration may be
                      related to side effects associated with medication therapy, presence of a large hiatal
                      hernia, refractory GERD symptoms, and so on.

                  Laparoscopic Fundoplication
                    A fundoplication procedure strengthens the valve between the esophagus and stom-

                      ach by taking the upper curve of the stomach (the fundus) and wrapping it around
                      the esophagus so the lower portion of esophagus passes through a small tunnel of
                      stomach muscles. This restores the competence of the LES.
                    After fundoplication, the control of typical symptoms is obtained in about 90% of
                      patients and in 70% to 90% of patients with atypical symptoms (Lalwani, 2008).

EOSINOPHILIC ESOPHAGITIS

                   Eosinophils are white blood cells that regulate inflammation and play a key role in aller-
                   gic reactions. EoE occurs when there is a high concentration of eosinophils in the esopha-
                   gus. It is a chronic inflammatory disorder that is characterized by the following:

                   1. Esophageal dysfunction:
                       In children, symptoms manifest as failure to thrive, abdominal pain, or vomiting.
                       In adults, symptoms manifest as dysphagia.

                   2. Eosinophil-predominant inflammation:
                       Usually greater than or equal to 15 eosinophils (eos) per high-power field (hpf)
                         determined on esophageal biopsy with other conditions leading to esophageal
                         eosinophilia being excluded.
                                                          EOSINOPHILIC ESOPHAGITIS  409

Etiology

           Evidence suggests a role for food allergies in the disease etiology; however, exact
             etiology is unknown.

           It is known that EoE runs in families. Although specific genes that predispose to
             EoE susceptibility have been identified, genetic testing is not ready for usage in the
             clinical setting.

Other Conditions Associated With Esophageal Eosinophilia

                    GERD
                    Crohn's disease
                    Celiac disease
                    Achalasia
                    Drug hypersensitivity
                    Vasculitis
                    Pemphigoid vegetans
                    Connective tissue disease
                    Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES)

Symptoms

                    In children, symptoms manifest as failure to thrive, abdominal pain, or vomiting.
                    In adults, symptoms manifest as dysphagia. Attacks of dysphagia occur more fre-

                      quently in patients with blood eosinophilia or with pronounced findings on endos-
                      copy (Bonis et al., 2013).

Tests

          Endoscopy (EGD)
           Biopsies should be obtained.

              There needs to be a minimum of four biopsies from two different sites in order
                to improve the accuracy of the diagnosis. Doing six to nine biopsies increases the
                sensitivity for detecting EoE.

              Biopsies are done even if endoscopically the appearance looks normal.

Management: Dietary

                    Approximately 70% of EoE patients have current or past allergic diseases or positive
                      skin prick tests especially to a variety of foods (Noel, Putnam, & Rothenberg, 2004).
                      The following are foods most associated with EoE:
                       Wheat
                       Cow's milk
                       Soy
                       Eggs
                       Peanuts/tree nuts
                       Shellfish/seafood

                    Dietary therapy is based on the idea that patients with EoE have high rates of food
                      allergies and this may contribute to the development of EoE.

                    Consider a referral to an allergist for serum IgE food testing, food allergy skin prick
                      testing, or food patch testing. Also consider referral to a dietician for help with
                      dietary management.
410  21. ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS

                    Suspected foods are withdrawn for 4 to 6 weeks and reintroduced one at a time.
                    Consider repeating. EGD and rebiopsy after a minimum of two food group trials
                    Dietary elimination can be the initial therapy for both children and adults.

Management: Pharmacological

                  Proton Pump Inhibitor Therapy
                    In many cases, EoE is responsive to PPI therapy. To determine the success of respon-

                      siveness, an EGD can be done 8 weeks or more after a PPI trial (daily or twice daily
                      dosing). EoE diagnosis is confirmed if there is persistence eosinophilia ( 15 eos/
                      hpf) after an 8-week course of PPI therapy.

                  Swallowed Steroid Therapy
                    In cases of confirmed EoE nonresponsive to PPI therapy, the next step for these

                      patients includes an 8-week trial of topical swallowed steroids followed by an
                      EGD with biopsies to reevaluate eosinophilia. On endoscopic reevaluation, if there
                      are fewer than 15 eos/hpf, the medication trial is determined to be successful.
                      There are limited data on the long-term maintenance use of these medications with
                      EoE.

                   These medications include the following:

                       Flovent (fluticasone):
                      · Child dosing can range from 88 to 440 mcg/day and adult dosing can range
                            from 880 to 1760 mcg/day. Typical dosing is:
                            - Age 1 to 4 years: 44 mcg, two sprays twice a day
                            - Age 5 to 10 years: 110 mcg, two sprays twice a day
                            - Age greater than 11 years and adults: 220 mcg, two sprays twice a day
                      · Fluticasone comes as a metered dose inhaler and is administered without a
                            spacer.

                       Pulmicort (budesonide):
                      · Age 1 to 10 years: 0.5 mg twice a day
                      · Age 11 years and older: 1 mg twice a day
                      · The budesonide comes as an oral viscous solution.

                    With Flovent, the medication is sprayed into the patient's mouth and then swal-
                      lowed. The patient should not inhale when the medication is being administered.
                      With Pulmicort, the solution is swallowed.

                    Pharyngeal or esophageal candidiasis is a side effect/risk when using swallowed
                      steroids. The patient should be instructed not to swallow food or water for 30 min-
                      utes after taking the medication and to rinse the mouth out after each use.

Management: Endoscopic

                    Esophageal dilation to treat strictures. This has an effect in relieving dysphagia but
                      has no effect on underlying inflammation.

Links and Resources

                    American Partnership for Eosinophilic Disorders: www.apfed.org
                    Campaign Urging Research for Eosinophilic Disorders: www.curedfoundation.org
                    Registry for Eosinophilic Gastrointestinal Disorders: www.regid.org
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  411

                    Children's Digestive Health and Nutrition Foundation: www.cdhnf.org
                    The International Gastrointestinal Researchers: www.tigers-egid.cdhnf.org

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Boeckxstaens, G. E. (2007). Achalasia. Best practice and research. Clinical gastroenterology, 21(4), 595-608.
            Bonis, P., Furuta, G., Talley, N., & Grover, S. (June 11, 2013). Treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.

                   UpToDate. Wolters Kluwer Health. Updated. Retrieved from http://www.uptodate.com/contents/
                   treatment-of-eosinophilic-esophagitis.
            Camilleri, M., Dubois, D., Coulie, B., Jones, M., Kahrilas, P. J., Rentz, A. M., . . . Revicki, D. A. (2005).
                   Prevalence and socioeconomic impact of upper gastrointestinal disorders in the United States:
                   Results of the US Upper Gastrointestinal Study. Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology: The Official
                   Clinical Practice Journal of the American Gastroenterological Association, 3(6), 543-552.
            Davis, C. M. (2013). Practical management of eosinophilic esophagitis. Pediatric Annals, 42(7), 128-134.
            Dellon, E. S. (2012). Diagnosis and management of eosinophilic esophagitis. Clinical Gastroenterology and
                   Hepatology: The Official Clinical Practice Journal of the American Gastroenterological Association, 10(10),
                   1066-1078.
            Dellon, E. S., Gonsalves, N., Hirano, I., Furuta, G. T., Liacouras, C. A., & Katzka, D. A.; American Col-
                   lege of Gastroenterology. (2013). ACG clinical guideline: Evidenced based approach to the diag-
                   nosis and management of esophageal eosinophilia and eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE). American
                   Journal of Gastroenterology, 108(5), 679-92; quiz 693.
            Dickman, R., Boaz, M., Aizic, S., Beniashvili, Z., Fass, R., & Niv, Y. (2011). Comparison of clinical charac-
                   teristics of patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease who failed proton pump inhibitor thera-
                   py versus those who fully responded. Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 17(4), 387-394.
            Ferreira, L. E., Simmons, D. T., & Baron, T. H. (2008). Zenker's diverticula: Pathophysiology, clinical
                   presentation, and flexible endoscopic management. Diseases of the Esophagus: Official Journal of the
                   International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus/I.S.D.E, 21(1), 1-8.
            Holm, A., & Lafreniere, D. (2003). Zenker's diverticulum. In G. Wu, K. Aziz, & G. Whalen (Eds), Clini-
                   cal gastroenterology: An internist's illustrated guide to gastrointestinal surgery. Totowa, NJ: Humana
                   Press.
            Katz, P. O., Gerson, L. B., & Vela, M. F. (2013). Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of gastroe-
                   sophageal reflux disease. American Journal of Gastroenterology, 108(3), 308-28; quiz 329.
            Kay, M., & Wyllie, R. (2005). Pediatric foreign bodies and their management. Current Gastroenterology
                   Reports, 7(3), 212-218.
            Lagergren, J., Bergström, R., & Nyrén, O. (1999). Association between body mass and adenocarcinoma
                   of the esophagus and gastric cardia. Annals of Internal Medicine, 130(11), 883-890.
            Lalwani, A. K. (2008) Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery (pp. 492-
                   495). New York: McGraw-Hill.
            Liacouras, C. A., Furuta, G. T., Hirano, I., Atkins, D., Attwood, S. E., Bonis, P. A., . . . Aceves, S. S. (2011).
                   Eosinophilic esophagitis: Updated consensus recommendations for children and adults. Journal of
                   Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 128(1), 3-20.e6; quiz 21.
            Lieberman, J. A., Morotti, R. A., Konstantinou, G. N., Yershov, O., & Chehade, M. (2012). Dietary therapy
                   can reverse esophageal subepithelial fibrosis in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis: A historical
                   cohort. Allergy, 67(10), 1299-1307.
            Lightdale, J., & Gremse, D. (2013). Gastroesophageal reflux: Management guidance for the pediatrician.
                   Pediatrics: Official Journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. Retrieved from http://pediatrics.
                   aappublications.org/content/131/5/e1684.full.pdf.
            Noel, R. J., Putnam, P. E., & Rothenberg, M. E. (2004). Eosinophilic esophagitis. New England Journal of
                   Medicine, 351(9), 940-941.
            Park, W., & Vaezi, M. F. (2005). Etiology and pathogenesis of achalasia: The current understanding.
                   American Journal of Gastroenterology, 100(6), 1404-1414.
            Richter, J. E., & Boeckxstaens, G. E. (2011). Management of achalasia: Surgery or pneumatic dilation.
                   Gut, 60(6), 869-876.
            Siddiq, M. A., Sood, S., & Strachan, D. (2001). Pharyngeal pouch (Zenker's diverticulum). Postgraduate
                   Medical Journal, 77(910), 506-511.
412  21. ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS

            Smith, M. T., & Wong, R. K. (2007). Foreign bodies. Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Clinics of North America,
                   17(2), 361-82, vii.

            Spechler, S., LaMont, J. T., & Grover, S. (July 12, 2013). Patient information: Achalasia (beyond the ba-
                   sics). UpToDate. Wolters Kluwer Health. Last Updated. Retrieved from http://www.uptodate.com/
                   contents/achalasia-beyond-the-basics.

            van der Pol, R. J., Smits, M. J., van Wijk, M. P., Omari, T. I., Tabbers, M. M., & Benninga, M. A. (2011).
                   Efficacy of proton-pump inhibitors in children with gastroesophageal reflux disease: A systematic
                   review. Pediatrics, 127(5), 925-935.
