23  Overview of
    Lesions of the Skin:
    Head and Neck

                   Most workup including biopsy/excision and treatment/management for dermatological
                   lesions are done by a dermatologist. However, other specialty practices may encounter
                   the lesion first and, therefore, this chapter discusses how to recognize and evaluate the
                   most common benign and malignant cutaneous lesions of the head and neck region.

BENIGN SKIN LESIONS: HEAD AND NECK

                   Skin lesions are commonly encountered during a routine visit. It is important to prop-
                   erly distinguish a benign lesion from a potentially malignant lesion. If there is any
                   question in which the diagnosis is uncertain, a biopsy should be done to rule out
                   malignancy. A simple skin lesion biopsy can be performed in the office. A deeper exci-
                   sion may need to be done in the operating room.

Common Benign Skin Lesions: Head and Neck

                   The following lists common benign lesions that can potentially appear in the head and
                   neck region; it is not all inclusive.

                  Dermoid Cyst
                   See Chapter 16: Dermoid Cyst section.

                    Usually present at birth
                    May have both solid and cystic components
                    The tumor is fixed to the underlying periosteum so it may feel immobile when pal-

                      pated
                    Postauricular dermoid cyst:

                       Pocket under the skin that contains tissue normally present in the outer layers of
                         skin. It occurs during embryonic development when the skin layers do not prop-
                         erly grow together. These cysts can contain hair follicles, hair, blood, fat, bone,
                         cartilage, and sweat glands.

                    A dermoid cyst can also occur in the nasal cavity, oropharynx, floor of the mouth,
                      lips, and cheek mucosa.

                    Treatment is usually a simple excision but can be delayed if the patient is asymp-
                      tomatic.

                  Preauricular Pit
                   See Chapter 6: Preauricular Sinus Fistula or Cyst section.
438  23. LESIONS OF THE SKIN: HEAD AND NECK

                  Actinic Keratosis
                    Also called "solar keratosis" because this condition is associated with frequent sun

                      exposure.
                    The most common premalignant lesion of the head and neck region
                    Some of the lesions can progress to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The change

                      of progression to epidermal cutaneous carcinoma (more commonly SCC) has been
                      estimated to be as great as 20% (Bailey & Johnson, 2001).
                    The lesion usually appears as an erythematous patch with minimal inflammation
                      often covered by a sandpaper-like scale.

                  Seborrheic Keratosis
                    This lesion is present in the adult population only. May be related to sun exposure

                      but exact etiology is unclear.
                    Color may vary from tan to black. They are round, oval, flat, or elevated and range

                      in size. They look like warts on the skin and their appearance can mimic melanoma
                      skin cancer.
                    No treatment is necessary.

                  Epidermoid Cyst
                    Also called a "follicular cyst"
                    The most common cutaneous cyst
                    The lesion is flesh-colored and dome-shaped.
                    Most originate within the dermis at the upper segment (infundibular) portion of the

                      hair follicle.
                    Milia: Refers to a very small, superficial epidermoid cyst
                    Epidermal inclusion cyst: More specifically refers to implantation of epidermal ele-

                      ments located within the dermis
                    Etiology: Blocked pore or trauma from piercing or needle biopsy, for example
                    They are usually asymptomatic; however, they can become infected or inflamed.

                      Rarely cancerous growths (such as basal cell carcinoma [BCC]) have developed
                      within epidermoid cysts.
                    Often these lesions are asymptomatic and do not need to be treated. If symptomatic,
                      the contents (usually a cheese-like substance) can be extracted. Intralesional injec-
                      tion with triamcinolone can reduce the inflammation and oral antibiotics may be
                      used to cover for a staphylococcal infection.
                    Complete excision is an option if the lesion reoccurs. If the entire cyst wall is not
                      completely removed, there is a greater likelihood for recurrence.

                  Lipoma
                    Most common benign soft tissue neoplasm composed of fat cells found superficially

                      below the skin.
                    Can occur anywhere on the body.
                    Etiology: Unknown; however, there may be an inherited link
                    Presentation: Smooth, moveable, painless, round, soft/rubbery mass
                    Diagnosis is usually made by visual appearance alone.
                    Often these lesions are asymptomatic and do not need to be treated. If the patient

                      finds the lesion bothersome, unsightly, or the diagnosis is in question, a simple exci-
                      sion can be done. Larger lipomas are best removed through incisions made in the
                      skin overlying the lipoma.
                                                     BENIGN SKIN LESIONS: HEAD AND NECK  439

Nevus Sebaceous
 Solitary, hairless lesion that typically occurs on the face or scalp
 They are usually present at birth and are caused by an overgrowth of sebaceous

   glands in the area of a mole (nevus).
 Rarely, malignancies (like basal cell carcinoma) can arise within the lesion.

Fibroepithelial Polyp
 Also called a "skin tag"
 Soft, flesh-colored; attached to skin by slender stalk
 Covered with squamous epithelium
 Are harmless and generally painless and do not usually grow or change over time.
 If the lesion becomes irritated (by jewelry or contact trauma), it can bleed.
 It is unnecessary to excise these lesions unless the patient desires removal of the lesion.

 NOTE: Most skin lesions are benign; however, doing a biopsy of the lesion and sending
   it off for histological examination can help determine an accurate diagnosis.

   PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: BIOPSY OF SKIN LESION

   Indications

     Evaluate a skin growth when malignancy is a concern.
     To clarify a diagnosis when multiple etiologies are considered

   Contraindications

     No contraindications
     Caution needed with to patients with a history of any bleeding disorders, on

       aspirin or any type of blood thinners, or with an allergy to topical anesthetic
       medications (i.e., lidocaine).

    NOTE: Coagulation studies (PT/PTT/INR tests) prior to a biopsy are generally not
    needed. It may be necessary to have the patient stop the blood thinner a week prior
    to the procedure after approval from the physician who prescribed the medication.
    In general, patients who are anticoagulated with an INR greater than 2.5 should not
    be biopsied.

   Complications

     Bleeding at the biopsy site
     Hematoma
     Infection
     Hypersensitivity reaction at the biopsy site
     Vasovagal response

   Equipment Needed

     Gloves
     Alcohol pad
     Forceps
     Scissors

                                                                                                                          (continued)
440  23. LESIONS OF THE SKIN: HEAD AND NECK

PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: BIOPSY OF SKIN LESION (continued)

 Gauze
 Suture, if needed
 Lidocaine HCl 1% and epinephrine 1:100,000
 Tuberculin syringe with 0.5- to 1-inch needle (for local anesthetic administra-

   tion)
 Silver nitrate for chemical cauterization (used after procedure, if needed for

   hemostasis)
 Pathology container filled with 10% formalin solution and laboratory requisi-

   tion form

Shave Biopsy                                 Punch Biopsy

 Used for lesions that are                    Used for lesions that require
   predominantly superficial and                dermal or subcutaneous tissue
   do not extend into the dermis                for diagnosis. Example: Most
   Example: Skin tags, warts,                   inflammatory skin conditions
   seborrheic, or actinic keratosis
                                              Special equipment needed:
 Special equipment needed:                      Disposable punch instrument. 2,
   Surgical blade (#15) with scalpel            4, 6, or 8 mm in size. The only
   handle or disposable razor blade.            purpose of the skin punch is to
   Ideally, the razor will shave only a         "core" the site but not to remove
   small fragment of the protruding             the lesion itself.
   lesion and leave the rest of the
   skin relatively flat.

Biopsy Procedure

 If the lesion is not intraoral or intranasal, clean the area with an alcohol pad to
  ensure sterile conditions.

 Anesthetize the area to be biopsied by injecting lidocaine HCl 1% and epi-
   nephrine 1:100,000 with a 0.5- to 1-inch needle just superficially around the
   periphery of the lesion/skin.

Shave Biopsy                                 Punch Biopsy

1. If the lesion is raised, lift the         1. Using a disposable punch
    lesion with forceps. If the lesion is       instrument for the desired size,
    flat, hold the skin taut by applying        apply pressure and twist in a
    pressure to the skin with a slight          "drilling" motion until the blade
    lateral pull.                               of the skin punch pierces the
                                                epidermis of the skin (half of the
2. With the opposite hand, hold a               remaining blade should be visible).
    surgical blade (#15) with scalpel
    handle or disposable razor blade.        2. Remove the punch instrument.
                                                 Wipe the excess blood off with
3. Transect the lesion at the base               gauze to expose the biopsy site.
    using a steady cutting motion.
    Control the depth of the sample          3. Lift up the cored skin gently with
    by adjusting the angle of the                forceps. Cut the skin lesion with
    blade.                                       scissors or a scalpel.

                                             (continued)
                                                                 MALIGNANT SKIN LESIONS: HEAD AND NECK  441

                        Place the lesion in formalin solution.
                        After the lesion is removed, blot the excess blood with gauze. If hemostasis is

                          not achieved with applied pressure, apply silver nitrate and chemically cau-
                          terize the area. Suture the biopsy site if needed (rarely needed for superficial
                          skin lesions).
                        If the biopsy site is not intraoral or intranasal, apply triple antibiotic ointment
                          on the site and cover with an adhesive bandage.

MALIGNANT SKIN LESIONS: HEAD AND NECK

                   Malignant skin lesions of the head and neck are common. Key features can indicate that
                   the lesion may possibly be malignant. These features include those that are pigmented,
                   irregular shaped, and growing or spreading. The most important factor involved in
                   the pathogenesis of skin cancer is the cumulative amount of exposure to ultraviolet
                   radiation. Knowing what to look for is important; however, when in doubt, perform
                   a biopsy to confirm diagnosis. Since not all malignant lesions are visibly pigmented,
                   suspicion should arise for any lesion that is growing or bleeds on minor trauma. If exci-
                   sion is performed early on in the disease process and the lesion is a nonmelanoma skin
                   cancer, the outcome is favorable. Premalignant lesions should be removed to reduce
                   the occurrence of malignant disease.

Common Malignant Skin Lesions: Head and Neck

                   The following lists malignant lesions that can potentially appear in the head and neck
                   region; it is not all inclusive.

                  Basal Cell Carcinoma
                    Of all skin cancers that can occur in the head and neck region, BCC is the most com-

                      mon, comprising 60% of skin cancer lesions (Lewis, 1998).
                    BCC are slow-growing lesions that rarely metastasize.
                    BCC that have recurred after excision may be at greater risk of metastasis (Tavin,

                      Persky, & Jacobs, 1995).
                    The lesion usually appears first as a round or oval area of skin thickening. Then

                      the lesion slowly extends circumferentially, creating a slightly raised edge, which
                      may have a shiny, pearly, or slightly translucent appearance. The lesion eventually
                      gradually erodes the underlying tissue, is covered by thin skin, and ulcerates.

                  Squamous Cell Carcinoma
                    SCC is the second most common head and neck malignant skin lesion.
                    Usually seen as an erythematous, ulcerated, scaling crusted lesion. The lesion may

                      be friable and tends to bleed with minimal trauma.
                    SCC has metastatic potential with lesions of the lip or ear, recurrent lesions, and/or

                      deeply invasive lesions having the higher likelihood to metastasize.
                    Actinic keratosis is considered a precursor to SCC.

                  Malignant Melanoma
                    Although it comprises only 1% of skin cancers, malignant melanoma (MM) accounts

                      for more than 60% of skin cancer deaths (Sauer & Hall, 1996).
442  23. LESIONS OF THE SKIN: HEAD AND NECK

                    Most MM (70%-80%) occur in the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus region and most of
                      the remainder develop in the oral cavity (Bachar et al., 2008). Oral cavity MM often
                      present with lymph node metastasis.

                    MM skin lesions are usually irregular, raised, or flat and dark brown or black.
                    Limited data exist on treatment options; however, surgical excision (may include

                      neck dissection for nodal disease) combined with radiotherapy seem to be the treat-
                      ment of choice.

STAGING CRITERIA

   TNM STAGING CRITERIA FOR MUCOSAL MELANOMA OF THE HEAD AND NECK

T  Primary Tumor

   T3  Mucosal disease

   T4a Moderately advanced disease. Tumor involving deep soft tissue,
                  cartilage, bone, or overlying skin

   T4b Very advanced disease. Tumor involving brain, dura, skull base,
                  lower cranial nerves (IX, X, XI, XII), masticator space, carotid artery,
                  prevertebral space, or mediastinal structures

N  Regional Lymph Nodes

   NX  Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

   N0  No regional lymph node metastasis

   N1  Regional lymph node metastases present

M Distant Metastasis

   M0  No distant metastasis

   M1  Distant metastasis

Source: American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). (2010). TNM staging classification for mucosal
melanoma of the head and neck (7th ed.).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Bachar, G., Loh, K. S., O'Sullivan, B., Goldstein, D., Wood, S., Brown, D., & Irish, J. (2008). Mucosal
                   melanomas of the head and neck: Experience of the Princess Margaret Hospital. Head and Neck,
                   30(10), 1325-1331.

            Bailey, B., & Johnson, J. (2001). Cutaneous malignancy. In Head and neck surgery--otolaryngology (4th ed.,
                   Vol 2., pp. 1455-1479). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

            El-Monem, M. H., Gaafar, A. H., & Magdy, E. A. (2006). Lipomas of the head and neck: presentation
                   variability and diagnostic work-up. Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 120(1), 47-55.

            Houghton, A. N., Coit, D. G., Daud, A., Dilawari, R. A., Dimaio, D., Gollob, J. A., . . . National Compre-
                   hensive Cancer Network. (2006). Melanoma. Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network:
                   JNCCN, 4(7), 666-684.

            Lewis, R. (1998). Recognizing neoplastic skin lesions: A photo guide. American Family Physician, 58(4),
                   873-884. Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/1998/0915/p873.html.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  443

Luba, M., Bangs, S., Mohler, A., & Stulberg, D. (2003). Common benign skin tumors. American Family
      Physician, 67(4), 729-738. Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/2003/0215/p729.html.

National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN guilde-
      lines). (2010). TNM staging system for mucosal melanoma of the head and neck. Version 2.2013.
      (7th ed.). Retrieved from http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/head-and-
      neck.pdf.

Pickett, H. (2011). Shave and punch biopsy for skin lesions. American Family Physician, 84(9), 995-1002.
Rosen, H., Schmidt, B., Lam, H. P., Meara, J. G., & Labow, B. I. (2009). Management of nevus sebaceous

      and the risk of basal cell carcinoma: An 18-year review. Pediatric Dermatology, 26(6), 676-681.
Salasche, S. J. (2000). Epidemiology of actinic keratoses and squamous cell carcinoma. Journal of the

      American Academy of Dermatology, 42(1 Pt 2), 4-7.
Sauer, G. C., & Hall, J. C. (Eds). (1996). Skin tumors. In A manual of skin diseases (7th ed., p. 342). Phila-

      delphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven.
Tavin, E., Persky, M. S., & Jacobs, J. (1995). Metastatic basal cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Laryn-

      goscope, 105(8 Pt 1), 814-817.
