24                 Evaluation and
                   Management of Allergic
                   and Nonallergic Disorders

ALLERGIC RHINITIS

Rhinitis is inflammation of the nasal mucous membranes. This can be caused by a
number of factors including viruses, bacteria, and irritants. Rhinitis triggered by
exposure to environmental allergens is termed allergic rhinitis (AR). These aller-
gens can include pollen, mold, animal dander, dust mites, and so on.

       AR is a very common disorder of the immune system that can affect people of all
ages. The risk of developing AR is much higher in people with asthma or eczema and
in those who have a family history of asthma or AR. Although AR is not a life-threaten-
ing illness, it is clinically relevant because it can have a profound adverse effect on the
quality of life and productivity at work or school. It is also a major risk factor for poor
asthma control, gastroesophogeal reflux disease control, eczema, ear infections, throat
infections, and/or underlying chronic sinusitis.

                   TYPES OF ALLERGIC RHINITIS

Seasonal                                Perennial

 Caused by an IgE-mediated reaction      Caused by an IgE-mediated reaction to
   to seasonal allergens, which are        perennial allergens
   dependent on geographic location

 Examples of seasonal allergens          Examples of perennial allergens
   include tree pollen, grass, pollen,     include dust mites, molds, cockroaches,
   weed pollen                             animal dander, and pollen when pollen
                                           is prevalent year round

Signs and Symptoms of Allergic Rhinitis

                   One or more of the following may be present:

                  Eyes
                    Watery, red, itchy eyes
                    Gritty feeling in the eyes
                    Allergic shiners (swelling and blue/dark discoloration below the eyes)
                    Dennie-Morgan lines
                    Conjunctivitis
                    White or translucent conjunctival discharge

                  Ears
                    Congestion or popping of the ears
                    Hearing loss
                    Ear itching
                    Dizziness
446  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                    Negative pressure in middle ear space, leading to tympanic membrane retraction.
                      Related to eustachian tube dysfunction

                    Chronic serous otitis media

                  Nose
                    Nasal congestion
                    Nasal itching
                    Sneezing
                    Rhinorrhea
                    Boggy turbinates (pale, bluish-gray mucosa)
                    Nasal polyps
                    Adenoid hypertrophy
                    Nasal crease or "allergic salute"

                  Sinus
                    Facial pressure or pain
                    Chronic, recurring sinusitis

                  Mouth
                    Palatal itching
                    Recurrent aphthous ulcers
                    Decreased taste, loss of taste

                  Throat
                    Postnasal drip
                    Cobblestone appearance of the posterior pharyngeal wall (streaks of lymph tissue

                      on the posterior pharynx)
                    Sore throat
                    Hoarse voice

                  Lower Respiratory
                    Asthma symptoms including wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness
                    Cough

                  Skin
                    Atopic dermatitis (eczema)

                          AR is not just a localized disease that affects the nose and nasal passages. It is pre-
                   dominantly an inflammatory condition that may represent a broader systemic airway
                   disease that can involve the entire respiratory tract including the nasal cavity, paranasal
                   sinuses, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchial tubes, and lungs. The submucosa of both
                   the upper and lower airways are similar. There is evidence showing that upper airway
                   provocation by an allergen can lead to both an upper and lower airway response. When
                   AR symptoms are controlled, this can improve upper and lower airway symptoms.

                          There is no cure for AR. Treatment includes a combination of allergen avoidance,
                   target symptom control with pharmacotherapy, and desensitizing with immunother-
                   apy. There are many effective medications in the market available to treat AR symptoms
                   (discussed later); however, only immunotherapy with individually targeted allergens
                   has the ability to potentially alter the long-term natural history of AR. Even with effec-
                   tive medications and immunotherapy, some individuals may remain symptomatic.

Pathophysiology

                   The pathophysiology of AR is a very complex immunological process, which is
                   beyond the scope of this book to comprehensively address. This section consolidates
                   our current understanding and helps explain the body's response in AR.
                                                                                               ALLERGIC RHINITIS  447

                          AR is a defect of the immune system and thus a basic understanding of the
                   immune system is necessary to care for allergy patients. Our bodies are inundated
                   with exposure to a wide variety of proteins from the environment. Our immune sys-
                   tem defends us against these proteins through a system of biological structures and
                   processes that detect, identify, and kill pathogens and tumor cells. It detects a wide
                   variety of agents, from viruses and bacteria to parasite worms, and distinguishes them
                   from the organism's own healthy cells and tissues.

                          Immune systems can be simple or complex. Simple immunity measures are non-
                   specific and include barrier-like cell walls, mucous membranes, or skin; and defensive
                   systems such as enzymes to break down proteins or stomach acid. These defenses are
                   part of most living organisms' defenses and are termed innate defenses.

Innate Immunity (Defenses)

                    Present at all times
                    Provides general protection
                    Does not improve with repeated exposure to pathogen

                          Pathogens can evolve rapidly and adapt to avoid the innate immune system
                   and successfully infect the hosts. Therefore, higher organisms have developed more
                   complex defenses. The human immune system adapts over time to recognize specific
                   pathogens more efficiently. This is referred to as adaptive or acquired immunity.

Adaptive or Acquired Immunity

                    Protects against specific pathogens
                    Develops in response to an infection
                    Develops memory that may provide life-long immunity to reinfection with the same

                      pathogen

                          As part of this immune system, an immunological memory is created to enable
                   an enhanced response to a secondary encounter with the pathogen. This process is the
                   basis for immunization.

                          The immune system has four key tasks:

                    Recognition: Detect infection or harm
                    Effector function: Contain and eliminate infection
                    Regulation: Control activity to avoid damage to the body
                    Memory: Remember exposure and react immediately and strongly upon reexposure

                          In patients with AR, the immune system perceives innocuous proteins (antigens
                   from the environment) as a threat to an organism and triggers the same inflammatory
                   reaction that it would use to fight a bacterial or viral infection. This is why it is often
                   difficult to determine if a patient is having recurrent infections or an allergic reaction.

                          AR is an immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated disease. Mast cells and basophils
                   play an important role in the inflammatory process of AR. These cells, located all over
                   the body, contain inflammatory mediators such histamine and leukotrienes. The mast
                   cells, in the respiratory mucosa and basophils in the peripheral blood, release these
                   inflammatory mediators into the surrounding area in response to inflammation. IgE
                   is an antibody that is bound to the mast cells each of which has more than 100,000
                   receptor sites for IgE. When someone is exposed to an allergen for the first time (e.g.,
                   ragweed), the body senses the protein of the allergen as either foreign or friendly. The
                   exact reason why the body rejects certain allergens and considers them foreign is not
                   fully understood. The IgE antibodies that are bound to the surface of the mast cells
                   recognize the protein surface markers of the allergen upon future exposure. If the body
448  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                   considers the allergen foreign, on future exposure when the protein of the allergen
                   binds with the IgE antibodies attached to the mast cell, it causes destruction of the
                   mast cell. This causes the mast cell to release the previously contained inflammatory
                   mediators into the surrounding tissues in addition to a similar response with basophils
                   in the peripheral blood. This causes a multitude of various AR symptoms, which can
                   vary in severity between individuals. Over several hours, these substances activate
                   other inflammatory cells that can cause a late phase response leading to persistent
                   symptoms. As a result of the development of mucosal inflammation, the nose becomes
                   primed with allergen and reacts more vigorously to subsequent allergen exposure but
                   also becomes hyperresponsive to irritants and to changes in atmospheric conditions.

VASOMOTOR RHINITIS

                   The same symptoms of AR can occur in nonallergic rhinitis or vasomotor rhinitis
                   (VMR), except that the symptoms are not the result of an IgE-mediated response and
                   the cause is not related to exposure to an allergen. The exact pathophysiology in VMR
                   remains poorly understood. In comparison to AR, VMR alone without AR is uncom-
                   mon. In most studies, the ratio of AR to pure nonallergic rhinitis is 3:1 (Settipane, 2003).
                   Data suggest that 44% to 87% of patients with rhinitis may have mixed rhinitis with
                   a combination of both allergic and nonallergic rhinitis (Settipane, 2003). Considering
                   that most patients have an element of both AR and VMR, the same medications used
                   for AR can be tried in those suspected of having VMR.

Triggers Associated With Vasomotor Rhinitis

                    Barometric pressure
                    Changes in temperature
                    Newspaper/newsprint
                    Hair products
                    Medications (aspirin and certain blood pressure pills)
                    Car and diesel exhaust
                    Perfumes and fragrances
                    Cleaning products
                    Smoke
                    Laundry detergents
                    Pool chlorine

                          VMR symptoms, mostly rhinorrhea, can also occur after ingestion of foods or
                   alcoholic beverages. This is called gustatory rhinitis. Most often the food is hot and
                   spicy. It is usually not associated with pruritus or facial pain. It is suggested that this
                   mechanism of action is likely caused by a stimulation of trigeminal sensory nerve end-
                   ings located in the upper aerodigestive tract. Avoidance of the implicated foods is the
                   first treatment option and intranasal topical administration of anticholinergic agents
                   such as Atrovent nasal spray (discussed later) have been shown to be effective.

PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT

Table 24.1:  Most patients with AR require pharmacotherapy in addition to allergen avoidance

Pharmacotherapy Options for satisfactory symptom control. There are currently multiple options--both over the
             counter and prescription--that can be used alone or in combination to achieve desired
for Allergy

Management. symptom control.
                                TABLE 24.1 PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT

                Brand Name             Generic Name       Age                     Pregnancy
                                                          Approved  OTC/RX Category Comments

Antihistamines

Systemic        Zyrtec                 cetirizine         2 years   OTC  B  14% risk of drowsiness

                Allegra                fexofenadine       6 months  OTC  C  4% risk of drowsiness

                Claritin               loratadine         2 years   OTC  B  8% risk of drowsiness

                Alavert                loratadine         6 years   OTC  B

                Xyzal                  levocetirizine     6 months  RX   B  6% risk of drowsiness

                Clarinex               desloratadine      6 months  RX   C  4% risk of drowsiness

Ophthalmic      Emadine                emedastine         3 years   RX   B

Intranasal      Astelin                azelastine         5 years   RX   C  Generic is available.                   PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT  449

                Astepro                azelastine         12 years  RX   C  Generic is not available.

                Patanase               olopatadine        6 years   RX   C

Topical         Allegra                diphenhydramine/   2 years   OTC  B: diphenhydramine
                Anti-itch              allantoin topical
                                                                         N/A: skin protectants
                                          cream

Decongestants

Systemic        Sudafed                pseudoephedrine    2 years   OTC  C

                N/A                    phenylephrine      12 years  OTC  C

Intranasal      Mucinex Nasal Spray oxymetazoline         6 years   OTC  C

                Afrin

                Dristan Nasal

                Neo-Synephrine

                Vicks Sinex Vapospray

                                                                                                       (continued)
                         TABLE 24.1  PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT (continued)                                      450  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS
            Brand Name
                                     Generic Name           Age                     Pregnancy
                                                            Approved  OTC/RX Category Comments

Antihistamine + Decongestant Combinations

Systemic    Zyrtec-D                 cetirizine +           12 years  OTC  B: cetirizine

                                           pseudoephedrine                 C: pseudoephedrine

            Allegra-D                fexofenadine +         12 years  OTC  C

                                           pseudoephedrine

            Claritin-D               loratadine +           12 years  OTC  B: loratadine

                                           pseudoephedrine                 C: pseudoephedrine

            Alavert-D                loratadine +           12 years  OTC  B: loratadine

                                           pseudoephedrine                 C: pseudoephedrine

            Semprex-D                acrivastine +          12 years  RX   C              Dosing is every 4-6 hours instead of once
                                                                                              to twice daily
                                           pseudoephedrine

Ophthalmic  Visine-A                 Pheniramine/           6 years   OTC  C              Contraindicated with heart disease,
            Opcon-A                  naphazoline                                              hypertension and glaucoma
            Naphcon-A

Intranasal Corticosteroids

Intranasal  Flonase                  fluticasone            4 years   RX   C
                                        propionate

            Nasonex                  mometasone             2 years   RX   C

            Veramyst                 fluticasone            2 years   RX   C

            Nasacort AQ              triamcinolone          2 years   RX   C

            Omnaris                  ciclesonide            6 years   RX   C

            Zetonna                  ciclesonide            12 years  RX   C              Zetonna is the dry aerosol version of the
                                                                                              aqueous nasal spray Omnaris

                                                                                          Requires one spray per nostril instead of
                                                                                              two.

                                                                                          Zetonna is an alcohol-based formulation.
Intranasal Corticosteroids                 beclomethasone  6 years   RX  C
                        Beconase AQ
                        Qnasal             beclomethasone  12 years  RX  C  Qnasal is the dry aerosol version of the
                                                                                aqueous nasal spray Beconase AQ.
            Rhinocort Aqua                 budesonide      6 years   RX  B
            Nasarel                        flunisolide                      Used once daily instead of twice daily as
                                                           6 years   RX  C      with Beconase AQ.

Intranasal Antihistamine + Corticosteroid                                   Qnasal is an alcohol-based formulation
                                                                             Generic available
Intranasal  Dymista (Astelin +             azelastine/     12 years  RX  C   Can use up to three times per day
               Flonase)                       fluticasone
                                              propionate                    Can use up to six times per day                                 PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT  451
                                                                            Generic is available
Mast Cell Stabilizers                                                       Available OTC

Intranasal  NasalCrom                      cromolyn        2 years   RX  B                                                     (continued)

Ophthalmic  Crolom                         cromolyn        4 years   RX  B
            Alomide                           ophthalmic
            Alocril                                        2 years   RX  B
            Alamast                        lodoxamide
                                              ophthalmic   3 years   RX  B

                                           Nedocromil      3 years   RX  C
                                              ophthalmic

                                           pemirolast
                                              ophthalmic
                          TABLE 24.1  PHARMACOTHERAPY OPTIONS FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT (continued)                                              452  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS
             Brand Name
                                      Generic Name           Age                      Pregnancy  Comments
                                                             Approved   OTC/RX Category

Mast Cell Stabilizer + Antihistamine

Ophthalmic   Optivar                  azelastine ophthalmic  3 years    RX   C
                                      epinastine ophthalmic  3 years
             Elestat                  ketotifen ophthalmic   3 years    RX   C

             Zaditor                                                    OTC  C

             Zyrtec Itchy Eye Drops

                        Patanol       olopatadine            3 years    RX   C
                                         ophthalmic
                        Lastacaft                            2 years    RX   B
Anticholinergics                      alcaftadine

Intranasal   Atrovent Nasal           Ipratropium            5-6 years  RX   B                   Generic is available.
                0.03% and 0.06%          bromide                                                 0.03% is approved for age 6 years and

Leukotriene Receptor Antagonist                                                                      above. Can use up to three times daily.
                                                                                                 0.06% is approved for age 5 years and
Systemic     Singulair                montelukast            12 months RX    B
                                                                                                     above. Can use up to four times a day.

                                                                                                  Although rare, caution that drug may
                                                                                                    cause mood and behavior changes

Mucolytic Agents

Systemic     Mucinex                  guaifenesin            2 years    OTC  C

Mucolytic Agent + Decongestant

Systemic     Mucinex-D                guaifenesin +          12 years   OTC  C
IgE Blocker
                                      pseudoephedrine

Injectable   Xolair                   omalizumab             12 years   RX   B                    Although Xolair is effective for
                                                                                                    treating AR, it is approved for use only
                                                                                                    in patients with allergic asthma
Drug Class                PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR ALLERGY MANAGEMENT  453
Antihistamines
                Pharmacodynamics
Decongestants
                 Antihistamines prevent histamine-receptor interaction
                   through competition with histamines for histamine receptors.
                   Once the antihistamine is bound to the histamine receptor, it
                   prevents histamine release.

                 Two groups of antihistamines are available--first and
                   second generation. The main differences between the two
                   generations of drugs are their propensity to cause central
                   nervous system (CNS) side effects.
                    First generation antihistamines are highly lipophilic and
                       this allows them to penetrate well into the CNS, where
                       they induce sedation. This generation also causes more
                       anticholinergic side effects such as dry mouth. Examples:
                       Benadryl, Dimetapp, Dramamine, Hydroxyzine, etc.
                    The second generation antihistamines cause much
                       reduced CNS sedation. This generation also has few or
                       no anticholinergic side effects. Examples; Zyrtec, Allegra,
                       Claritin, Xyzal, etc.

                NOTE: Keep in mind that patients respond to antihistamines
                differently. What works for one person may not work for another.

                Intranasal:
                 Intranasal decongestants (e.g., Afrin) when sprayed in the nose

                   constricts the blood vessels, reducing blood flow within the nasal
                   membranes, decreasing inflammation and mucus production,
                   and thus temporarily providing relief from nasal congestion,
                   sinus congestion, and even eustachian tube congestion.
                 Long-term (greater than 5-7 days) use of the topical decongestant
                   nasal spray can lead to rhinitis medicamentosa, which is a
                   condition of rebound nasal congestion. The body essentially gets
                   used to the vasoconstricting effects and is dependent on the
                   continuous use of the medication for relief of congestion. This
                   eventually results in permanent turbinate hyperplasia.
                Systemic:
                 Sudafed is an example of a systemic decongestant. It works as
                   a vasoconstrictor without the rebound effects that intranasal
                   decongestants can have.
                 However, the same vasoconstriction actions can also result in
                   adverse effect in other areas of the body. Avoid decongestant
                   use in patients with cardiovascular disease, hypertension,
                   prostatic hypertrophy, glaucoma, and pregnant women.
                 OTC phenylephrine is an oral decongestant option; however,
                   it is not as effective as pseudoephedrine when taken orally for
                   nasal decongestion.
                    Pharmacologically, phenylephrine is a direct alpha-

                       adrenergic agonist in therapeutic doses, whereas
                       pseudoephedrine has both alpha and to a lesser degree
                       beta-adrenergic activity (Reents, 2007).
                       · Phenylephrine has a shorter elimination half-life of 2.5 hours

                           compared to that of pseudoephedrine with 9-16 hours.

                NOTE: When possible, have the patient take behind-the-
                pharmacy-counter pseudoephedrine instead of off-the-shelf
                phenylephrine.

                                                                                                     (continued)
454  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

Drug Class             Pharmacodynamics
Intranasal
                        Intranasal corticosteroids gradually reduce inflammation and
    corticosteroids       block histamine production in the nasal passages, therefore
                          relieving AR symptoms.
Mast cell stabilizers
    (MCS)               Corticosteroids can increase intraocular pressure and cause or
                          worsen open-angle glaucoma. A patient with glaucoma should
Anticholinergics          get approval from an ophthalmologist before starting an
                          intranasal corticosteroid. If the medication is approved for use,
Leukotriene               frequently patients' ocular pressures are more closely monitored.
    receptor
    antagonist          Be sure the patient is using the nasal spray correctly: Aim the
                          nozzle of the spray container toward the back of the head
                          and toward the ear (right nostril, right ear, and left nostril,
                          left ear) before spraying. Do not aggressively sniff the spray
                          or tilt the head back.

                       NOTE: Remember that it may take up to 2 weeks of using an
                       intranasal corticosteroid before noticing the full effects.

                        MCS work slowly over time, sometimes taking up to 2-6
                          weeks to become effective.

                        MCS block pathways essential for mast cell degranulation and
                          stabilize the cell, which prevents the inflammatory mediators
                          inside the mast cell (histamine, etc.) from being released.

                        Although MCS have a good safety profile, they have a short
                          half-life and therefore must be dosed often (sometimes up to
                          six times per day) in order to be effective.

                        Anticholinergic agents have a specific ability to decrease
                          nasal secretions.

                        Atrovent nasal spray is a topical anticholinergic that can
                          help with rhinorrhea, but not nasal congestion. It works by
                          stopping mucous glands in the nose from overproducing
                          mucous. It generally begins to work within 15 minutes.

                        Systemic anticholinergics have a large side effect profile and
                          can dilate the pupil and worsen the obstruction in patients
                          with narrow-angle glaucoma, increasing the risk of acute
                          angle closure. Other side effects of systemic anticholinergics
                          include dryness of the mouth, nose, throat, skin, etc.
                          Therefore, oral anticholinergic medications are rarely used in
                          AR and if used, are reserved for selective cases.

                        Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LRA)--Singulair--block
                          leukotrienes, which cause inflammation in both the upper
                          and lower airway. Leukotrienes are also secondary mediators
                          of the allergic cascade.

                        LRA plus an antihistamine is more effective than an
                          antihistamine alone but inferior to an intranasal
                          corticosteroid (Rodrigo & Yañez, 2006).

                        Singulair is taken once per day. There are no clinical trials that have
                          evaluated the relative efficacy of morning versus evening dosing.

                        Unlike antihistamines that can start working immediately,
                          LRAs take time to work. There is no set timeframe to tell the
                          patient when to notice AR symptom improvement; however,
                          in most cases, maximum effectiveness is achieved within 30-
                          45 days. If no improvement is noticed within this timeframe,
                          the medication should be discontinued.

                                             (continued)
                  IN VITRO-SPECIFIC IGE TESTS  455

Drug Class        Pharmacodynamics
Mucolytic agents
                   Mucolytic agents are designed to help loosen and clear
                     mucus from the upper and lower airways by breaking up the
                     sputum.

                   It is important to tell the patient to drink lots of water (six to
                     eight glasses of water per day) in order for this medication to
                     have a significant effect.

IN VITRO-SPECIFIC IgE TESTS

                   Through a simple blood draw it is possible to measure allergen-specific IgE. The basic
                   principle in these available assays is that those allergens already bound to IgE can be
                   quantitated and those allergens that have not bound to IgE cannot be quantitated. A
                   number of methods have been used throughout the years to report allergen-specific
                   IgE results. The first assay for allergen-specific IgE was reported in 1974 and was
                   termed the radioallergosorbent test (RAST). Since then the standards for accuracy and
                   reliability for quantitative IgE testing have been reexamined and the testing criteria
                   readjusted so that the radioactive isotopes are no longer used for allergen detection.
                   Instead, the newer methods of testing for specific IgE antibody include ImmunoCAP,
                   Immulite, and Turbo RAST with ImmunoCAP being the preferred testing method of
                   choice. However, despite these newer methods of testing, the general term "RAST"
                   is still used, which is actually a brand name that has become generic to refer to any
                   of the newer assays for testing. Despite these improved adjustments, one drawback
                   with today's method of allergen-specific IgE testing through a blood draw is that the
                   tests have relatively high false-positives (patients with a positive test without allergic
                   symptoms) and high false-negatives (patients with clinical symptoms but a negative
                   test result). Also, a direct correlation cannot be assumed between the presence of spe-
                   cific IgE antibodies and clinical disease. Allergen-specific immunoassays detect IgE
                   antibody in the blood but not all patients are clinically allergic. The interpretation of
                   specific IgE results requires correlation with the history and physical examination.

                          In comparison, the precise sensitivity of skin prick testing (SPT) has been
                   reported to range from less than 50% to greater than 90% with the average being
                   approximately 70% to 75% for most studies (Wallace et al., 2008). Therefore, when
                   possible, skin prick tests should be done and is therefore the preferred test method
                   for the diagnosis of IgE-mediated sensitivity. The following situations would war-
                   rant specific IgE immunoassays instead of SPT:

                    Widespread skin disease (i.e., severe eczema, psoriasis, or dermatographism)
                    An uncooperative patient
                    Previous history of anaphylaxis from SPT
                    The patient is unable to go off of medications that would interfere with SPT
                    Patients with uncontrolled or severe asthma

                          Thanks to technological advancements, today's levels of sensitivity, specificity,
                   and reproducibility are significantly better than with the original RAST method. The
                   newer assays, specifically ImmunoCAP, allow for greater binding of the allergen and
                   improved detection of even low-level amounts of specific IgE to a given allergen. The
                   increased binding capacity results in a greater sensitivity. The sensitivity of Immuno-
                   CAP is 90% (Reinhardt, 2012). A recent study published in the Journal of Allergy and
                   Clinical Immunology demonstrated that ImmunoCAP is the standard for accuracy and
                   reliability for quantitative IgE testing.
456  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

ALLERGY SKIN TESTING

                   Allergen-specific IgE testing can be done with skin testing, which is more sensitive
                   than serological tests (in vitro). Skin testing detects allergen-specific IgE bound to mast
                   cells. Diagnostic allergy skin testing should be performed in the context of a history
                   that suggests an allergic trigger. Positive allergy tests demonstrate sensitization but do
                   not always indicate clinical reactivity. A positive skin test with a history suggestive of
                   clinical sensitivity strongly indicates the allergen as the cause of the disease. The deci-
                   sion for what to test for should be representative of what the patient may encounter in
                   the environment and should be geographically based.

Goals of Allergy Skin Testing

                    Identify allergens to which the patient is symptomatically reactive.
                    Determine correlation between reactive allergens and the patient's symptoms.
                    Based on sensitivity results and the patient's history, determine if immunotherapy

                      is warranted.

Types of Skin Testing

                   Skin testing is the most common method of detecting allergen-specific IgE sensitivity.
                   This may include the following types of testing.

                  Skin Prick Testing
                    Usually done on the forearm or back
                    This test is done by using needle pricks or a series of scratches and allowing a small

                      droplet of allergenic extract (e.g., ragweed pollen) to penetrate the skin.
                    Histamine release is a major mediator that results in a hive at the prick site

                      and surrounding erythema, called a wheal and flare, which is measured and
                      documented.
                    Various reagents (i.e., commercial extracts), techniques of testing (i.e., probe
                      type), location on the body, method of measurement, and timing of measurement
                      are variable between practices depending on which set of guideline criteria are
                      used.
                       Guideline criteria can be found through the American Academy of Allergy,

                         Asthma, and Immunology and the American Academy of Otolaryngic Allergy
                    Regardless of the specific method of measurement, the accuracy of skin testing

                      with FDA approved, commercial, standardized aeroallergen extracts has greater
                      than 85% sensitivity and specificity (Adinoff, Rosloniec, McCall, & Nelson,
                      1990).
                    With such a high level of sensitivity, negative SPT results (<3 mm wheal diameter)
                      can be used to rule out sensitivity to that allergen.

                  Intradermal Dilutional Testing
                    IDT is performed only after a negative SPT.
                    A small amount (usually 0.02 mL) of diluted antigen extract is injected subcutane-

                      ously into the dermis, creating a 2- to 3-mm intracutaneous bubble, similar to an
                      intracutaneous tuberculosis test. After a short period of time, the wheal is measured
                      to see if there was any progression.
                    Disadvantages include a high risk of anaphylaxis since the allergen is injected into
                      the dermis and cannot be removed from the skin as with SPT.
                                                                            SUBCUTANEOUS IMMUNOTHERAPY  457

                  Intradermal Dilutional Testing/Skin Endpoint Titration (IDT/SET)
                    The skin endpoint titration uses intradermal injections of allergens at increasing con-

                      centrations to measure an allergic response.
                    It tests multiple antigen dilutions (one at a time) to establish the minimum amount

                      of antigen required to produce a positive skin test result.
                    This type of testing is infrequently because it requires an increase in testing time and

                      requires multiple sticks for the patient, which is usually not favorable.
                    The test is started with a very diluted solution. After a short period of time (usually

                      10 minutes) the injection site is measured to look for growth of the wheal. Wheal
                      measurements are similar to IDT.
                    The "endpoint" is determined by a skin wheal that is clearly more reactive than the
                      negative control. Next, one level higher concentration is injected to determine that
                      the stronger dilution produces a wheal even larger than the first reactive wheal.

                  Modified Quantitative Testing
                    Modified quantitative testing is a blended method of SPT and IDT.
                    It initially uses SPT to estimate an approximate range of skin reactivity to individual

                      allergens and then it employs one IDT for each allergen at a predetermined dilution
                      to further refine and quantify the degree of allergic sensitivity.

Risk Factors for Allergy Testing

                   Although skin testing is generally safe, there is always a risk of systemic anaphylactic reac-
                   tion. The risk of adverse reaction to SPT is approximately 0.04% for systemic reactions
                   with no deaths reported; and with intradermal testing, systemic reactions have occurred in
                   approximately 1% to 2% of patients and deaths have been reported (Bernstein et al., 2008).

                  Key Factors to Consider
                    The effect of epinephrine may be blunted by the presence of beta-blocker therapy;

                      such medications should be discontinued before skin testing is done.
                    Pay special attention to those with a history of previous systemic/anaphylactic reac-

                      tions and those with a high degree of reactivity.
                    SPT is not contraindicated in pregnancy; however, it is unanimously considered

                      appropriate to postpone SPT in order to avoid possible reactions, even if rare, and
                      consequently aggressive therapies. If there is immediate diagnostic need, do sero-
                      logical assay testing instead.
                    Very young children require particular caution. Little children cannot effectively ver-
                      balize early symptoms of an allergic reaction (i.e., apprehension, generalized itch,
                      feeling of asphyxiation, tightness of chest, and dizziness).
                    Patients with severe lung disease, congestive heart failure, or unstable angina may
                      not be appropriate candidates for skin testing because, due to the limited cardiovas-
                      cular reserve in these patients, anaphylaxis is likely to be life-threatening.
                    Patients with uncontrolled asthma or severe asthma should not be tested until their
                      asthma is stable.

SUBCUTANEOUS IMMUNOTHERAPY

                   Subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy (SCIT) rehabilitates the immune system by
                   desensitizing the patient to what he or she is allergic. The major objectives of SCIT are
                   to reduce the body's response to an allergic trigger and prevent development of persis-
                   tent disease in the long term.
458  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                          The severity and duration of allergy-related symptoms should be considered in
                   assessing the need for SCIT. Initiating SCIT that is based solely on the results of in vitro
                   or in vivo IgE testing without appropriate clinical correlation is inappropriate.

                          SCIT involves subcutaneously administering gradually increasing doses of aller-
                   gen extract (the specific allergens are determined by the patient's skin testing response)
                   to allow the body to get "used to" the substances and thereby develop a resistance and
                   long-term tolerance. There are two phases to SCIT--build-up and maintenance.

Build-Up Phase

                    This phase involves receiving SCIT injections with increasing amounts of allergen
                      extract until the maintenance (highest or most effective dose) is achieved.

                    Injections are usually given once to twice weekly and the duration ranges from 3
                      months to 1 year depending on the level of concentration the patient started with.

Maintenance Phase

                    The maintenance phase is when the patient reaches the highest or most effective or
                      tolerated dose.

                    Once the maintenance dose is achieved, depending on the patient's level of symp-
                      tom stability, the duration between doses can be spaced apart, typically up to
                      4 weeks.

                    Once the maintenance dose is achieved, SCIT is continued for a period of 3 to 5
                      years. The sustainability of symptoms is different for each person. Ultimately, the
                      duration of SCIT should be individualized based on the patient's clinical response,
                      disease severity, reaction history, and preference.

                    After 1 year at maintenance dose (or sooner), clinical improvement should be
                      apparent.

                          Although SCIT is not a cure for allergies, it is the only current medical therapy
                   that may change the natural course of the disease for the better and induce long-term
                   remission. There is no specific upper or lower age limit for initiating SCIT. However,
                   special consideration is given to very young children who cannot effectively verbalize
                   symptoms of an allergic reaction. In pregnancy, allergen immunotherapy dose can be
                   held and continued, but immunotherapy is generally not initiated and the dose is not
                   advanced.

Adverse Reactions to Subcutaneous Allergen Immunotherapy

                   Two types of adverse reactions can occur with SCIT--local and systemic.

                  Local Reaction
                    It is common to have mild erythema, swelling, and tenderness at the injection site.

                      This can happen immediately after receiving an injection or several hours later.
                    Prevention and management of local reaction(s) include the following:

                       Cold pack to the area
                       Premedicate with oral antihistamine at least 2 hours before injection
                       Topical steroid or Benadryl application as needed to injection site
                       Rinse injection syringe with Benadryl or epinephrine before serum is drawn up
                       Dosage adjustment
                                                              SUBLINGUAL IMMUNOTHERAPY  459

Systemic Reaction
 Severe systemic reactions occur in less than 1% of patients, in the United States receiv-

   ing conventional immunotherapy, which equates to a mortality incidence of less than
   one per 1 million (Lockey, Nicoara-Kasti, Theodoropoulos, & Bukantz, 2001).
 Patients with severe, poorly controlled asthma are at higher risk for systemic reac-
   tions to SCIT than with patients who have well-controlled, stable asthma.
 Most of the time, systemic symptoms occur up to 30 minutes after receiving an injec-
   tion. Systemic symptoms can include:
    Hives/angioedema
    Increased respiratory symptoms (wheezing, shortness of breath, stridor, chest

      pain, etc.)
    Throat swelling/globus sensation
    Hypotension
    Generalized itching
    Flushing
    Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
 Treatment
    Epinephrine is the primary treatment for anaphylaxis with no absolute contrain-

      dication to its use. NOTE: Patients on beta-blockers may be resistant to the effects
       of epinephrine.
    Antihistamines
    Bronchodilators (i.e., Albuterol)
    Oxygen
    Corticosteroids (benefit to stabilize the mast cells in the late-phase reaction of an
      allergic response)

SUBLINGUAL IMMUNOTHERAPY

Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT), also called oral immunotherapy, involves putting
allergy extract drops under the tongue (SLIT-aqueous) or swallowing a tablet (SLIT-tab-
let). SLIT has gained wide acceptance in many European countries, Australia, and parts
of Asia and Canada. The first double-blind, placebo-randomized-control trial of SLIT was
published in 1986. Throughout the years, studies have continued to evaluate the safety
and efficacy of standards regarding route of administration, dose, and duration of ther-
apy. In the United States, the FDA has not approved SLIT and considers its usage off-label.
On the horizon is a sublingual grass pollen tablet called Grazax, which is a standardized
allergen extract of timothy grass pollen. Grazax has been approved for use in Europe
since 2000 and there are currently trials in the United States, which look promising.

       It is not fully understood how SLIT works. It is thought that it works similar to
SCIT in that it stimulates the body's immune system to produce antibodies against the
allergen(s) and allows the body to become tolerant to it.

Advantages of SLIT               Disadvantages of SLIT

 It has been proven that SLIT     Patient noncompliance. Patients who
   carries a much lower risk of     regularly miss doses may not have satisfactory
   anaphylaxis compared with        results
   SCIT
                                  At this time, cost is a disadvantage compared
 Convenient for patients            to SCIT, because most insurance companies do
   because therapy is self-         not cover it
   administered
                                  The most common side effect of SLIT is a local
                                    irritation in the mouth and under the tongue
460  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                          There are still many unanswered questions regarding SLIT's long-term benefit.
                   It is still not known if SLIT will prove to have the same potential for improvement in
                   patients with allergic asthma, or if SLIT is equally effective in a patient with multiple
                   allergen sensitivities.

FOOD ALLERGY

                   Food allergies can be classified as mediated by immunoglobulin E (IgE-mediated),
                   non-IgE-mediated, or mixed. Clinical presentation can vary from life-threatening
                   anaphylaxis as seen in IgE-mediated reactions, to chronic, delayed symptoms as
                   seen in eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE). The term "food allergy" for the layperson
                   covers a vast majority of conditions, but in reality "food allergy" is an IgE-medi-
                   ated, reproducible adverse reaction to a food. It can make it confusing for the pro-
                   vider when a patient claims he or she has a food allergy. Due to the discrepancy
                   between self-diagnosed food allergy and a true food allergy, it is essential to get a
                   thorough history and understanding of the different types of food reactions and of
                   the laboratory diagnostic tests currently available to accurately diagnose and man-
                   age the problem. The ultimate clinical diagnostic test for food allergy is to determine
                   what happens when the patient consumes the food in question. The gold standard
                   method to evaluate this is by doing a double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food
                   challenge test. Because of the logistics of performing the test, it is not generally
                   feasible to do it in a standard clinical practice setting. Despite the etiology, whether
                   IgE-mediated or non-IgE-mediated, treatment is generally always avoidance of the
                   suspected allergen.

Eosinophilic Esophagitis

                   For more information, see Chapter 21: Eosinophilic Esophagitis section.
                          EoE is another uncommon type of non-IgE-mediated food allergy condition.

                   Although the cause of EoE is not completely understood, atopy has been strongly
                   implicated as a factor. More than 50% of patients with EoE also have an atopic con-
                   dition (i.e., atopic dermatitis, AR, asthma) as well as positive results on SPT for
                   food allergens or measurement of antigen-specific IgE in the serum (Hong & Vogel,
                   2010). Symptoms can include difficulty swallowing, vomiting, and failure to thrive.
                   Common foods include wheat, milk, eggs, and soy. Diagnosis involves examination
                   and biopsy of the esophagus. Treatment includes removal of suspected foods from
                   the diet.

Oral Allergy Syndrome

                   Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) is related to cross-reacting protein allergens between
                   pollen and food.

                  Symptoms
                    Symptoms occur within a few minutes after contact and are confined to the mouth:

                      Oral pruritus; Edema of the lips, tongue, palate, and throat can occur.

                  Foods Involved
                    Fresh, uncooked fruits and vegetables
                                              FOOD ALLERGY  461

          TABLE 24.2 TYPES OF FOOD ALLERGIES

          IgE-Mediated                        Non-IgE-Mediated

OVERVIEW   More than 90% of IgE-               Non-IgE-mediated food allergies
Etiology     mediated food allergies are         are known as "food sensitivities"
             caused by just eight foods:         or "food intolerance" and are
             cow's milk, soy, hen's egg,         poorly defined and understood.
             peanuts, tree nuts, wheat,
             fish, and shellfish.              The most common food
                                                 associated with non-IgE-
           Approximately 80% of                  mediated food allergy
             allergies to cow's milk, hen's      syndromes is cow's milk (James,
             egg, wheat, and soy, and            Burks, & Eigenmann, 2012).
             20% of peanut allergies
             resolve by the time the child     Lactose intolerance is a type of
             reaches early adolescence           non-IgE-mediated food allergy
             (Wood, 2003). Allergies             in which the body lacks the
             to fish and shellfish often         enzyme (lactase) that breaks
             persist into adulthood.             down lactose to allow for gut
                                                 absorption.
           NOTE: The reason food
             allergies are more prevalent      Celiac disease is a form of
             in children is related to their     malabsorption due to a non-IgE-
             immature gut barrier.               mediated reaction to gliadin,
                                                 a component of gluten found
           IgE-mediated food allergy             in wheat, oat, rye, and barley.
             is closely related to atopic        Diagnosis requires small intestine
             diseases such as asthma,            biopsy and serological tests
             allergic rhinoconjunctivitis,       positive for gliadin and tissue
             and eczema.                         translutaminase (usually done by
                                                 a gastroenterologist).
           IgE-mediated food allergies
             are reproducible (meaning         Some foods contain naturally
             the reaction will occur every       occurring chemicals or artificial
             time the food is ingested).         additives that have been known
                                                 to provoke symptoms.
           Exercise, alcohol, NSAIDs,
             and narcotic analgesics           Food protein-induced illnesses
             have been known to cause            that are non-IgE-mediated
             or lower the threshold for          can occur in infancy but are
             mast cell degranulation.            usually outgrown by the age
             Thus, a patient with an             of 1 or 2 years. These illnesses
             IgE-mediated food allergy           include food protein-induced
             may be able to eat the food         enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES),
             or take the medication              protcocolitis, and enteropathy,
             without a reaction, but if          to name a few.
             the patient eats the food or
             takes the medication and          Exacerbations of eosinophilic
             then exercise (for example),        gastrointestinal disorders (EGIDs)
             the combination may cause           include eosinophilic gastritis,
             a reaction.                         eosinophilic enteritis, and
                                                 eosinophilic colitis.

           Is an IgE-mediated response         The exact etiology is unknown
             in which the reactions are          but the etiology depends on
             mast cell-driven and are            the cause of the reaction.
             consistent with the release         For example, the etiology of
             of histamine and other              lactose intolerance is different
             mediators from mast cells           than eosinophilic gastritis.

                                                                (continued)
462  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                TABLE 24.2 TYPES OF FOOD ALLERGIES (continued)

                IgE-Mediated                     Non-IgE-Mediated

Onset of         Usually immediate or < 2         Delayed onset in symptoms; can
    symptoms       hours                            occur hours later

Symptoms         IgE-mediated is the only         Symptoms are typically not life
                   type of food allergy capable     threatening.
                   of producing fatal results.
                                                 Symptoms may include (but are
                Symptoms may include (but            not limited to) the following:
                    are not limited to) the
                    following:                    Abdominal pain
                                                  Chronic fatigue
                 Most common                      Attention deficit hyperactivity
                   manifestations are
                   dermatological, respiratory,     disorder
                   and cardiovascular.            Diarrhea
                                                  Gastroesophageal reflux
                 Urticaria
                 Angioedema
                 Anaphylaxis
                 Vomiting
                 Oral allergy syndrome
                 Eczema
                 Rhinitis, asthma
                 Hypotension (histamine is

                   also a potent vasodilator)

Diagnostic       Most easily identified by        Cannot be detected on either
    procedures     detecting positive IgE           skin testing or RAST.
                   antibodies to the food in
                   question with either skin      Accurate diagnosis depends on
                   testing or RAST.                 elimination and rechallenge.

                 Allergy testing for foods        The diagnosis of non-IgE-
                   should not be done as a          mediated food allergies is
                   screening test or in the         based on signs and symptoms
                   absence of history that          occurring reproducibly
                   suggests a possible reaction     on exposure to food and
                   to a food.                       resolution of those signs and
                                                    symptoms with food avoidance.
                Skin Prick Testing:
                 Negative skin prick tests       IgG Food Tests:
                                                  Measuring IgG for specific
                   have a negative predictive
                   value of more than 95%           foods had been used as an
                   and can therefore exclude        indication of food allergies.
                   IgE-mediated food allergies      However, this testing has been
                   (Hong & Vogel 2010).             called into question because of
                 Positive skin prick tests          the lack of scientific validity. It
                   have a specificity of only       is not clear what the IgG tests
                   about 50%, making a              for food actually mean.
                   positive test difficult to     What is known: The production
                   interpret (Hong & Vogel          of IgG antibodies to foods is a
                   2010). Combine a positive        normal immune response.
                   result with a clear history
                   of food-induced symptoms.

                                                                   (continued)
                                                   FOOD ALLERGY  463

Diagnostic      IgE-Mediated                       Non-IgE-Mediated
    procedures
                Immunoassays (RAST):                Using IgG food testing to
Management       Less sensitive than skin prick       determine if a patient has food
                                                      intolerance or sensitivity is not
                   testing                            helpful. In fact, it may lead to
                 Negative RAST test results           further confusion.

                   for an IgE-mediated food         IgG food assays should not be
                   allergy has a low negative         ordered and patients who have
                   predictive value and an            already had them performed
                   undetectable level may still       should be counseled that they
                   be associated with symptoms        are a normal immune response
                   in 10%-25% of cases (Hong          to food, are present in all
                   & Vogel, 2010).                    individuals, and do not cause
                 The higher the test result           illness (James et al., 2012).
                   or concentration of a
                   food-specific IgE with           Food elimination or exclusion
                   RAST testing, the higher           diets should be done and may
                   the likelihood of a clinical       help to determine if a patient
                   reaction. However, combine         has an intolerance or sensitivity
                   a positive result with a clear     to the food in question. A
                   history of food-induced            challenge-dechallenge-
                   symptoms.                          rechallenge approach involves
                                                      removing the food from the diet
                 Vigilant avoidance of the            to see if symptoms resolve, then
                   food.                              reintroducing the food to see
                                                      whether the symptoms reappear.
                 Provide the patient with a
                   self-injectable Epi-Pen for
                   anaphylactic symptoms.

                  Pollen-Food Relationship
                    Involves cross-reacting protein allergens such as the following:

                       Birch tree pollen and apples, pears, peaches, apricots, cherries, plums, nectarines,
                         prunes, carrots, hazelnuts, almonds, and walnuts

                       Mugwort weed pollen and celery, parsley, fennel, sunflower, and coriander
                       Ragweed pollen and melons (watermelon, cantaloupe, honeydew) and bananas
                       Grass pollen and tomato, melon, and orange

Treatment

                    When the food(s) are cooked, the food proteins become more stable and the patient
                      can generally eat the food(s) without any problem.

Additional Research Needed

                    Additional research is needed to confirm if standard immunotherapy with pollens
                      could alleviate the associated food allergy symptoms with OAS.
464  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

URTICARIA AND ANGIOEDEMA

                   Urticaria is edema of superficial dermis of the skin resulting from vascular dilation and
                   leakage of fluid into the skin in response to inflammatory mediators released from mast
                   cells. Angioedema is swelling that occurs in the deeper dermis of the skin and subcuta-
                   neous tissue in response to the same inflammatory mediators. The major inflammatory
                   mediator in short-lived, acute urticaria/angioedema is histamine.

Acute Urticaria and/or Angioedema            Chronic Urticaria and/or Angioedema
Less than 6 weeks duration                   Greater than 6 weeks duration

       Acute urticaria/angioedema is generally easily managed with antihistamines
and resolves in less than 6 weeks. Most of the time it is easy to determine the etiology.
Chronic urticaria/angioedema is a more complex disease process and generally
involves additional inflammatory mediators such as prostaglandins, leukotrienes,
cytokines, and so on. The effects of these mediators add to the symptom variabil-
ity and complexity of this disease. It is much more difficult to detect the cause of
the condition if it is chronic. The longer the urticaria/angioedema has been present,
the more difficult the etiology is to determine. Chronic urticaria/angioedema can be
precipitated by a multitude of endogenous or exogenous factors that can be immu-
nological or nonimmunological. When the etiology cannot be determined, chronic
urticaria/angioedema is termed "idiopathic." About 60% of chronic urticaria cases
remain idiopathic (Kaplan, 2004). Urticaria and/or angioedema can also be the early
signs of impending anaphylaxis and could lead to life-threatening obstruction of the
laryngeal airway.

Physical Description                         Locations

Urticaria    Pruritic, erythematous,          Lesions commonly involve the
               blanching, circumscribed         extremities or trunk but can
               macular, or raised wheals        occur anywhere on the body

Angioedema   Deeper subcutaneous              Mainly located near loose
               nonpitting swelling              connective tissues such as the
                                                throat, lips, eyelids, and tongue
             Affected areas typically
               feel tingly or numb rather     Abdominal discomfort can also
               than pruritic                    occur

       There are multiple conditions that can precipitate urticaria with or without
angioedema. About 40% of patients with chronic urticaria have accompanying epi-
sodes of angioedema (Kaplan, 2002). In most patients, chronic urticaria is a self-limited
disorder, although the duration of the disease can last 2 to 5 years or longer (Saini,
Bochner, Callen, & Feldweg, 2013).

Possible Etiologies of Urticaria /Angioedema: Associated Workup and Treatment

                  Allergen Exposure
                    Allergy skin testing for specific IgE antibody to inhalents (pollens, molds, animal

                      dander, etc.) may be useful if a history related to allergen exposure and outbreak of
                      urticaria/angioedema exists
                                                               URTICARIA AND ANGIOEDEMA  465

Food
 Acute hives/angioedema is more closely associated with an IgE-mediated reaction

   to a food antigen.
 It is extremely rare to demonstrate a causal relationship between chronic urticaria/

   angioedema and the detection of specific IgE antibodies to food antigens by either
   skin tests or in vitro tests (Sampson, 2004).

Medications (Current or Previous)
These include:

 Herbals
 Supplements
 Antibiotics: If the patient's history is suggestive of an association with penicillin or

   related beta-lactam antibiotics, penicillin skin testing can be considered.
 Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy, opiates, aspirin/

   NSAIDs, muscle relaxants. These medications can more easily cause mast cell
   degranulation. NOTE: There are no reliable in vitro tests that can confirm a drug-asso-
   ciated etiology.
 Angioedema involving the throat, tongue, or lips without urticaria should prompt
   consideration of drug-induced angioedema (such as that seen with ACE inhibitors).

Infection
Examples include:

 Upper respiratory infection. NOTE: Acute spontaneous urticaria in pediatrics is usu-
   ally caused by a viral infection in most cases.

 Infectious mononucleosis. NOTE: If mononucleosis is suspected, Epstein-Barr virus
   (Monospot) should be tested.

 Viral hepatitis

Occupational Exposure
Examples include:

 Latex: Latex-induced symptoms would require elimination of latex exposure and
   possible removal of cross-reacting food allergens from the patient's diet (i.e., banana,
   avocado, grapes, peaches, apricots, cherry, pineapple, kiwi, chestnut, etc.).

 Chemicals
 Contact irritants. NOTE: Patch testing may be useful in confirming a causal relationship

   with contact irritants.
 Dust
 Fumes

Insect Stings or Bites
 Hymenoptera venom allergy is an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity to the venom of

   certain stinging insects. These include honeybees, yellow jackets, hornets, wasps,
   and so on.
 In vitro lab testing is available for evaluation.

Physical
Examples include:

 Exercise and sweating: Selected cases may be able to prophylactically use antihista-
   mines before exercise, which may help to reduce the frequency and/or intensity of
   the attacks.
466  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                    Pressure (e.g., tight clothing or straps)
                    Sun exposure
                    Heat exposure (e.g., hot showers, extreme humidity)
                    Cold exposure

                     NOTE: Dermatographism (the skin becomes raised and inflamed when stroked, scratched,
                     rubbed, etc.) suggests the presence of a physical urticarial process.

                  Hormonal
                    Consider when urticaria in women occurs on a cyclic basis.
                    Urticaria associated with pregnancy (pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of preg-

                      nancy [PUPP])

                  Hereditary
                    May have history of urticaria or angioedema in the family. NOTE: If angioedema

                        occurs without urticaria, hereditary or acquired C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency should
                        be suspected.

                   Hereditary Angioedema
                    This condition is a rare inherited blood disorder caused by a deficiency in the C1

                      esterase inhibitor (part of the immune system). When C1 esterase inhibitor is not
                      present in sufficient amounts, an imbalance occurs that causes the capillaries to
                      release fluid into the surrounding tissues, thereby causing edema. Swelling can
                      affect the face, extremities, gastrointestinal tract, and upper airways and in some
                      causes cause airway compromise. Because C1 esterase inhibitor plays a role in dis-
                      ease fighting, inflammatory response, and coagulation within the immune system,
                      an episode of hereditary angioedema can follow even minor trauma (e.g., dental
                      manipulation).
                    Screening C4 levels should be obtained on patients who have angioedema without
                      urticaria. C4 levels are usually decreased during both symptomatic and asymptom-
                      atic periods of the disease. If C4 levels are reduced, quantitative C1 esterase inhibi-
                      tor levels should be obtained. A reduced C1 esterase inhibitor level and reduced C4
                      warrants evaluation for an occult lymphoproliferative disorder.

                  Autoimmune or Systemic Process
                   Treatment of autoimmune and/or systemic process disorders associated with urti-
                   caria/angioedema are dictated by the specific disease process, which can include:

                    Autoimmune disorders
                    Connective tissue disorders
                    Mastocytosis
                    Systemic lupus erythematosus
                    Vasculitis
                    Lymphoma
                    Thyroid disorders. NOTE: Palpate the thyroid for enlargement that may suggest an

                        autoimmune process. Thyroid autoimmunity may be associated with up to 30% of
                        chronic urticaria cases (Najib, Bajwa, Ostro, & Sheikh, 2009). Thyroid-stimulating hor-
                        mone and antithyroid peroxidase/antithyroglobulin antibody lab tests are used to detect
                        the presence of autoimmune thyroid disorders. One or both thyroid autoantibodies may
                        be present in up to 28% of patients with chronic urticaria/angioedema; therefore some
                        advocate that these tests be done, especially in women or patients with a family history
                        of thyroid or other autoimmune disease (Heymann, 1999).
                                                                                 URTICARIA AND ANGIOEDEMA  467

                  Other
                    Laboratory testing should be selective and based on diagnostic suspicions. Ran-

                      dom ordering of laboratory tests in the hopes of identifying an occult underly-
                      ing condition is not recommended. Laboratory tests to consider, if warranted,
                      include:
                       Complete blood count (CBC) with differential
                       Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
                       Liver function tests (LFTs)
                       Thyroid function tests (TFTs)
                       Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
                       Rheumatoid factor (RF)
                    Punch skin biopsy on patients with difficult-to-treat chronic idiopathic urticaria to
                      detect other etiologies.
                    Chest x-ray may help to confirm the presence of a tumor and/or mediastinal wid-
                      ening in patients with suspected superior vena cava obstruction who present with
                      chronic swelling of the face and neck.

Management

                   If a cause of the urticaria/angioedema is known, the best treatment is avoidance
                   of the trigger. With both acute and chronic presentations of urticaria/angioedema,
                   consider removing factors that may augment or induce urticaria/angioedema such
                   as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), alcohol ingestion, aspirin, and
                   so on.

                          Regardless, symptomatic relief may be achieved with medications for urticaria
                   and non-life-threatening angioedema. Continuous treatment with antihistamines over
                   a period of weeks to a few months may control outbreaks enough until a sustained
                   remission occurs. Consider referral to an allergist or immunologist early on, especially
                   if the etiology has not been conclusively determined.

                          Options include:

                  First-Generation Antihistamines
                   Examples include:

                    Benadryl (diphenhydramine)
                    Atarax (hydroxyzine)

                  Second-Generation Antihistamines
                   Examples include:

                    Allegra (fexofenadine)
                    Claritin (loratadine)
                    Clarinex (desloratadine)
                    Zyrtec (cetirizine)
                    Xyzal (levocetirizine)

                  Tricyclic Antidepressants
                    Doxepin. NOTE: Doxepin has both H1 and H2 antireceptor activity.

                  H2 Blockers
                    Tagament (cimetidine)
                    Zantac (ranitidine)
468  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

                  Corticosteroids
                    Corticosteroid treatment (i.e., prednisone or Medrol dose pack) may be appropriate

                      when antihistamines are not effective.
                    These agents are helpful at stabilizing the mast cells and controlling the release of

                      inflammatory mediators that can potentiate the urticaria/angioedema.

                  Leukotriene Modifiers
                    Singulair (montelukast)
                    Accolate (zafirlukast)

                     NOTE: There are preliminary reports about the potential usefulness of leukotriene modi-
                     fiers in the treatment of chronic urticaria.

                  Epinephrine (Epipen)
                    Emergency epinephrine (Epipen) should be prescribed for patients with history of

                      anaphylaxis or laryngeal angioedema.

                          In chronic urticaria/angioedema, monotherapy alone may not be entirely effective
                   in controlling the condition because other capillary permeability-inducing mediators are
                   released (i.e., leukotrienes, prostaglandin, kinins, etc.). Therefore, therapies with more
                   than one medication or higher doses than usual of a medication are often needed.

                          Options include:

                    Second-generation antihistamine in the morning and first-generation antihistamine
                      at night

                    Second-generation antihistamine twice a day and first-generation antihistamine or
                      Doxepin for breakthrough symptoms

                    A combination of an H2 blocker (i.e., Tagament, Zantac) with a first- or second-
                      generation antihistamine in once daily or twice a day dosing

Urticarial Vasculitis

                   Urticarial vasculitis (UV) is an uncommon form of vasculitis that causes wheals and/
                   or red patches (that look like urticaria) due to swelling of small blood vessels. UV is
                   thought to be due to immune complex-mediated inflammation, but the exact etiology
                   is unknown.

                    UV lesions are:
                       In the same location for longer than 24 hours
                       More painful than pruritic lesions as with urticaria
                       More prominent on lower extremities
                       Pigmented with changes to the skin once resolved (usually dark discoloration
                         occurs, termed "hyperpigmentation")

                    Angioedema may accompany UV

                  Workup
                    A punch biopsy of the skin lesion for diagnostic confirmation
                    ESR and C-reactive protein lab tests may be elevated in UV
                    CH50 may be normal or decreased

                  Treatment
                    Management should be initiated with the help of an immunologist and/or rheuma-

                      tologist.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  469

                    Antihistamines may be useful in managing the pruritus associated with UV.
                    Other antiinflammatory or cytotoxic agents may be helpful, but these medications

                      require careful monitoring for potentially serious side effects.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Adinoff, A. D., Rosloniec, D. M., McCall, L. L., & Nelson, H. S. (1990). Immediate skin test reactivity
                   to Food and Drug Administration-approved standardized extracts. Journal of Allergy and Clinical
                   Immunology, 86(5), 766-774.

            Bernstein, I. L. (1988). Proceedings of the task force on guidelines for standardizing old and new tech-
                   nologies used for the diagnosis and treatment of allergic diseases. Journal of Allergy and Clinical
                   Immunology, 82, 487-526.

            Bernstein, I., Li, J., Bernstein, D., Hamilton, R., Spector, S., Tan, R., . . . Weber, R. (2008). Allergy diagnostic
                   testing: An updated practice parameter. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 100(3), suppl
                   3, S1-S148. Retrieved from http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Docu-
                   ments/Practice%20and%20Parameters/allergydiagnostictesting.pdf.

            Boyce, J., Assa'ad, A., Burks, A., Jones, S., Sampson, H. A., Wood, R. A., . . . Schwaninger, J. (2010). Guide-
                   lines for the diagnosis and management of food allergy in the United States: Report of the NIAID-
                   sponsored expert panel. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 126(6 Suppl), S1-S58.

            Bush, R. Diagnostic tests in allergy. Expert guide to allergy and immunology (pp. 1-22). Retrieved from
                   https://www.acponline.org/eBizATPRO/images/ProductImages/books/sample%20chapters/
                   Allergy%20&%20Immunology_Ch01.pdf.

            Chapman, J. A., Bernstein, L. I., Lee, R. E., Oppenheimer, J. (2006). Food allergy: A practice parameter.
                   American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the American College of Allergy, Asthma,
                   and Immunology, 96, S1-S68. Retrieved from http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/
                   PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/food-allergy-2006.pdf.

            Codreanu, F., Moneret-Vautrin, D. A., Morisset, M., Guénard, L., Rancé, F., Kanny, G., & Lemerdy, P.
                   (2006). The risk of systemic reactions to skin prick-tests using food allergens: CICBAA data and
                   literature review. European Annals of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 38(2), 52-54.

            Cox., L., Nelson, H., & Lockey, R. (2010). Allergen immunotherapy: A practice parameter third update.
                   Joint Council of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology and the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and
                   Immunology. Retrieved from http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Docu-
                   ments/Practice%20and%20Parameters/Allergen-immunotherapy-Jan-2011.pdf.

            Frew, A. (2008). Sublingual immunotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 358, 2259-2264. Retrieved
                   from http://www.smschile.cl/documentos/NEJM/pulmonary/articulo1.pdf.

            Greiner, A. N., Hellings, P. W., Rotiroti, G., & Scadding, G. K. (2011). Allergic rhinitis. Lancet, 378(9809),
                   2112-2122.

            Heymann, W. R. (1999). Chronic urticaria and angioedema associated with thyroid autoimmunity: Review
                   and therapeutic implications. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 40(2 Pt 1), 229-232.

            Hong, S., & Vogel, N. M. (2010). Food allergy and eosinophilic esophagitis: Learning what to avoid.
                   Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 77(1), 51-59.

            Huggins, J. L., & Looney, R. J. (2004). Allergen immunotherapy. American Family Physician, 70(4), 689-696.
            James, J., Burks, W., & Eigenmann, P. (2012). Food allergy. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.
            The Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters comprised of members from the American Academy of

                   Asthma and Immunology, the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the
                   Joint Council on Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. (December 2000a). Part 1: acute urticaria/
                   angioedema. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 85, 525-531. Retrieved from http://www.
                   aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/
                   urticaria_prt1-(1).pdf. August 17, 2013.
            The Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters comprised of members from the American Academy of
                   Asthma & Immunology, the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the
                   Joint Council on Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. (December 2000b). Part 2: Chronic urticaria/
                   angioedema. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology 85, 532-544. Retrieved from http://www.
                   aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/
                   urticaria_prt2-(1).pdf. August 17, 2013.
470  24. ALLERGIC AND NONALLERGIC DISORDERS

            Jovancevic, L., Georgalas, C., Savovic, S., & Janjevic, D. (2006, 2010). Gustatory rhinitis. Rhinology, 48(1),
                   7-10; Journal of Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology, 16(2), 75-78.

            Kaplan, A. P. (2002). Clinical practice. Chronic urticaria and angioedema. New England Journal of Medi-
                   cine, 346(3), 175-179.

            Kaplan, A. P. (2004). Chronic urticaria: Pathogenesis and treatment. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immu-
                   nology, 114(3), 465-74; quiz 475.

            Katz, D., & Friedman, R. (2008). Food allergy and intolerance. In Nutrition in clinical practice: A compre-
                   hensive, evidence-based manual for the practitioner (2nd ed., pp. 275-280). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters
                   Kluwer Health and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

            Liccardi, G., Amato, D., Canonica, W., Salzillo, A., Piccolo, A., & Passalacqua, G. (2006). Systemic reac-
                   tions from skin testing: Literature review. Journal of Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunol-
                   ogy, 16(2), 75-78.

            Lieberman, J. A., & Sicherer, S. H. (2011). Diagnosis of food allergy: Epicutaneous skin tests, in vitro
                   tests, and oral food challenge. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 11(1), 58-64.

            Lin, M. S., Tanner, E., Lynn, J., & Friday, G. A. (1993). Nonfatal systemic allergic reactions induced by kin
                   testing and immunotherapy. Annals of Allergy, 71(6), 557-562.

            Lin, S. Y., Erekosima, N., Kim, J. M., Ramanathan, M., Suarez-Cuervo, C., Chelladurai, Y., . . . Segal, J. B.
                   (2013). Sublingual immunotherapy for the treatment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and asthma: A
                   systematic review. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 309(12), 1278-1288.

            Lockey, R. F., Nicoara-Kasti, G. L., Theodoropoulos, D. S., & Bukantz, S. C. (2001). Systemic reactions
                   and fatalities associated with allergen immunotherapy. Annals of Allergy, Asthma , and Immunology:
                   Official Publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 87(1 Suppl 1), 47-55.

            Marrouche, N., & Grattan, C. (2012). Childhood urticaria. Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immu-
                   nology, 12(5), 485-490.

            Meltzer, E. O., Gross, G. N., Katial, R., & Storms, W. W. (2012). Allergic rhinitis substantially impacts
                   patient quality of life: Findings from the Nasal Allergy Survey Assessing Limitations. Journal of
                   Family Practice, 61(2 Suppl), S5-S10.

            Melvin, T. A., & Patel, A. A. (2011). Pharmacotherapy for allergic rhinitis. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North
                   America, 44(3), 727-739, x.

            Najib, U., Bajwa, Z. H., Ostro, M. G., & Sheikh, J. (2009). A retrospective review of clinical presenta-
                   tion, thyroid autoimmunity, laboratory characteristics, and therapies used in patients with chronic
                   idiopathic urticaria. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology: Official Publication of the American
                   College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 103(6), 496-501.

            Pattanaik, D., & Lieberman, P. (2010). Vasomotor rhinitis. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 10(2), 84-91.
            Peltier, J., & Ryan, M. W. (2007). Comparison of intradermal dilutional testing, skin prick testing, and

                   modified quantitative testing for common allergens. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Offi-
                   cial Journal of American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 137(2), 246-249.
            Ramaekers, J. G., & Vermeeren, A. (2000). All antihistamines cross blood-brain barrier. British Medical Jour-
                   nal, 321(7260), 572. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1118461/.
            Reents, S. (Ed.) (2007). Clinical pharmacology (online). Tampa, FL: Gold Standard. Retrieved from www.
                   clinicalpharmacology.com. Accessed August 10, 2013.
            Reinhardt, R. (2012). What is RAST testing? Thermo Fischer Scientific. Retrieved from http://www.isital-
                   lergyblog.com/what-was-rast-testing/.
            Rodrigo, G. J., & Yañez, A. (2006). The role of antileukotriene therapy in seasonal allergic rhinitis: A sys-
                   tematic review of randomized trials. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology: Official Publication
                   of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, 96(6), 779-786.
            Saini, S., Bochner, B., Callen, J., & Feldweg, A. (2013). Chronic urticaria: Clinical manifesations, diag-
                   nosis, pathogenesis and natural history. Up to Date. Retrieved from http://www.uptodate.com/
                   contents/chronic-urticaria-clinical-manifestations-diagnosis-pathogenesis-and-natural-history.
            Sampson, H. A. (1998). Adverse reactions to foods. In E. Middleton, C. E. Reed, & E. F. Ellis (Eds),
                   Allergy, principles and practice (5th ed., pp. 1162-1182). New York: Wiley.
            Sampson, H. A. (2004). Update on food allergy. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 113(5), 805-
                   819; quiz 820.
            Schaefer, P. (2011). Urticaria: Evaluation and treatment. American Family Physician, 83(9), 1078-1084.
                   Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/2011/0501/p1078.html.
            Senna, G. E., Calderon, M., & Milani, M. (2011). Allergy immunotherapy tablet: Grazax® for the treat-
                   ment of grass pollen allergy. Expert Review of Clinical Immunology, 7(1), 21-27.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  471

Settipane, R. A. (2003). Rhinitis: A dose of epidemiological reality. Allergy and Asthma Proceedings: The
      Official Journal of Regional and State Allergy Societies, 24(3), 147-154.

Small, P., & Kim, H. (2011). Allergic rhinitis. Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology: Official Journal of
      the Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 7 Suppl 1, S3.

Sur, D. K., & Scandale, S. (2010). Treatment of allergic rhinitis. American Family Physician, 81(12), 1440-1446.
Wallace, D., Dykewicz, M., Bernstein, D., Bleesing-Moore, J., Cox, L., & Khan, D. (2008). The diagnosis

      and management of rhinitis: An updated practice parameter. Developed by the Joint Task Force
      on Practice Parameters, representing the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunol-
      ogy; the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology; and the Joint Council of Allergy,
      Asthma, and Immunology. S1-S84. Retrieved from http://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/Medi-
      aLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/rhinitis2008-diagnosis-manage-
      ment.pdf. August 5, 2013.
Wang, J., Godbold, J. H., & Sampson, H. A. (2008). Correlation of serum allergy (IgE) tests performed by
      different assay systems. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 121(5), 1219-1224.
Wood, R. A. (2003). The natural history of food allergy. Pediatrics, 111(6 Pt 3), 1631-1637.
