3 Physical Examination of the
               Cranial Nerves for the
               Head and Neck

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES

Figure 3.1:      There are 12 cranial nerves (CNs), which leave the brain and pass through foramina
Cranial nerves.  (holes) in the skull. All of the nerves are distributed in the head and neck except for the
                 vagus nerve (CN X), which also supplies the thorax and abdomen.

Cranial Nerve I: Olfactory Nerve
                   The olfactory nerve is the shortest of the 12 nerves.

                 Type of Nerve
                  Sensory nerve only

Figure 1.8:      Nerve Responsibility
Paranasal         Sense of smell
sinuses.
                 Foramina
                 The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

                  This nerve leaves the brain at the olfactory foramina in the cribiform plate of the
                    ethmoid bone, and then enters the olfactory bulb.

                 Location of the Nerve
                  The olfactory bulb is located on the roof of the nasal cavity, superior conchae, and

                    septum of nasal cavity. NOTE: The olfactory bulb contains more than 100 million olfac-
                    tory receptor cells.

                 Testing Nerve Function
                  Ask the patient to identify a substance (i.e., alcohol-soaked pad) or if he or she can

                    smell a certain thing such as coffee.
                  Test one nostril at a time.

                 Damage to the Nerve
                  Nasal obstruction or damage to the nerve impairs the sense of smell.
                  Examples of the types of things that can damage CN I include the following:

                     Tumors
                     Toxic exposures
62  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                       Base of skull fracture
                       Chronic rhinitis
                       Multiple sclerosis (MS)

                   Olfactory  Optic
            Oculomotor              Trigeminal
                                      Facial
             Trochlear                Glossopharyngeal
          Abducens                   Vagus
Vestibulocochlear
        Hypoglossal

                 Accessory

             FIGURE 3.1 Cranial nerves.

                  Terms to Know
                    Hyposmia: Decreased sense of smell
                    Anosmia: Absence of smell sensation
                    Dysosmia: Distortion of smell sensation

                       Cacosmia: Sensation of bad or foul smell
                       Parosmia: Sensation of smell in the absence of appropriate stimulus
                       Phantosmia: Perception of an odor when no olfactory stimulus is present.

Cranial Nerve II: Optic Nerve

                  Type of Nerve
                    Sensory nerve only

                  Nerve Responsibility
                    Vision

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.
                    Optic canal
                                                      PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  63

Figure 3.2: Eye  Location of the Nerve
anatomy.          The optic nerve conveys visual information to the brain from the information

                    received from the retina of the eye.
                  The optic nerve travels from the eye (retina) and exits the orbit via the optic canal.
                  The optic nerve can travel within an Onodi cell.

                     Onodi cells are part of the posterior ethmoid sinus cavity. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE:
                        It is important during endoscopic sinus surgery to avoid injury to the optic nerve

                        when dissecting the posterior ethmoid cells.

                 Superior palpebral conjunctiva:      Superior lacrimal
                       tarsal (Meibomian) glands      papilla and puncta
                                     shining through
                                                      Plica semilunaris
                                         Pupil
                                                      Lacrimal caruncle
                                 Cornea               in lacrimal lake

                    Limbus of cornea                  Inferior lacrimal
                                                      papilla and puncta
                   Bulbar conjunctiva
                             over sclera

                                  Inferior fornix
                                 of conjunctiva

                    Inferior palpebral conjunctiva:
                     tarsal glands shining through

FIGURE 3.2 Eye anatomy.

     Testing Nerve Function
      Visual fields

         Test for gross defects in the visual fields by the confrontation method:
           Have the patient cover the left eye with the left hand.
           The examiner places his or her right eye directly in front of the patient's open
              right eye (at a distance of approximately 40 inches or 1 m away).
           The patient fixes the right eye on the examiner's right eye.
           While the examiner and patient stay fixated, looking at each other in this posi-
              tion, the examiner moves a penlight, for example, slowly from behind the
              patient's head toward the front of the patient until the patient signifies the light
              can be seen. Many different radii along the visual fields can be evaluated.
           Repeat for the opposite eye.

      Visual acuity
         Using an eye chart, test each eye separately.

      Color vision
         Test each eye separately for color distinction.

     Damage to the Nerve
      Damage to the retina of the eye will result in a loss of input from that eye.
      Damage to the optic nerve will result in visual defect in the ipsilateral eye.
64  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                  Terms to Know
                    Anopsia: Defect in a visual field; blindness
                    Hemianopia: Defective vision or blindness in half of the visual fields of one or both

                      eyes usually signifies injury to the optic tract.

Cranial Nerve III: Oculomotor Nerve

                  Type of Nerve
                    Motor nerve only

                  Nerve Responsibilities
                    Eyelid, eyeball movement, and pupil constriction. NOTE: CN III, IV, and VI are all

                        responsible for eye movement.
                    There are two components of the oculomotor nerve with distinct functions. They are

                      as follows:
                       Somatic motor component: Responsible for the precise movement of the eyes and

                         for visual tracking or fixation on an object.
                       Visceral motor component: Responsible for pupil light and accommodation

                         reflexes.

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

                    Superior orbital fissure. NOTE: CN III, IV, and VI all exit the same foramina.

                  Location of the Nerve
                    The oculomotor nerve runs along the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus (along with

                      CN IV and VI).
                       The cavernous sinus cavity is bordered by the temporal bone of the skull and the

                         sphenoid bone. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The pituitary gland lies between the two-
                            paired cavernous sinuses. Tumors of the cavernous sinus or pituitary adenomas may
                            cause CN III, IV, and VI deficits.
                    The nerve exits the superior orbital fissure and innervates six muscles that are
                      responsible for raising the eyelid and eyeball movement.
                       The nerve also provides input that constricts the pupil.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                    Test eye movement for each eye separately by instructing the patient to hold the

                      head still and follow (only with the eyes) a finger while you make a large "H" sym-
                      bol in front of the patient's eye.
                    Look for ocular eye movements.
                    Test for pupillary reflex by shining a light into one eye (which should result in con-
                      striction of the other opposite eye simultaneously).

                  Damage to the Nerve
                    This results in oculomotor nerve palsy and the patient will be unable to move the

                      eye normally.

                  Terms to Know
                    Diplopia: Double vision
                    Mydriasis: Pupil dilation
                    Ptosis: Drooping of the upper or lower eyelid
                                                            PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  65

                    Strabismus: The eyes are not properly aligned with each other.
                       Hyperphoria: Misalignment of the eyes so that one eye is set higher than the
                         other.
                       Hypophoria: Misalignment of the eyes so that one eye is set lower than the
                         other.

                    Anisocoria: Unequal pupils

Cranial Nerve IV: Trochlear Nerve

                   The trochlear nerve innervates one single muscle only--the superior oblique muscle
                   of the eye.

                  Type of Nerve
                    Motor nerve only

                  Nerve Responsibilities
                    Responsible for eye movement, specifically downward movement of the eye. NOTE:

                        CN III, IV, and VI are all responsible for eye movement.

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

                    Superior orbital fissure. NOTE: CN III, IV, and VI exit the same foramina.

                  Location of the Nerve
                    The trochlear nerve runs along the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus (along with

                      CN III and VI).
                    The cavernous sinus cavity is bordered by the temporal bone of the skull and the

                      sphenoid bone. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The pituitary gland lies between the two-
                        paired cavernous sinuses. Tumors of the cavernous sinus or pituitary adenomas may
                        cause CN III, IV, and VI deficits.
                    From the cavernous sinus, the trochlear nerve enters the eye through the superior
                      orbital fissure.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                   To best isolate this CN:

                    Have the patient look downward toward the nose to test the superior oblique mus-
                      cle of the eye.

                  Damage to the Nerve
                    The trochlear nerve is the only nerve to exit from the dorsal aspect of the brain and

                      it has the longest intracranial course of any CN. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The tro-
                        chlear nerve is most susceptible to damage from intracranial lesions caused by trauma,
                        inflammatory disease, and compression.
                    Damage to the trochlear nerve may present as
                       Diplopia when looking downward
                       Weakness on downward gaze: The patient may complain about difficulty descend-

                         ing stairs or looking down.

                  Term to Know
                   Diplopia: Double vision
66  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

Cranial Nerve V: Trigeminal Nerve

Figure 2.2:       The trigeminal nerve (TN) is the largest CN.
Trigeminal
nerve and facial  Type of Nerve
nerve branches.    Both sensory and motor nerves
                   The sensory fibers form three nerves that provide sensory innervation to the head

                     via three branches. They are
                      V1: Ophthalmic branch
                      V2: Maxillary branch
                      V3: Mandibular branch
                   The motor fibers of the TN are distributed within the mandibular branch (V3).

Figure 3.3:       Nerve Responsibilities
Trigeminal        V1: Ophthalmic Branch
nerve branches:    Transmits nerve impulses from the cornea, skin of the forehead, scalp, eyelids, nose,
Sensory
distribution.        nasal cavity, and paranasal sinuses.

                  V2: Maxillary Branch
                   Receives sensory input from the skin over the maxilla, upper lip, maxillary teeth,

                     nasal mucosa, maxillary sinuses, and hard or soft palate.

                                                                                                            1st Branch:
                                                                                                            Ophthalmic (eye)

                                                                                                            2nd Branch:
                                                                                                            Maxillary (top jaw)

                                                                                                            3rd Branch:
                                                                                                            Mandibular (lower jaw)

FIGURE 3.3 Trigeminal nerve branches: Sensory distribution.
                                          PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  67

V3: Mandibular Branch
 This nerve branch has both sensory and motor functions.
 Sensory functions include the following:

    Receiving input from the skin over the chin, lower lip, side of the head, mandibu-
      lar teeth, temporomandibular joint (TMJ), inside the mouth, and the anterior two
      thirds of the tongue.

 Motor functions include the following:
    Innervating the muscles of mastication: These muscles are involved in biting,
      chewing, and swallowing.

Foramina
The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

V1: Ophthalmic Branch
 Leaves the brain at the superior orbital fissure.

V2: Maxillary Branch
 Leaves the brain at the foramen rotundum.

V3: Mandibular Branch
 Both sensory and motor fibers leave the brain at the foramen ovale.

Testing Nerve Function
 Sensory evaluation of all three branches of the TN involves examining symmetry of

   pain and light touch sensation from all areas.

V1: Ophthalmic Branch
 Examine pain (with a blunt pin) and light touch (with a cotton swab) to the fore-

   head.
 Evaluate corneal reflex by gently touching each cornea with a cotton wisp and

   observing any asymmetry in the blink response.

V2: Maxillary Branch
 Examine pain (with a blunt pin) and light touch (with a cotton swab) to the cheek.

V3: Mandibular Branch
 Sensory evaluation

    Examine pain (with a blunt pin) and light touch (with a cotton swab) to the jaw.
 Motor evaluation

    Compare the tone of the masseter muscles while the patient clenches his or her
      jaw. Assess for weakness. NOTE: Another way to assess the tone of the masseter
       muscle is to ask the patient to move the jaw from side to side against the resistance
       of your palm.

Damage to the Nerve
 Injury to the TN can cause the sensation of pain, throbbing, or burning.

    Examples of causes that can injure the TN include traumatic brain injury, stroke,
      and dental procedures.

 Other causes of TN disorders can include the following:
    Structural abnormalities such as tumors or arteriovenous malformations
    Inflammatory conditions such as MS and herpes zoster (shingles)
    Idiopathic conditions such as atypical facial pain syndrome
68  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                    Other associated symptoms can include the following:
                       Corneal drying
                       Decreased salivation
                       Numbness of the forehead, eyebrow, and/or nose.

                  Terms to Know
                    Dysesthesia: A numbness, crawling, or unpleasant sensation
                    Hypesthesia: A diminished sensation
                    Neuralgia: Sharp, shocking pain that follows the path of a nerve
                    Paresthesia: Abnormal sensation such as burning, prickling, or tingling

Cranial Nerve VI: Abducens Nerve

                   The abducens nerve innervates the lateral rectus muscle of the eye only. This muscle is
                   responsible for lateral movement of the eye (abduction).

                  Type of Nerve
                    Motor nerve only

                  Nerve Responsibilities
                    Responsible for eye movement, specifically lateral eye movement (abduction). NOTE:

                        CN III, IV, and VI are all responsible for eye movement.

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.
                    Superior orbital fissure. NOTE: CN III, IV, and VI exit the same foramina.

                  Location of the Nerve
                    The abducens nerve runs along the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus (along with

                      CN III and IV).
                       The cavernous sinus cavity is bordered by the temporal bone of the skull and the

                         sphenoid bone. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The pituitary gland lies between the two-
                            paired cavernous sinuses. Tumors of the cavernous sinus or pituitary adenomas may
                            cause CN III, IV, and VI deficits.
                    From the cavernous sinus, the abducens nerve enters the eye through the superior
                      orbital fissure.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                    Test eye movement for each eye separately by instructing the patient to hold the head

                      still and follow (only with the eyes) a finger while you make a large "H" symbol in
                      front of the patient's eye. Look specifically for lateral eye movement (abduction).

                  Damage to the Nerve
                    Damage to the abducens nerve results in weakness or paralysis of the lateral rectus

                      muscle of that eye.
                       The patient would not be able to abduct the affected eye beyond the midline of

                         gaze.
                       The patient would not be able to direct both eyes to an object located laterally.
                    In a complete injury of the abducens nerve, the affected eye is turned medially.
                    In an incomplete injury of the abducens nerve, the affected eye is seen at midline at
                      rest, but the patient cannot deviate the eye laterally.
                                 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  69

              Terms to Know
               Diplopia: Double vision. A common complaint on lateral gaze to the affected side
               Strabismus: Inability to direct both eyes to the same object

Cranial Nerve VII: Facial Nerve

Figure 2.2:   Type of Nerve
Trigeminal     Both sensory and motor nerve. NOTE: Primarily motor with small sensory component
nerve and
facial nerve  Nerve Responsibilities
branches.     The facial nerve has four components.
Figure 3.4:
Facial nerve  1. Branchial motor component:
motor and         Largest component of the facial nerve
sensory           Supplies the muscles of facial expression
components.       The brachial motor component includes the following branches:
                     Temporal branch: Supplies the muscle to the forehead
Figure 1.2:          Zytomatic branch: Supplies the orbicularis occuli muscle
Pinna.               Buccal branch: Supplies the muscles below the orbit and small muscles around
                       the nose and mouth
                     Mandibular branch: Supplies the muscles of the lower lip and chin

              2. Visceral motor component:
                  Innervates and stimulates secretion from the lacrimal gland (tears), submandibular
                    gland, sublingual gland, and mucous membranes of the nasopharynx, and hard and
                    soft palate.

              3. Special sensory component:
                  Taste sensation from the anterior two thirds of the tongue and hard and soft pal-
                    ates. NOTE: CN VII, IX, and X are all involved in taste sensation.

              4. General sensory component:
                  General sensation from the skin of the concha of the auricle and from a small area
                    behind the ear

              Foramina
              The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

               All of the components of the facial nerve go through the internal auditory meatus.
                 NOTE: The vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) also enters the internal auditory meatus.
                 CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Facial nerve deficits in conjunction with CN VIII deficits (i.e.,
                 balance or hearing problems) are characteristic of a lesion (e.g., acoustic neuroma) in
                 the region of the internal auditory meatus.

               Next, the nerve passes through the facial canal in the temporal bone.
               Then the nerve exits the stylomastoid foramen and enters the parotid gland, where

                 it branches off to different areas in the face. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Positive identifi-
                 cation and preservation of the facial nerve are essential in a superficial or total paroti-
                 dectomy.

              Location of the Nerve
               The course of the facial nerve runs along the roof of the inner ear, just posterior to the

                 cochlea. NOTE: Facial nerve palsies can present as a complication of otitis media (OM).
                 The palsy results from an inflammatory reaction. Also, in mastoiditis and with a cho-
                 lesteatoma, direct mass compression on the facial nerve can cause facial nerve palsy.
                 Viral infection (i.e., herpes zoster oticus) can result in facial paralysis and vesiculation
                 of ear. Bell's palsy is a condition that causes idiopathic facial nerve paralysis.
70  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                                                                                                                   Brachial motor
                                                                                                                   Visceral motor
                                                                                                                   Special sensory
                                                                                                                   General sensory

                                                                                                                      Internal
                                                                                                                      acoustic meatus

                                                                                                                                  Motor nucleus
                                                                                                                                  of facial nerve

                                                                                                                                 Posterior
                                                                                                                                 auricular branch

                                                                                                                             Stylomastoid foramen

FIGURE 3.4 Facial nerve motor and sensory components.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                   1. Branchial motor component:

                       Temporal branch: Ask the patient to wrinkle the forehead.
                       Zytomatic branch: Ask the patient to close the eyes tightly.
                       Buccal branch: Ask the patient to puff the cheeks and smile.
                       Mandibular branch: Ask the patient to frown or protrude the lower lip.
                   2. Visceral motor component:
                       Ask the patient if he or she has any abnormalities with saliva secretion. NOTE: Keep

                            in mind that there are many other contributing factors for saliva secreting abnormali-
                            ties. Facial nerve palsies that affect the visceral motor component of the facial nerve
Figure 1.2:                                            PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  71
Pinna.
                    usually affect other nerve components as well (i.e., the patient with facial nerve palsy
                    will likely not present just with saliva secreting abnormalities).
             3. Special sensory component:
                 Evaluate taste sensation from the anterior two thirds of the tongue by applying
                   sugar, salt, or lemon juice on a cotton swab to the lateral aspects of each side of the
                   tongue. Have the patient identify the taste. NOTE: Realistically, this is time consum-
                    ing and difficult to do during a regular office visit. Instead, just ask the patient if he
                    or she is having any problems with taste. NOTE: CN VII, IX, and X are all involved in
                    taste sensation.
             4. General sensory component:
                 Evaluate general sensation by using a dull pin to prick the skin of the concha of
                   the auricle and from a small area behind the ear. Compare to contralateral side.

             Damage to the Nerve
             Damage to the facial nerve can include (but is not limited to) the following:

              If the zygomatic branch is impaired, there may be an inability to blink or produce
                tears.

              If unable to move the buccal or mandibular branch, it may be difficult to eat, drink,
                or talk.

              Complete or partial paralysis of the face will result in impairment with facial expression.
              Damage to the special sensory component of the facial nerve may lead to unusual or

                impaired sense of taste. NOTE: Many facial nerve injuries have the capability to recover
                on their own without surgery.

             Terms to Know
             Hypoesthesia: Reduced sense of touch
             Paresis: Weakness or partial loss of voluntary movement
             Paralysis: Complete or total loss of voluntary movement
             Xerostomia: Subjective complaint of dry mouth, which may or may not be associated
             with lack of saliva.

Cranial Nerve VIII: Vestibulocochlear Nerve

Figure 1.3:  NOTE: The vestibulocochlear nerve is also known as the "acoustic nerve."
External,
middle, and  Type of Nerve
inner ear.    Sensory nerve only

Figure 2.4:  Nerve Responsibilities
Middle and    The nerve has two sensory divisions:
inner ear.
                 Vestibular nerve: Transmits balance information from the semicircular canals in
                   the inner ear to the brain.

                 Cochlear nerve: Transmits sound information from the cochlea (particularly the
                   organ of Corti) in the inner ear to the brain.

             Foramina
             The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

              Both the vestibular and cochlear nerves leave the brain via the internal auditory
                canal (IAC). NOTE: The facial nerve (CN VII) also enters the internal auditory meatus.
72  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

Figure 2.4:       NOTE: Facial nerve deficits in conjunction with CN VIII deficits (i.e., balance or hearing
Middle and        problems) are characteristic of a lesion (e.g., acoustic neuroma) in the region of the
inner ear.        internal auditory meatus.

Chapter 8:     Location of the Nerve
Under-          The opening of the IAC is located on the posterior aspect of the temporal bone and
standing
Vestibular        is approximately 10 to 17 mm in length.
Testing            The IAC contains the facial, vestibular, and cochlear nerves, and the surrounding
section.
Chapter 1:           blood vessels. NOTE: All three nerves (vestibular, cochlear, and facial nerves) have a
Under-                common anatomical course within the IAC, but they do not have common functions.
standing        Connections between the different nerves can exist; for example:
Rinne and          The presence of vertigo after vestibular or cochlear surgery
Weber              There is a higher incidence of vestibular problems in patients who have Bell's
Tuning Fork          palsy.
Test section.  1. Vestibular nerve:
                  The vestibular nerve further divides into three branches:
                   Superior vestibular nerve branch: Supplies the superior semicircular canal, lateral
                     semicircular canal, and utricle
                   Inferior vestibular nerve branch: Supplies the saccule of the inner ear
                   Posterior vestibular nerve branch: Supplies the posterior semicircular canal.
                   NOTE: The superior, inferior, and posterior vestibular nerve join to form a common
                      bundle, which enters the brainstem.
               2. Cochlear nerve:
                   The cochlear nerve arises from within the cochlea and extends through the IAC
                     to the brainstem.

               Testing Nerve Function
               1. Vestibular nerve:

                   Basic evaluation of the vestibular nerve involves a quick examination to see if the
                     patient has good balance.
                      Romberg test

                   A thorough evaluation of the vestibular system requires several different kinds
                     of tests.

               2. Cochlear nerve:
                   Screen for auditory acuity.
                      Lightly rub your fingers together next to the patient's ears comparing right and
                        left response.
                      Test for lateralization, air, and bone conduction with the Rinne or Weber test.

               Damage to the Nerve
               Damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve can result in hearing loss and balance issues.

               Terms to Know
               Dizziness: Impairment in stability. The term "dizziness" is not specific to the vestibu-
               lar system of the inner ear.
               Presbycusis: Age-related hearing loss
               Vertigo: Perception of motion (usually spinning) due to dysfunction of the vestibular
               system

Cranial Nerve IX: Glossopharyngeal Nerve

Figure 2.3:    Type of Nerve
Glosso-         Both sensory and motor nerve
pharyngeal
nerve.
                                          PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  73

Nerve Responsibilities
There are five components of the glossopharyngeal nerve--two motor and three sensory.

1. Branchial motor component:
    Provides voluntary control of the stylopharyngeus muscle. This muscle elevates
      the larynx, pharynx during speech, and dilates the pharynx to allow passages of
      food, which helps in swallowing.

2. Visceral motor component:
    Innervates parasympathetic fibers to the smooth muscle glands of the pharynx,
      larynx, and the parotid gland. Example of this component's function includes pro-
      duction of saliva in response to the smell of food.

3. Visceral sensory component:
    Transmits information from the carotid sinus and carotid body (near carotid
      artery). Helps to regulate blood pressure

4. General sensory component:
    Provides information about pain temperature and touch from the skin of the exter-
      nal ear, internal surface of the tympanic membrane, upper pharynx, and posterior
      one third of the tongue (which can cause the patient to gag).

5. Special sensory component:
    Provides taste sensation from the posterior one third of the tongue. NOTE: CN VII,
       IX, and X are all involved in taste sensation.

Foramina
The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

 Jugular foramen (at the base of the skull)

Location of the Nerve
 The glossopharyngeal nerve travels anterior to the vagus (CN X) and accessory

   nerves (CN XI), which also exit the skull via the jugular foramen.

Testing Nerve Function
1. Branchial motor component:

    Look for any difficulty with muscle control during speech.
    To test the motor division of the glossopharyngeal nerve and vagus nerve (CN X),

      have the patient say "ahh" or "kah." The palate should rise symmetrically.
    Ask the patient if he or she has any swallowing abnormalities.
2. Visceral motor component:
    Ask the patient if he or she has any abnormalities with saliva secretion. NOTE: Keep

       in mind that there are many other contributing factors for saliva secretion abnormalities.
       NOTE: Glossopharyngeal nerve palsies that affect the visceral motor component of the
       nerve usually affect other nerve components as well (i.e., the patient with glossopha-
       ryngeal palsy will likely not present just with saliva secreting abnormalities).
3. Visceral sensory component:
    Any abnormalities with this component of the nerve should be further managed
      through primary care or a cardiologist.
4. General sensory component:
    The gag reflex tests both the sensory and motor components of the hypoglossal
      and vagus (CN X) nerve.
       Only the afferent fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve (which carries sensory

         information to the central nervous system) is involved in the gag reflex.
       The motor component of the gag reflex is innervated by the vagus nerve.
    The gag reflex is an involuntary reflex. It is obtained by stroking the back of the
      pharynx with a tongue depressor and watching the palate elevate.
74  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

               5. Special sensory component:
                   Evaluate taste sensation from the anterior two thirds of the tongue by applying
                     sugar, salt, or lemon juice on a cotton swab to the lateral aspects of each side of the
                     tongue. Have the patient identify the taste. NOTE: Realistically, this is time consum-
                      ing and difficult to do during a regular office visit. Instead, just ask the patient if he
                      or she is having any problems with taste. NOTE: CN VII, IX, and X are all involved in
                      taste sensation.

               Damage to the Nerve
                Loss of function to the glossopharyngeal nerve is rare but can occur after surgery to

                  the hypopharynx (e.g., tonsillectomy or uvulopalatopharyngoplasty [UPPP]).
                Glossopharyngeal palsy can occur in conjunction with vagus and accessory nerve

                  involvement, since all these nerves pass through the jugular foramen.
                   On leaving the jugular foramen, these nerves lie adjacent to the internal carotid

                     artery, where they can be damaged by dissection of that vessel. NOTE: CN IX, X, and
                      XI pathways are physically so close together that isolated lesions are rarely seen.

               Terms to Know
               Ageusia: Loss of taste functions of the tongue
               Dysgeusia: Distortion of sense of taste
               Dysphagia: Difficulty swallowing
               Odynophagia: Painful swallowing
               Paresis: Weakness of voluntary movement or partial loss of voluntary movement
               Paralysis: Total loss of function of one or more muscles
               Xerostomia: Subjective complaint of dry mouth, which may or may not be associated
               with lack of saliva

Cranial Nerve X: Vagus Nerve

Figure 3.5:    The vagus nerve is the longest CN. It is the only CN that extends beyond the head and
Vagus nerve    neck, and also supplies the thorax and abdomen.
distribution.

               Type of Nerve
                Both sensory and motor nerve

               Nerve Responsibilities
               There are five components of the vagus nerve--two motor and three sensory.

               Most motor fibers are parasympathetic fibers to the heart, lungs, and visceral organs.
               1. Branchial motor component:

                   The vagus nerve plays a role in speech and swallowing by supplying the volun-
                     tary muscles of the pharynx and larynx as well as one muscle of the tongue.
                      Palatoglossus muscle of the tongue elevates the back of the tongue.
                      The rest of the tongue muscles are innervated by the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII).

                   The branchial motor component of the vagus nerve has three major branches as
                     follows:
                      Pharyngeal branch:
                       Primary motor nerve of the pharynx
                      Superior laryngeal nerve:
                       Primary sensory nerve of the larynx
                      Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN):
                       Responsible for both abduction and adduction of the vocal cords
Vagus nerve                           PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  75

Superior and inferior                               Pharyngeal branch
      vagal ganglions                               Laryngeal
                                                    branches

       Cardiac branch                 Heart

      Pulmonary plexus                                           Lung
               Esophageal plexus                              Celiac plexus

Stomach                                                                           Spleen
   Liver

                                             Small intestine  Kidney

    Colon

FIGURE 3.5 Vagus nerve distribution.
76  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                     NOTE: Unilateral damage to the RLN can occur during surgical procedures in the neck
                     (e.g., thyroidectomy), resulting in hoarseness due to unilateral weakness or paralysis of
                     the muscles controlling the vocal fold on the affected side. A paratracheal lymph node (as
                     can be seen in metastatic lung cancer) can also lead to compression of the left RLN with
                     similar results.

                   2. Visceral motor component:
                       Parasympathetic stimulation of the smooth muscles and glands of the pharynx,
                         larynx, and viscera of the thorax and abdomen
                       Results in slower heart rate, bronchoconstriction, and stimulates increased secre-
                         tions and motility of the gastrointestinal tract

                   3. Visceral sensory component:
                       Provides sensory information from the larynx, esophagus, trachea, and abdomi-
                         nal and thoracic viscera as well as stretch receptors of the aortic arch and chemore-
                         ceptors of the aortic bodies (which sense aortic blood pressure)

                   4. General sensory component:
                       Provides general sensory information (pain, temperature, and touch) from the
                         skin of the back of the ear and external auditory meatus, parts of the tympanic
                         membrane, and pharynx

                   5. Special sensory component:
                       Provides taste sensation from the epiglottic region. NOTE: CN VII, IX, and X are all
                            involved in taste sensation.

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

                    The nerve emerges from the medulla and travels with the fibers of the glossopharyn-
                      geal nerve (CN IX) and the accessory nerve (CN XI) through the jugular foramen.

                  Location of the Nerve
                    Upon exiting the jugular foramen at the base of the skull, the vagus nerve travels

                      between the internal jugular vein and internal carotid artery within the carotid sheath.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                    To test the motor division of the glossopharyngeal nerve and vagus nerve (CN X),

                      have the patient say "ahh" or "kah." The palate should rise symmetrically.
                    The gag reflex tests both the sensory and motor components of the hypoglossal and

                      vagus (CN X) nerve.
                       The motor component of the gag reflex is innervated by the vagus nerve.
                       Only the afferent fibers (which carry sensory information to the central nervous

                         system) by the glossopharyngeal nerve are involved in the gag reflex.

                  Damage to the Nerve
                   The vagus nerve extends all the way from the brain to the abdomen. Therefore, symp-
                   toms of damage to the vagus nerve depend on the severity of damage, location of
                   injury, and whether nearby blood vessels were affected.

                          Damage to the nerve can cause:

                    Vocal changes
                    Dysphagia
                    Hearing loss
                    Change in gag reflex (which can lead to choking)
                    Cardiovascular problems
                    Digestive problems
                                                            PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES  77

                          Head and neck vagus nerve abnormalities include the following:

                    Hoarseness and dysphagia:
                       Due to paralysis of the laryngeal muscles and the inability to elevate the soft pal-
                         ate on the affected side
                       Causes can include:
                       Trauma from a surgical procedure of the neck
                       Aortic aneurysm
                       Compression of the nerve from an enlarged paratracheal lymph node

                    The left RLN may be damaged as a result of thoracic disease.
                       The left RLN originates from the left vagus nerve and passes under the arch of
                         the aorta.

                    Neoplastic or nonneoplastic disorders interrupting the intracranial portion may
                      cause the following:
                       Drooping of the soft palate
                       Speech disorders because the soft palate may not rise during phonation

                     NOTE: CN IX, X, and XI pathways are physically so close together that isolated lesions are
                     rarely seen.

                  Terms to Know
                   Aphonia: Inability to produce vocal sounds
                   Dysphagia: Difficulty swallowing
                   Dysphonia: Inability to produce voice sounds using the vocal organs
                   Vocal cord paresis: Weakness of one or both vocal cords
                   Vocal cord paralysis: Inability to move one or both vocal cords

Cranial Nerve XI: Spinal Accessory Nerve

                  Type of Nerve
                    Motor nerve only

                  Nerve Responsibilities
                   There are two roots to this nerve.
                   1. Branchial motor cranial root:

                       Innervates the muscles of the larynx and pharynx
                          Controls swallowing movements. NOTE:The glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and vagus
                               (CN X) nerves also play a role in swallowing.

                   2. Branchial motor spinal root:
                       Innervates the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM)
                          Provides voluntary control of head and neck movement

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.

                    The glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), vagus nerve (CN X), and spinal accessory
                      nerve leave the skull together through the jugular foramen and then are distributed
                      peripherally.

                  Location of the Nerve
                   1. Branchial motor cranial root:

                       Fibers of this root originate from the medulla.
78  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                   2. Branchial motor spinal root:
                       Fibers of this root originate from the upper spinal cord segments (C1-5) and
                         ascend into the skull to join the cranial root. NOTE: After passing through the jugu-
                            lar foramen, the two roots separate almost immediately.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                    Ask the patient to shrug the shoulders (trapezius muscle) and turn the head (SCM)

                      against your hand resistance.

                  Damage to the Nerve
                    Damage to CN XI results in weakness or paralysis of the SCM and/or trapezius

                      muscles.
                    Weakness of the SCM will result in difficulty turning the head against resistance.
                    Weakness of the trapezius muscle will result in a shoulder drop. NOTE: CN IX, X, and

                        XI pathways are physically so close together that isolated lesions are rarely seen.

                  Terms to Know
                   Paresis: Weakness of voluntary movement or partial loss of voluntary movement
                   Paralysis: Total loss of muscle function of one or more muscles

Cranial Nerve XII: Hypoglossal Nerve

                  Type of Nerve
                    Motor nerve only

                  Nerve Responsibilities
                    Supplies three of the four muscles that control tongue movement

                       Genioglossus muscle: Protrudes the tongue
                       Styloglossus muscle: Retracts and elevates the tongue
                       Hypoglossus muscle: Causes the upper surface of the tongue to convex
                     NOTE: The vagus nerve (CN X) controls only one tongue muscle. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE:
                     The muscles of the tongue contribute to speech and swallowing abilities.

                  Foramina
                   The foramina are where the nerve exits the brain.
                    Hypoglossal canal (in the occipital bone)

                  Location of the Nerve
                    The nerve arises from the medulla and exits the skull via the hypoglossal canal.

                  Testing Nerve Function
                    Have the patient stick out the tongue and move it side to side.
                    Further testing includes:

                       Moving the tongue right and left against resistance
                       Having the patient say "la la la."

                  Damage to the Nerve
                    If there is unilateral weakness with the nerve, the protruded tongue will deviate

                      toward the side of the weakness.
                                                            CRANIAL NERVE DEFICITS OF THE HEAD AND NECK  79

                  Terms to Know
                   Paresis: Weakness of voluntary movement or partial loss of voluntary movement
                   Paralysis: Total loss of muscle function of one or more muscles

CRANIAL NERVE DEFICITS OF THE HEAD AND NECK

Cranial Nerve I: Olfactory Nerve Deficits

                  Causes of Olfactory Nerve Disorders
                    Major Causes of Smell Disorders
                    Nasal and paranasal sinus disease:

                       Related to
                       Obstruction of nasal passages
                       Restriction of airflow to the olfactory neuroepithelium
                       Excess mucus from diseased cells can cause an odor

                    Upper respiratory tract infections:
                       Consider especially if smell disorder is sudden in onset.

                    Head trauma:
                       Can lead to permanent anosmia.

                    Inhalation of chemicals:
                       Can cause direct damage to the olfactory receptor cells.

                    Other Causes of Smell Disorders
                    Nasal polyps
                    Tumors (e.g., of the frontal lobe)
                    Fractures of the cribiform plate of the ethmoid bone
                    Radiation
                    Other health issues such as Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease (most common).
                    Certain medications

Cranial Nerve II: Optic Nerve Deficits

                  Causes of Optic Nerve Disorders
                    Trauma

                       Sinus surgery (particularly posterior ethmoid and sphenoid endoscopic sinus sur-
                         gery)

                       Compression from edema or orbital bone fragments
                       Bone fractures of the optic canal
                    Aneurysm of the internal carotid artery
                       Causing vascular compromise of the optic canal
                    Cranial arteritis
                       Inflammation along the lining of arteries within the skull that can block blood

                         flow to the optic nerve
                       Diabetes is one of the conditions that can cause this.
                    Pituitary gland tumor
                    Hematomas involving the optic nerve
                    Autoimmune diseases (e.g., multiple sclerosis (MS) and lupus)
                    Infections (e.g., herpes zoster, meningitis, syphilis, encephalitis, and sinusitis, espe-
                      cially sphenoid)
80  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

Cranial Nerve III: Oculomotor Nerve Deficits

                  Causes of Oculomotor Nerve Disorders

                     NOTE: Depending on the location of damage, different muscle groups may be affected,
                     which produces different patterns of presentation.

                    Congenital oculomotor palsy
                    Idiopathic
                    Trauma
                    Compression on the nerve
                    Loss of blood supply to the nerve (e.g., aneurysm)
                    Vascular disorders (diabetes, heart disease, atherosclerosis, etc.)
                    Inflammation
                    Infection
                    Tumors
                    Demyelinating disease (e.g., MS)
                    Autoimmune diseases (e.g., myasthenia gravis)
                    Cavernous sinus thrombosis

Cranial Nerve IV: Trochlear Nerve Deficits

                  Causes of Trochlear Nerve Disorders
                    Idiopathic
                    Trauma (most common cause)
                    Compression on the nerve
                    Loss of blood supply to the nerve (e.g., aneurysm)
                    Vascular disorders (diabetes, heart disease, atherosclerosis, etc.)
                    Inflammation
                    Infection
                    Tumors
                    Demyelinating disease (e.g., MS)
                    Autoimmune diseases (e.g., myasthenia gravis)
                    Cavernous sinus thrombosis

Cranial Nerve V: Trigeminal Nerve Deficits

                  Trigeminal Nerve Disorder: Herpetic and Postherpetic Neuralgia
                    Overview of Herpes Zoster
                    Caused by the varicella zoster virus.
                    The virus infects the TN in childhood as chickenpox.
                    The virus remains dormant in the nerve ganglia for decades and can be reactivated

                      years later by stress or immune compromise.

                    Overview of Postherpetic Neuralgia
                    Postherpetic neuralgia occurs when the nerves have been damaged after an out-

                      break of herpes zoster.
                    More likely to occur in the older population, above 50 years of age.

                    Associated Symptoms of Herpes Zoster
                    Pain (excruciating)
                    Small, crusting pustules on the skin
                                          CRANIAL NERVE DEFICITS OF THE HEAD AND NECK  81

 Burning
 Itching
 Possible facial weakness
 A secondary infection can occur
 Ocular palsies, tinnitus, or hearing loss can occur

Associated Symptoms of Postherpetic Neuralgia
 Pain that lasts for more than a month after a herpes zoster infection occurred
 The pain can last months to years

Pharmacotherapy Options
Herpes Zoster
Episodes of herpes zoster are generally self-limited and resolve without intervention.
However, pharmacotherapy considerations can include the following:

 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
 Opioid analgesics
 Consider oral prednisone taper
 Antiviral therapy (should be started within the first 24 hours of symptom onset) is

   most beneficial in those patient populations at risk for prolonged severe symptoms,
   specifically immune compromised and persons older than 50 years.
    Valtrex (valacyclovir): Adults: 1,000 mg by mouth three times a day  7 days
    Zovirax (acyclovir): Adults: 800 mg by mouth four times a day  5 to 7 days

Postherpetic Neuralgia
 Tricyclic antidepressants
 Topical lidocaine patches may be helpful.

Prevention
 A herpes zoster vaccine is available and adults above the age of 50 years should get

   the vaccine.
 One shot of the vaccine can cut the risk of getting shingles by about half.
 The vaccine may also help prevent postherpetic neuralgia and ophthalmic herpes.

Links and Sources
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov/shingles/index.html

Trigeminal Nerve Disorder: Trigeminal Neuralgia
Overview
 Usually in older patients more than 50 years of age

    However, trigeminal neuralgia may be a manifestation of MS in younger indi-
      viduals.

 Intermittent, sudden, severe, brief, stabbing/sharp, or jabbing pain that occurs in the
   distributing of one or more divisions of the TN.

 Symptoms usually last a few seconds and tend to only occur on one side of the
   face.

Associated Symptoms
 The pain may be localized.
 Symptoms may be provoked by the slightest touch.

    Main trigger locations that can provoke an attack are the lateral aspect of the nose
      and the corner of the mouth.
82  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                    Examination Findings
                    The pain is most often localized to the second or third divisions (maxillary or man-

                      dibular branch) of the TN.
                    Trigeminal neuralgia is not associated with the following:

                       Loss of corneal reflex
                       Facial numbness
                       Change in smell or taste

                    Workup
                   Imaging Workup
                    MRI head with and without contrast. NOTE: Consider referring the patient to a neu-

                        rologist and/or pain management specialist at the same time you order the MRI.
                       If no cause is found when the MRI is done and symptoms are persistent, the patient

                         will need further workup and medications to treat the condition (this should be
                         done by the neurologist or pain management specialist).
                    Further workup may include a lumbar puncture. However, trigeminal neuralgia
                      management usually starts with medications.

                    Pharmacotherapy Options
                   Adjunct Therapy Options (Until the Patient Can Be Seen by a Neurologist or Pain
                   Management Specialist)
                    Antidepressants
                    NSAIDs
                    Opiates are seldom effective

                   Medication Management Through Neurologist or Pain Management Specialist
                    Goal of medications: Lessen or block the pain signals to the brain
                    Types of medications usually prescribed include the following:

                       Anticonvulsants: Tegretol, Carbatrol, Trileptal, Klonopin, Neurontin, and so on.
                       Antispasmodics (muscle relaxing agents)

                    Surgical Options
                    A neurosurgeon does the surgery for trigeminal neuralgia.
                    Surgery is considered when medications cannot control the pain.
                    Surgery is not effective 100% of the time. Even after surgery, the pain can return

                      months or years later.

                   Goal of Surgery
                   The goal of surgery is to stop the blood vessel from compressing the TN or to damage
                   the TN to keep it from malfunctioning. However, damaging the nerve often causes
                   temporary or permanent facial numbness.

                   Type of Surgeries Performed
                    Gamma knife radiosurgery (most common type)

                       Direct radiation to the root of the TN
                    Microvascular decompression

                       Relocates blood vessels that are in contact with the trigeminal root

                   Management Considerations
                    Patients can go into spontaneous remission periods that can last days, months, or

                      sometimes many years at a time.
                                                           CRANIAL NERVE DEFICITS OF THE HEAD AND NECK  83

                 Links and Sources
                  Temporal Neuritis Association: The Facial Pain Association: www.fpa-support.org
                  The Facial Pain Research Association: www.facingfacialpain.org
                  American Pain Society: www.ampainsoc.org
                  Facial Neuralgia Resources: www.facial-neuralgia.org
                  Trigeminal Neuralgia: Diagnostic Questionnaire: neurosurgery.ohsu.edu/tgn.php

                 Trigeminal Nerve Disorder: Trigeminal Nerve Schwannomas
                 Overview
                  TN schwannomas involve the cerebellopontine angle (CPA) or arise from the root

                    of the TN.

                 Associated Symptoms
                  Decreased sensation (hypesthesia) on one side of the face
                  Paresthesias
                  Neuralgia
                  Difficulty chewing or biting

                 Workup
                  Same as trigeminal neuralgia

                 Surgical Options
                  A neurosurgeon does the surgery for TN schwannomas.
                  Surgery is based on the severity of symptoms and the location of the schwannoma.

Cranial Nerve VI: Abducens Nerve Deficits

                  Causes of Abducens Nerve Disorders
                    Idiopathic
                    Trauma
                    Compression on the nerve
                    Loss of blood supply to the nerve (e.g., aneurysm)
                    Vascular disorders (diabetes, heart disease, atherosclerosis, etc.)
                    Inflammation
                    Infection
                    Tumors
                    Demyelinating disease (e.g., MS)
                    Autoimmune diseases (e.g., myasthenia gravis)
                    Cavernous sinus thrombosis

Cranial Nerve VII: Facial Nerve Deficits

See Chapter 4:   Causes of Facial Nerve Disorders
Evaluation and    Bell's palsy
Management        Ramsay Hunt syndrome
of Facial Nerve
Conditions.
84  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

Cranial Nerve VIII: Vestibulocochlear Nerve Deficits

Chapter 5:      Causes of Vestibulocochlear Nerve Disorders
Evaluation and
Management      Vestibular Disorders                     Cochlear Disorders
of Hearing and
Tinnitus.        Vestibular labyrinthitis                 Sensorineural hearing loss
                 Vestibular neuronitis                    Noise-induced hearing loss
Chapter 8:       Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo     Hearing loss due to barotrauma
Evaluation and   Superior semicircular canal dehiscence   Hearing loss due to autoimmune
Management       Otological tumors: Benign or malignant
of Inner Ear     Meniere's disease and perilymph            disorders
Conditions.                                               Tinnitus: Technically, this is a disorder
                   fistulas
                 Otic vascular occlusion                    of the brain looking for input from
                 Ototoxicity                                the cochlea.
                 Autoimmune inner ear disease

Cranial Nerve IX: Glossopharyngeal Nerve Deficits

                    Trauma to the glossopharyngeal nerve after surgery to the hypopharynx (e.g., ton-
                      sillectomy or uvulopalatopharyngoplasty [UPPP]) is rare but can occur (Bailey &
                      Johnson, 2001).

                    Glossopharyngeal palsy can occur in conjunction with vagus and accessory nerve
                      involvement, since all the nerves pass through the jugular foramen.
                       On leaving the jugular foramen, these nerves lie adjacent to the internal carotid
                         artery, where they can be damaged by dissection of that vessel. NOTE: CN IX, X, and
                            XI pathways are physically so close together that isolated lesions are rarely seen.

                  Glossopharyngeal Nerve Disorder: Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia
                    Overview
                    Resembles trigeminal neuralgia in many aspects, except that the unilateral stabbing

                      pain is localized to the root of the tongue and throat
                    Less common than trigeminal neuralgia

                    Associated Symptoms
                    Unilateral transient stabbing pain localized to the root of the tongue and tonsillar

                      fossa
                    May be associated with pain at the angle of the jaw and external auditory meatus

                      (which involves the vagus nerve, CN X)
                    May be triggered by coughing, sneezing, swallowing, chewing, talking, laughing,

                      yawning, and/or pressure of the tragus of the ear

                    Exam Findings
                    Pain is elicited on palpation of the triggered sites.

                    Workup
                    To confirm diagnosis (can only be done during an acute attack)

                       Anesthetize the tonsillar fauces and posterior pharynx with 10% lidocaine spray,
                         which temporarily blocks the pain: may not be successful in all cases.

                    The workup is the same as for trigeminal neuralgia.

                    Pharmacotherapy Options
                    Treatment options are the same as for trigeminal neuralgia.
                CRANIAL NERVE DEFICITS OF THE HEAD AND NECK  85

                Surgical Options
                 Microvascular decompression of the glossopharyngeal nerve may be considered.

                    Performed by neurosurgeon
                    Permanent weakness and potentially paralysis of structures that involve the nerve

                      can occur

                Management Considerations
                 Patient will likely need referral to neurologist and pain management specialists.

                Links and Sources
                 Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia Patient Support Group: www.livingwithgpn.org

Cranial Nerve X: Vagus Nerve Deficits--Head and Neck

                     NOTE: CN IX, X, and XI pathways are physically so close together that isolated lesions are
                     rarely seen.

                Head and Neck Vagus Nerve Disorder: Laryngeal Neuralgia
                 Rare
                 Intermittent pain is localized over the upper portion of the thyroid cartilage or hyoid

                   bone on one or both sides
                 Triggered by sneezing, talking, coughing, or yawning

Chapter 22:     Head and Neck Vagus Nerve Disorder: Unilateral and Bilateral Vocal Cord
Evaluation and  Paralysis
Management      VC paresis (weakness) or paralysis can be unilateral or bilateral. When the VCs do
of Larynx and   not move normally, it can result in a weak, breathy hoarse voice, and airway compro-
Hypopharynx     mise leading to reduced airway protection. VC immobility is a physical finding and
Disorders       not a diagnosis. It is important to determine the cause of the immobility, if able. With
                bilateral vocal fold paralysis (BVCP), the majority of the time, it is caused by surgical
                injury.

                Vagus Nerve Disorder: Vasovagal
                Overview
                 Also called neurocardiogenic syncope or "fainting."
                 Regardless of the trigger, the brainstem is activated by the triggering stimulus, which

                   results in the enhancement of the parasympathetic nervous system and withdrawal
                   of the sympathetic nervous system of the vagus nerve.
                    This causes cerebral hypoperfusion (the brain does not get enough oxygen due to

                      lack of blood supply).
                 Most cases are benign and not life-threatening.
                 It is important to identify cardiac or other causes that can mimic syncope, such as

                   the following:
                    Hemorrhage
                    Diabetes (hypoglycemic episode)
                    Stroke (cerebrovascular accident)
                    Arrhythmia
                    Cardiac disease
                    Metabolic imbalance (hypoxemia, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, etc.)
                    Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
                    Abdominal aortic aneurysm
86  3. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE CRANIAL NERVES FOR THE HEAD AND NECK

                    Associated Symptoms
                    Symptoms may last for a few seconds or minutes.
                    Loss of consciousness is possible.
                    Recovery is usually spontaneous or within a few seconds to minutes of onset.
                    General symptoms include the following:

                       Nausea
                       Light-headedness
                       Diaphoresis
                       Uncomfortable feeling in general
                       Weakness
                       Pale
                       Tunnel vision
                       Nervous sensation

                   Red Flag Symptoms That May Indicate Need for Further Workup
                    Severe headache
                    Chest pain
                    Dyspnea
                    Low back pain
                    Heart palpitations
                    Diplopia
                    Neurological deficits
                    Post-event confusion (could indicate seizure)

Cranial Nerve XI: Spinal Accessory Nerve Deficits

                     NOTE : CN IX, X, and XI pathways are physically so close together that isolated lesions
                     are rarely seen.

                  Causes of Spinal Accessory Nerve Disorders
                    Spinal cord tumors
                    Poliomyelitis: Viral disease that can affect the nerves and lead to partial or full

                      paralysis
                    Syringomyelia: Fluid-filled hole in the spinal cord that compresses and causes dam-

                      age
                    Glomus tumors
                    Neurofibromas: Benign nerve sheath tumor
                    Tumors at the foramen magnum
                    Surgical operations or injury in the posterior triangle of the neck

Cranial Nerve XII: Hypoglossal Nerve Deficits

                  Causes of Hypoglossal Nerve Disorders
                    Lesions of the hypoglossal nerve roots are rare.
                    Poliomyelitis and motor system disease: Viral disease that can affect the nerves and

                      lead to partial or full paralysis
                    Lesions of the occipital bone or bone abnormality at the base of the skull
                    Stroke (CVA)
                    Brainstem infection
                    Neck injury
                    Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease): Can cause twitching move-

                      ments on the surface of the tongue
                                                                                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY  87

                    Surgical operations of the neck. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The hypoglossal nerve is at
                        risk when the submandibular gland (SMG) is resected, because the nerve is inferior and
                        deep to the SMG.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Agur, A. M. R., & Dalley, A. F. (2004). The cranial nerves. In A. M. R. Agur & A. F. Dalley (Eds), Grant's
                   atlas of anatomy (pp. 793-824). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

            Bailey, B., & Johnson, J. (2001). Head and neck surgery -- otolaryngology (4th ed., Vol. 2., p. 575, Chapter 41:
                   Taste). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

            Bickley, L. S. (1999). Bates, guide to physical examination and history taking (7th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lip-
                   pincott.

            Blumenfeld, H. (2002). Neuroanatomy through clinical cases. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
            Campbell, K. (1997). Essential audiology for physicians. San Diego, CA: Singulair.
            Chen, N., Li, Q., Zhang, Y., Zhou, M., Zhou, D., & He, L. (2013). Vaccination for preventing postherpetic

                   neuralgia. Cochrane Database System Review, February 9; 3, CD007795.
            Gaul, C., Hastreiter, P., Duncker, A., & Naraghi, R. (2011). Diagnosis and neurosurgical treatment of

                   glossopharyngeal neuralgia: Clinical findings and 3-D visualization of neurovascular compression
                   in 19 consecutive patients. Journal of Headache and Pain, 12, 527-534.
            Jafek, B. W., & Stark, A. K. (1996). ENT secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus.
            Kolb, B., & Ian, W. (2011). An introduction to brain and behaviour (2nd ed.). New York: Worth.
            Lalwani, A. K. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery. New York:
                   McGraw-Hill.
            Lee, K. J. (1999). Essential otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
            Mayo Clinic. (2012). Trigeminal neuralgia. Retrieved from http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/trigemi-
                   nal-neuralgia/DS00446/DSECTION=treatments%2Dand%2Ddrugs. February 4, 2013.
            Moon, M. A. (February 2011) Herpes zoster vaccine effective in real practice. Family Practice News.
            Sooy, C. D., & Boles, R. (1991). Neuroanatomy for the otolaryngologist head and neck surgeon. In M. M.
                   Paparella & D. A. Shumrick (Eds), Otolaryngology: Basic sciences and related principles (pp. 132-134).
                   Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
            Taha, J. M., & Tew, J. M. Jr. (1996). Comparison of surgical treatments for trigeminal neuralgia: Reevalu-
                   ation of radiofrequency rhizotomy. Neurosurgery, 38, 865-871.
            Trigeminal Neuralgia Association UK. (February 2012). What is trigeminal neuralgia? Retrieved from
                   http://www.tna.org.uk/pages/trigeminal_neuralgia.html. February 3, 2013.
