4 Evaluation and Management
               of Facial Nerve Conditions

FACIAL NERVE PARALYSIS (TABLE 4.1)

                   The two most common causes of facial palsy--Bell's palsy and Ramsay Hunt syn-
                   drome--are addressed in this chapter. An overview of common tumors that can affect
                   the facial nerve is also briefly addressed.

BELL'S PALSY

Definition and Overview

                    Sudden (within 48 hours or less) facial paralysis, which leads to the loss of facial
                      expression

                    It is the most common cause of facial paralysis or weakness of the facial nerve (cra-
                      nial nerve [CN] VII).

                    Usually a spontaneous recovery occurs.
                    Can be unilateral or rarely bilateral.

Etiology

            Unknown
            There may be a viral prodrome in some cases.

               There is speculation that the herpes simplex virus (HSV) is the infecting agent.
            May be caused by local inflammation or ischemia, resulting in nerve constriction.

Incidence

            Rare in children
            30 to 45 cases per 100,000 patients per year (Peitersen, 2002)
            More common to occur during 35 to 45 years of age

Statistical Information

                    Bell's palsy accounts for more than 50% of acute facial palsies (Jafek & Stark, 1996).
                    Up to 30% of patients with Bell's palsy fail to recover facial function completely

                      (Gronseth & Paduga, 2012).
                    A positive family history of Bell's palsy is present in 10% of the patients (Jafek &

                      Stark, 1996).
                    Approximately 12% of patients may have recurrent facial paralysis, either ipsilateral

                      or contralateral (Jafek & Stark, 1996).
                          TABLE 4.1 MOST COMMON CAUSES OF FACIAL PARALYSIS                                                                                                       90  4. FACIAL NERVE CONDITIONS

Idiopathic        Trauma              Infection             Metabolic and      Neoplasia           Congenital
                                                            Systemic

Bell's palsy      Temporal bone       Herpes zoster oticus  Diabetes mellitus  Cholesteatoma       Birth trauma
Recurrent facial      fracturesa          (Ramsay Hunt      Sarcoidosisa       Glomus jugulare or  Mobius syndromea
                                          syndrome)         Guillian-Barre                         Unilateral lower lip
    palsy         Facial contusions/                                               tympanicum
Melkersson-           lacerations     Otitis media with         syndromea      Carcinoma (primary      paralysisb
                                          effusion          Autoimmune
    Rosenthal     Penetrating wounds                                               or metastatic)
    syndrome          to face and     Acute suppurative         disorders      Facial neuroma
                      temporal bone       otitis media                         Schwannoma
                                                                               Meningioma
                  Iatrogenic injury   Coalescent                               Leukemia
                                          mastoiditis                          Histiocytosis
                                                                               Rhabdomyosarcoma
                                      Chronic otitis media
                                      Malignant otitis

                                          externa
                                      Tuberculosis
                                      Lyme diseasea
                                      AIDS
                                      Infectious

                                          mononucleosis

aMay present with bilateral palsy.
bThis is not usually considered a true congenital facial paralysis. At rest, the appearance of the lip is normal. With laughing or crying, the lower lip can droop. Etiology is
attributed to a congenital absence of the depressor angulioris muscle or the depressor labiiinferioris muscle. May be associated with congenital heart defects.
Source: Adapted from Coker (1993, p 1715).
                         BELL'S PALSY  91

                   Return of facial movement is seen in 85% of all patients within 3 weeks. Full recov-
                     ery is typically achieved by 2 months (Bailey & Johnson, 2001).

Clinical Presentation

Chapter 3:         It is important to realize that Bell's palsy is a diagnosis of exclusion. If any of the fol-
Trigeminal           lowing symptoms are present, Bell's palsy is not likely the diagnosis.
Nerve Disorder:       Facial nerve dysfunction developing over weeks or months
Trigeminal            History of known trauma along the course of the facial nerve
Neuralgia             Bilateral facial paralysis
section.              Palsy at birth
                      Signs of a central nervous system (CNS) lesion
                      Failure to recover within 6 months after onset
                      Signs of a neoplasm
                      Vesicles on the head or neck

                   Symptoms of Bell's palsy can be transient or permanent and can affect all or any of
                     the three branches of the facial nerve (CN VII). Symptoms include the following:
                      Inability to control facial muscles on the affected side (within a 48-hour onset)
                      Often the eye on the affected side cannot voluntarily be closed. Can lead to blurred
                        vision
                      Lacrimation and salivation can be affected.
                      The facial nerve also carries taste sensations from the anterior two thirds of the
                        tongue, so taste may be impaired.
                      Posterior auricular pains or otalgia can occur.
                      Tingling or numbness of the cheek or mouth

                   The following cranial nerves (and the associated symptoms they contribute) may be
                     present with Bell's palsy:
                      TN (CN V): Although very rare, Bell's palsy can lead to trigeminal neuralgia. Nor-
                        mally, with trigeminal neuralgia there is pain in the trigeminal nerve or areas
                        affected by the trigeminal nerve. However, with Bell's palsy, pain is very rare.
                      Vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII): If there is a tumor along CN VIII (e.g., acoustic
                        neuroma), this can cause compression of the facial nerve (due to its close proxim-
                        ity to CN VIII within the internal auditory canal) and lead to facial paralysis.
                      Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX): May lead to difficulty chewing or talking.

                  NOTE: Advanced age accompanied with pain at initial presentation of Bell's palsy usually

                  indicates an overall poor likelihood of recovery.

Exam Findings

See the Clinical  Grade              HOUSE-BRACKMANN BELL'S PALSY SCALE
Presentation      I
section.          II     Facial Function Status

                         Normal facial function

                         Mild dysfunction:
                         Purposeful facial movements: Slight muscular weakness is observed,

                             particularly with the mouth when asked to smile
                         Purposeful eye movements: There is total closure of the eyes with slightest

                             effort
                         At rest: Face appears symmetrical

                                                                                                                              (continued)
92  4. FACIAL NERVE CONDITIONS

        Grade    HOUSE-BRACKMANN BELL'S PALSY SCALE (continued)
               Facial Function Status

        III    Moderate dysfunction:

               Purposeful facial movements: Noticeable difference between the two

               sides of the face, but not completely asymmetrical or disfiguring

               Purposeful eye movements: There is total closure of the eyes with effort

               At rest: Face appears symmetrical

        IV     Moderately severe dysfunction:

               Purposeful facial movements: Noticeable difference between the two

               sides of the face with near-total asymmetry

               Purposeful eye movements: Inability to close the eyes completely

               At rest: Face appears symmetrical

        V      Severe dysfunction:

               Purposeful facial movements: Hardly any mobility observed

               Purposeful eye movements: Inability to close the eyes completely

               At rest: There is asymmetry

        VI     Total paralysis

        Source: From Vrabec et al., 2009.

Workup

         There are no specific diagnostic tests to confirm Bell's palsy. NOTE: Remember that
           Bell's palsy is a diagnosis of exclusion. You may need to do additional tests to rule out

           other potential causes.
         Be sure to fully evaluate for a middle ear infection or effusion, as this may be the

           underlying cause for facial paralysis.
         Refer the patient to an ophthalmologist for a full eye examination.

Treatment Options

                    Spontaneous recovery occurs in most cases with or without treatment.
                    The goals of treatment for Bell's palsy include reducing recovery time and prevent-

                      ing complications to the eye such as corneal dryness.
                       Over-the-counter topical ocular lubricants applied frequently during the day

                         are usually sufficient in most cases to prevent drying (e.g., Hypo Tears, Refresh
                         Optive, Systane Lubricant, Clear Eyes, etc.).
                       Wear glasses indoors and outdoors, particularly glasses with wrap frame design,
                         to reduce exposure to drying winds and sun.
                       Apply ocular lubricating ointments at night (e.g., Lacri-lube, Advanced Eye Relief
                         Night Time Lubricant, Dura-tears Naturale, Lubrifresh PM, Refresh PM, Tears
                         Renewed).
                       Wear a patch or tape the eye shut at night to prevent dryness.
                       Improve the function of any cranial nerve deficits, particularly the facial nerve
                         and prevent or reduce permanent damage.

Pharmacotherapy Options: Acute Therapy

                    If medications are used (once the diagnosis is confirmed by exclusion), the goal is to
                      initiate therapy within 3 days or less of symptom onset.
                                                                                                       BELL'S PALSY  93

                    There are no FDA-approved drugs for Bell's palsy; however, the two most com-
                      monly recommended options are corticosteroids and antivirals. Both treatments are
                      controversial. Some studies have shown recovery without the use of either drug;
                      however, most agree that the medications can produce a higher percentage of full
                      recovery and should therefore be offered to the patient.

                  Corticosteroids
                    Corticosteroids should be offered to increase the probability of facial nerve function

                      recovery.
                    Steroids may speed recovery time, lessen the chance for synkinesis, and prevent the

                      progression of paralysis.
                       Synkinesis:

                      · Abnormal synchronization of facial movement
                      · Can occur after Bell's palsy because the facial nerve fibers sometimes reconnect

                            to the wrong nerve group, causing undesired and simultaneous unwanted facial
                            movements (e.g., during a smile, there is an involuntary movement of the eye)

                  Antiviral Therapy
                    Should not be used as monotherapy

                  Corticosteroids + Antiviral Therapy
                    Antiviral therapy (in addition to steroids) may increase the possibility of recovery.

                       Improved outcomes were found using a combination of prednisolone and acy-
                         clovir compared with prednisolone alone (Hato et al., 2003). NOTE: Although
                            combination therapy is recommended, counsel patients that the role of antiviral
                            therapy has not been fully established and if there is a benefit, it is likely modest
                            at best.

                  Dosing Recommendations
                    Prednisone: 1 mg/kg/day (maximum 80 mg) in divided doses × 7 days. (A gradual

                      taper during the second week is optional.)
                    Valtrex (valacyclovir): 1000 mg TID × 7 days, or
                    Famvir (famciclovir): 750 mg TID × 7 days.

                     NOTE: Caution when using famciclovir--it can cause a transitory rise in hepatic enzyme
                     production.

Pharmacotherapy Options: Long-Term Therapy

                  Predicting Long-Term Function of Facial Nerve
                   The Hilger facial nerve stimulator is the most frequently used method nerve excit-
                   ability test for predicting prognosis of facial nerve disorders. Applying maximum
                   stimulation with electrical pulses to the skin overlying the facial nerve (or branches of
                   the facial nerve) causes a nerve response and purposely twitches the nerve fibers on
                   the paralyzed side. The same is done to the nonparalyzed side for comparison. If the
                   response is decreased or absent, it can predict the likelihood for incomplete return of
                   facial function. The test is uncomfortable, so it should not be done unless the patient
                   has a House-Brackmann Grade VI paralysis.

                  Botox
                    Used in conjunction with facial neuromuscular therapy
                    Works by reducing the activity of the muscles that are overactive or uncoordinated
94  4. FACIAL NERVE CONDITIONS

                  Neuromuscular Retraining
                    Neuromuscular retraining (physical therapy) focuses on strengthening and coordi-

                      nating appropriate facial muscle movements.

Management Considerations

                  Eye Care
                    The eye must be protected from dryness if the patient is unable to voluntarily close

                      the eyes on his or her own.

Surgical Options

                    Used only when Botox and neuromuscular retraining have been unsuccessful
                       Facial nerve decompression (controversial, because studies have been mixed
                         regarding the benefits)
                      · A study in patients with greater than 90% degeneration demonstrated superior
                            results in those who underwent surgical decompression compared with those
                            who chose not to pursue decompression. In the surgical group, 91% of cases
                            exhibited a postoperative House-Brackmann Grade I or II. The best surgical
                            results were obtained when the procedure was done within 14 days after the
                            onset of paralysis (Pulec, 1981).
                       Implantable devices (i.e., gold weights) placed into the upper eyelid to keep the
                         eye closed. Implanting the device is a relatively simple procedure that can be per-
                         formed early on to assist in better eye protection during recovery.
                       Blepharoplasty: Surgical modification of the eyelid
                       Tarsorrhaphy: The eyelids are partially sewn together to further protect the eye

Long-Term Sequelae

                    Residual weakness
                    Synkinesis
                    Muscle spasms

Links and Sources

                    National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke: www.ninds.nih.gov

RAMSAY HUNT SYNDROME (HERPES ZOSTER OTICUS)

Etiology and Overview

Figure 1.3:   Herpes zoster is an infection where the varicella zoster virus reactivates from its
External,       latent state in a nerve ganglion.
middle, and
inner ear.    Herpes zoster oticus is the varicella zoster virus that reactivates from its latent state in
                the facial nerve (CN VII) and can also affect the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII).
                 The direct proximity between the two nerves at the cerebellopontine angle is
                   thought to be the reason that the herpes zoster virus affects CN VIII. NOTE: In
                    order to accurately diagnosis herpes zoster oticus, the patient must report a previous

                    history of having chickenpox.
                       RAMSAY HUNT SYNDROME (HERPES ZOSTER OTICUS)  95

              When herpes zoster oticus is associated with facial paralysis, the infection is called
                Ramsay Hunt syndrome.

              Herpes zoster oticus may also be known as:
                 Viral neuritis: Viral infection that causes inflammation of the nerves connecting
                   the inner ear to the brain
                 Geniculate herpes: Geniculate ganglion is the area within the facial nerve where
                   the varicella virus lies dormant for many years until an eruption occurs

Incidence

              Herpes zoster oticus accounts for 2% to 10% of all cases of facial nerve paralysis
                (Adams, Coulson, Croxson, & Oey, 2011).

              It is more common in older adults or the immunosuppressed.
              Exacerbating factors include physical and emotional stress.

Statistical Information

                    Ramsay Hunt syndrome generally causes more severe symptoms and has a worse
                      prognosis than Bell's palsy. However, more than 80% of all patients with herpes
                      zoster oticus recover without residual neurological deficits (Murakami et al., 1997).

                    Various severity degrees of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) can develop in about
                      6.5% of patients with Ramsay Hunt syndrome (Davis & Johnsson, 1983).

Clinical Presentation

Figure 1.2:   Herpes zoster oticus can affect:
Pinna.           External ear (particularly the concha of the auricle)
                 Postauricular skin
                 External auditory canal
                 Middle ear
                 Inner ear with involvement of the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII)
                 Lateral nasal wall
                 Soft palate
                 Anterolateral tongue
                 Facial nerve (CN VII)

Symptom Presentation

                  Vesicles
                    Appear within several days of onset of symptoms
                    The presence of vesicles is usually accompanied with the sensation of burning and/

                      or severe otalgia. Onset of pain may precede the rash by several hours or days.
                    Crusts can form once the vesicles rupture.
                    The rash can present as a severe otitis externa.
                    The vesicles can also appear on the face, in the mouth, and on the tongue.
                    In Ramsay Hunt syndrome, vesicles can appear before, during, or after facial palsy

                      occurs.

                  Facial Nerve (CN VII)-Associated Symptoms
                    Ipsilateral paresis
                    Ipsilateral paralysis (this mimics Bell's palsy)
96  4. FACIAL NERVE CONDITIONS

                  Vestibulocochlear Nerve (CN VIII)-Associated Symptoms
                    Vertigo
                    Tinnitus
                    Hearing loss: Severe sensorineural hearing loss rarely recovers completely (Davis &

                      Johnsson, 1983).
                    Nystagmus
                    Vomiting

                  Other Associated Symptoms
                    Eye pain
                    Lacrimation
                    Inability to close the eye, which can lead to corneal drying and irritation
                    Dysgeusia: Taste disturbances

Exam Findings

                    There should be a vesicular rash to diagnose herpes zoster oticus, although some-
                      times it is present without a rash.

                    The rash is unilateral in a dermatome distribution.

Workup

         The varicella zoster virus can be isolated from vesicular fluid to establish the diagno-
           sis with acute and convalescent antibody titers.

        NOTE: These tests are expensive and not routine.

Treatment Options

                  Corticosteroids
                    Systemic corticosteroids are used to relieve pain and decrease vertigo due to inflam-

                      mation that may be affecting CN VIII.
                    There is no evidence that indicates corticosteroids prevent the development of pos-

                      therpetic neuralgia (PHN; Whitley et al., 1996). NOTE: There have been reports of
                        extensive cutaneous spread of herpes zoster (called disseminated herpes zoster) in
                        immune-compromised patients including those with cancer and those currently on che-
                        motherapy and corticosteroid therapy (Yoon, Kim, Lee, & Choi, 2013).

                  Corticosteroids + Antiviral Therapy
                    Patients treated with acyclovir plus prednisone had better outcomes (time to healing

                      of rash, time to cessation of acute neuritis, time to return to usual activity and sleep,
                      and time to cessation of analgesics) than those treated with either prednisone or
                      acyclovir alone (Murakami et al., 1997).

                  Dosing Recommendations
                    Prednisone: 1 mg/kg/day in divided doses × 7 days. A gradual taper during the

                      second week is optional.
                    Valtrex (valacyclovir): 1000 mg TID × 7 days, or
                    Famvir (famciclovir): 750 mg TID × 7 days.

                       Known to reduce the duration of PHN. NOTE: Caution when using famciclovir--it
                            can cause a transitory rise in hepatic enzyme production.
                                                         RAMSAY HUNT SYNDROME (HERPES ZOSTER OTICUS)  97

                  Other Pharmacotherapy Options
                    Narcotic analgesics for pain relief
                    Antipruritic for itching

                  Secondary Bacterial Treatment Management
                    Usually occurs as a result of excoriated vesicles
                    Use hydrogen peroxide as a drying agent on the vesicles/crusts
                    Apply bacitracin ointment or substitute to the crusted regions
                    Prescribe an antistaphylococcal oral antibiotic
                    If a secondary bacterial otitis externa develops, prescribe a topical otic antistaphylo-

                      coccal antibiotic-steroid solution.

                  Postherpetic Neuralgia Treatment Options
                   NOTE: Patients with PHN need to be referred to a pain management specialist. Pharmaco-
                   therapy that may be of some utility includes the following:

                    Topical analgesics
                    Cyclic antidepressants
                    Narcotic analgesics for pain relief

Management Considerations

                  Eye
                    Refer the patient to an ophthalmologist for a full eye examination.
                    The eye must be protected from dryness if the patient is unable to voluntarily close

                      the eyes on his or her own.
                       Over-the-counter topical ocular lubricants applied frequently during the day

                         are usually sufficient enough in most cases to prevent drying (e.g., Hypo Tears,
                         Refresh Optive, Systane Lubricant, Clear Eyes, etc.).
                       Wear glasses indoors and outdoors, particularly glasses with wrap frame design,
                         to reduce exposure to drying winds and sun.
                       Apply ocular lubricating ointments at night (e.g., Lacri-lube, Advanced Eye Relief
                         Night Time Lubricant, Dura-tears Naturale, Lubrifresh PM, Refresh PM, Tears
                         Renewed).
                       Wear a patch or tape the eye shut at night to prevent dryness.

Surgical Options

                    Surgical decompression of the facial nerve may be considered.

Long-Term Sequelae

                    PHN is a complication of herpes zoster viral infection.
                    PHN is when pain persists or recurs in herpes zoster affected areas after the rash

                      subsides.
                    Facial paralysis is slow in resolving and in some cases may have incomplete resolution.

Prevention

                  Shingles Vaccine (Zostavax)
                    This is a one-time vaccine.
                    Recommended for use in people 60 years and older to prevent shingles, regardless

                      of whether they recall having chickenpox or not.
98  4. FACIAL NERVE CONDITIONS

                    The shingles vaccine is not recommended to treat active shingles or PHN once it
                      develops.

                    Even if the patient had shingles, he or she can receive the vaccine to help prevent
                      future occurrences.

Links and Sources

                   The following link offers support for those who have had or currently have Ramsay
                    Hunt syndrome: www.ramsayhunt.org
                    American Pain Society: www.ampainsoc.org
                    National Shingles Foundation: www.vzvfoundation.org
                    Center for Peripheral Neuropathy: peripheralneuropathycenter.uchicago.edu

TUMORS THAT CAN AFFECT THE FACIAL NERVE

Acoustic Neuroma

Chapter 8:       Very rare, slow-growing benign tumor that affects the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN
Evaluation and     VIII)
Management
of Inner Ear
Conditions
section.

Schwannoma

                 Rare benign tumor that affects the nerve sheath of the facial nerve or the vestibuloco-
                   chlear nerve (which is called a vestibular schwannoma or an acoustic neuroma).

Cholesteatoma

                    Cholesteatoma is a skin cyst located in the middle ear and mastoid bone. This can
                      lead to erosion of the facial nerve canal.

                    Surgery to remove a cholesteatoma can also lead to damage of the facial nerve, caus-
                      ing paralysis.

Parotid Tumors

                    The facial nerve enters the parotid gland where it branches to different areas in the face.
                    80% of parotid tumors are benign (Ritwik & Brannon, 2012).
                    If there is partial or complete facial paralysis associated with the presence of a

                      parotid tumor, suspect that the tumor is malignant. CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Positive
                        identification and preservation of the facial nerve is essential in a superficial or total
                        parotidectomy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Adams, R., Coulson, S., Croxson, G., & Oey, V. (2011). Prognostic factors in herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay
                   Hunt syndrome). Otology and Neurotology, 32, 1025-1030.

            Bailey, B. J., & Johnson, J. T. (2001). Head and neck surgery--otolaryngology (4th ed., Vol 2, p. 2147). Phila-
                   delphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
                                                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY  99

Bauer, C. A., & Coker, N. J. (1996). Update on facial nerve disorders. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North
      America, 29(3), 445-454.

Coker, N. J. (1993). Acute paralysis of the facial nerve. In B. J. Bailey, et al. (Eds), Head and neck surgery--
      otolarygology (p. 1715). Philadelphia, PA: J.B. Lippincott.

Davis, L. E., & Johnsson, L. G. (1983). Viral infections of the inner ear: Clinical, virologic, and pathologic
      studies in humans and animals. Americal Journal of Otolaryngology, 4, 347-362.

Gronseth, G. S., & Paduga, R. (2012). Evidence-based guideline update: Steroids and antivirals for Bell
      palsy. Report of the Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neu-
      rology. Neurology, Retrieved from http://www.neurology.org/content/79/22/2209.full.html
      November 7.

Hato, N., Matsumoto, S., Kisaki, H., Takahashi, H., Wakisaka, H., Honda, N., . . . Yanagihara, N. (2003).
      Efficacy of early treatment of Bell's palsy with oral acyclovir and prednisolone. Otology and Neu-
      rotology, 24, 948-951.

Jafek, B. W., & Stark, A. K. (1996). ENT secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus.
Lalwani, A. K. (2008). Current diagnosis and treatment in otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery. New York:

      McGraw-Hill.
Lee, K. J. (1999). Essential otolaryngology: Head and neck surgery (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Murakami, S., Hato, N., Horiuchi, J., Honda, N., Gyo, K., & Yanagihara, N. (1997). Treatment of Ramsay

      Hunt syndrome with acyclovir-prednisone: significance of early diagnosis and treatment. Annals
      of Neurology, 41(3), 353-357.
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. (2013). Shingles vaccination: What you need
      to know. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/vac-
      cines/vpd-vac/shingles/vacc-need-know.htm. February 14, 2013.
Peitersen, E. (2002). Bell's palsy: The spontaneous course of 2,500 peripheral facial nerve palsies of dif-
      ferent etiologies. Acta Oto-Laryngologica. Supplementum, 156, 32-39.
Price, F. (2002). Bilateral simultaneous facial nerve palsy. Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 116(1),
      46-48.
Pulec, J. L. (1981). Early decompression of the facial nerve in Bell's palsy. Annals of Otology, Rhinology,
      and Laryngology, 90(6), 570-577.
Ritwik, P., & Brannon, R. B. (2012). A clinical analysis of nine new pediatric and adolescent cases of be-
      nign minor salivary gland neoplasms and a review of the literature. Journal of Medical Case Reports,
      6(1), 287.
Sweeney, C. J., & Gilden, D. H. (2001). Ramsay Hunt syndrome. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and
      Psychiatry, 71(2), 149-154.
Vrabec, J. T., Backous, D. D., Djalilian, H. R., Gidley, P. W., Leonetti, J. P., Marzo, S.J., et al. (2009). Facial
      Nerve Grading System 2.0. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 140(4), 445-450.
Whitley, R. J., Weiss, H., Gnann, J. W. Jr., Tyring, S., Mertz, G. J., Pappas, P. G., et al. (1996). Acyclovir
      with and without prednisone for the treatment of herpes zoster. A randomized, placebo-controlled
      trial. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease Collaborative Antiviral Study Group.
      Annals of Internal Medicine, 125(5), 376-383.
Yeo, S. G., Lee, Y. C., Park, D. C., & Cha, C. I. (2008). Acyclovir and steroid versus steroid alone in the
      treatment of Bell's palsy. American Journal of Otolaryngology, 29, 163-168.
Yoon, K., Kim, S., Lee, E., & Choi, J. (2013). Disseminated herpes zoster in an immunocompetent elderly
      patient. Korean Journal of Pain, 26(2), 195-198.
