5 Evaluation and Management
               of Hearing and Tinnitus

SCREENING FOR HEARING LOSS IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS

Assessment of hearing should begin at birth. All infants should have hearing screening
before 1 month of age. Infants who do not pass the newborn screening should undergo
further audiological evaluation before 3 months of age. Additional information on the
guidelines for the detection of hearing loss among infants can be found through The
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH). Children with indicators of hearing loss
should be examined at a minimum of once every 6 months until 3 years of age, which
is the critical period for speech and language development. Beyond 3 years of age,
monitoring of hearing can be done on an as-needed basis.

       Increasing age is the most important risk factor for hearing loss in adults. Other
risk factors include occupational or personal exposure to loud noise, ototoxic agents,
previous recurrent inner ear infections, certain systemic diseases such as diabetes, and
genetic factors. Further evaluation for hearing loss should be done if suspected by the
examiner and/or perceived by the patient.

Test                     TYPES OF HEARING TESTS             Typical
                                                            Age Range
Auditory        Description                                 Implemented
brainstem                                                   Newborn and
response (ABR)   Checks the brain's response to sound       at any age if
                 It checks for hearing sensitivity in       retrocochlear
                                                            pathology is
                   newborns or children who are unable      suspected
                   to be tested by conventional methods.
                 ABR is correlated with hearing                             (continued)
                   sensitivity in the frequency range from
                   1,000 to 4,000 Hz.
                Description of test:
                 A series of clicks are delivered to the
                   patient through earphones.
                 The clicks stimulate the auditory
                   pathway of the ear and cause a series
                   of electrical activity that is detected
                   by electrodes on the patient's scalp
                   and the results are displayed as a
                   waveform on a computer.
102  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

Test                          TYPES OF HEARING TESTS (continued)          Typical
                                                                          Age Range
Otoacoustic                   Description                                 Implemented
emissions (OAEs)
                               There are five different waveforms         Newborns and
Behavioral                        generated and each wave corresponds     those who
observation                       to specific sites within the neural     are unable to
audiometry (BOA)                  auditory pathway.                       be tested by
                                                                          conventional
                               If there is something impairing            methods. Not
                                  the pathway (e.g., tumor), it will      usually done in
                                  delay the waveform at the site of the   adults
                                  lesion.
                                                                          Newborns, infants
                              NOTE: When evaluating possible                              (continued)
                              retrocochlear pathology, if the ABR test
                              is abnormal (not equal in both ears),
                              there is an indication to order an
                              "MRI of the internal auditory canal
                              (IAC)."

                               The cochlea not only receives
                                  sound but also produces sounds
                                  called OAEs.

                               OAE is a sound generated from
                                  within the inner ear and the OAE test
                                  measures cochlear function (outer hair
                                  cells).

                               OAEs are generally not found in
                                  persons with hearing worse than 30
                                  dB. Therefore, OAEs are not usually
                                  used in adulthood, as hearing loss
                                  tends to occur in this age group.

                               OAE testing is used as a screening tool
                                  to determine the presence or absence
                                  of cochlear function, as in newborn
                                  screening.

                               OAE testing is also reliable in those
                                  patients who are unable to be
                                  tested by conventional methods;
                                  however, OAEs cannot be used to fully
                                  determine an individual's auditory
                                  thresholds.

                              Description of test:
                               In order for the OAE test to be

                                  accurate, the probe that is inserted
                                  into the external auditory canal
                                  (EAC; that measures the sound) must
                                  properly fit.

                               Assesses hearing acuity by presenting
                                  a sound and observing the patient's
                                  response.
                  SCREENING FOR HEARING LOSS IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS  103

Test              Description                                 Typical
                                                              Age Range
Visual             The audiologist detects bodily             Implemented
reinforcement        reactions to sounds such as body
audiometry (VRA)     movement, eye widening, eye              5 months to
                     opening, etc. The infant is observed     2 years of age
Play audiometry      for changes in behavior after
Conventional         presenting the acoustic stimulus.        2 to 5 years of age
audiometry                                                    or children with
                   This test can rule out significant         developmental
                     hearing loss.                            delay

                   This test cannot be used to determine      Can be used
                     auditory thresholds.                     starting between
                                                              3 and 5 years of
                   This test makes a child respond to         age
                     sound he or she hears by connecting
                     sounds with a visual signal, e.g.,
                     stuffed animal.

                   Every time a sound is presented to the
                     child, a stuffed animal follows a few
                     seconds later.

                   After several times, the child realizes
                     a pattern and is not interested in the
                     sound, but only the stuffed animal.
                     The audible sound makes the child
                     look for the stuffed animal. Therefore,
                     every reaction following a sound
                     suggests that the previous sound was
                     audible.

                   The response tends to decrease for
                     children between 2 and 3 years of
                     age, because they tend to become
                     adjusted to the visual signal and
                     therefore do not pay attention.

                   This test can rule out significant
                     hearing loss.

                   This test can be used to determine
                     some auditory thresholds.

                   The child is trained to perform a
                     repetitive task (putting a ring on
                     a cone) in response to an auditory
                     stimulus.

                   Sometimes the audiologist can get
                     the child to wear a headset during
                     the test. Then standard auditory
                     thresholds can be measured.

                   By the age of 5 years, standard adult
                     testing techniques can be used in
                     hearing assessment.
104  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

INTERPRETING AUDIOGRAMS AND TYMPANOMETRY

Figure 5.1:                            An audiogram is an important tool when trying to establish a patient's range of
Audiogram.                             hearing and the extent and type of hearing loss. It is also an important tool to use
                                       in those who complain of dizziness, since many hearing and vestibular problems
                                       are related. Tympanometry is a quick test to evaluate the mobility of the tympanic
                                       membrane (TM). Both combined help to distinguish conductive versus sensorineu-
                                       ral hearing loss.

Quiet  Hearing Level in Decibels (dB)  -10                                                 Normal
Loud                                      0                                                hearing

                                        10     250 500 1000 2000 4000          8000
                                        20            Frequency in Hertz (Hz)
                                        30
                                        40
                                        50
                                        60
                                        70
                                        80
                                        90
                                       100
                                       110
                                       120
                                       130
                                       140

                                          125

                                       Low pitch  High pitch

                                                                                                    FIGURE 5.1 Audiogram.

How to Interpret an Audiogram

                   Pure tone audiometry is the standard way to assess a person's hearing. An audiolo-
                   gist administers the audiometry test. The frequency and intensity of the pure tones
                   are measured and documented on an audiogram chart. The audiologist determines
                   the patient's speech reception threshold (SRT), which is the faintest level at which the
                   patient can understand speech at least half of the time.

                                               Frequency                                   Intensity
                                                                                            Evaluates the loudness of a sound
                                                Evaluates the softest sound a person        Measured in decibels (dB)
                                                  can hear at different pitches
                                                                                               dB is documented vertically on the
                                                Measured in Hertz (Hz)                            audiogram graph
                                                   Hz is documented horizontally on
                                                      the audiogram graph.                     This scale is based on powers or
                                                                                                  multiples of 10
                                                The audiogram covers a range
                                                  of frequencies from 125 Hz (low                                                            (continued)
                                                  frequency) to 8,000 Hz (high frequency)
INTERPRETING AUDIOGRAMS AND TYMPANOMETRY  105

Frequency                                      Intensity

    Examples of low frequency sounds               The threshold of hearing is assigned
                                                      a sound level of 0 dB. A sound that
     · Base drum                                      is 10 times more intense is assigned
     · Tuba                                           a sound level of 10 dB. A sound that
     · A man's deep voice                             is 10 × 10 or 100 times more intense
     · Vowel sounds such as "oo" in the               is assigned a sound level of 20 dB. A
                                                      sound that is 10 × 10 × 10 or 1,000
          word "who"                                  times more intense is assigned a
    Examples of high frequency sounds                 sound level of 30 db, and so on.

     · Chirping birds                           The audiogram covers a range of
     · Whistle or squeal                          decibels from -10 dB (low intensity) to
     · A woman's or children's high               120 dB (high intensity).

          pitched voice                         Hearing thresholds:
                                                   < 20 dB: Normal hearing
     · Consonant sound "s" as in the               20-40 dB: Mild hearing loss
                                                   40-60 dB: Moderate hearing loss
          word "sun"                               60-80 dB: Severe hearing loss
 The range of hearing in humans is 20 to           > 80 dB: Profound hearing loss

   20,000 Hz; however, the audiogram is

   used to record those frequencies a typical

   person can detect (125-8,000 Hz)
 The range of frequencies that speech

   sounds are heard is from 400 to 3,000 Hz

       An audiometer is the machine that generates the pure tones. During the audiom-
etry evaluation, the audiologist selects the frequency and intensity of the pure tones and
also uses air conduction (AC) and bone conduction (BC) earphones to assess the degree
of hearing loss. The earphones are used to evaluate the outer, middle, and inner ear. By
comparing hearing thresholds via BC to thresholds via AC, it determines whether outer
or middle ear pathology is affecting the transmission of sound to the cochlea.

Air Conduction Audiometry                      Bone Conduction Audiometry

 Air conduction (AC) audiometry is called       BC audiometry is called the BC
   the AC response.                               response.

 Humans hear most sounds through AC.            A BC earphone is placed on the
 AC is the transmission of sound waves            mastoid process of the temporal
                                                  bone and bypasses the outer ear
   through the EAC. The sound energy              and middle ear to stimulate the
   moves the tympanic membrane and inner          cochlea directly.
   ear bones (malleus, incus, and stapes).
   When the stapes moves, it vibrates the       An air-bone gap is considered to
   fluid in the cochlea, which stimulates         exist when BC testing results have
   the hair cells. The hair cells stimulate       more than a 10 dB difference
   the acoustic nerve (cranial nerve [CN]         compared to AC testing results.
   VIII) and the nerve conveys the sound           This means that one ear
   information to the brain.                          potentially has a condition
 To measure AC, the patient listens to pure           that is preventing sound
   tones through earphones and presses a              transmission to the cochlea.
   button or notifies the audiologist with
   hand gestures when able to detect the        The next step is to "mask" to
   signal transmitted.                            confirm if the cochlea is being
 The purpose of AC audiometry is to               affected by outer and/or middle
   establish hearing sensitivity at various       ear pathology.
   frequencies.
106  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

Masking

         Once an air-bone gap is considered to exist (BC > AC), it is necessary to "mask" to
         confirm if sound transmission to the cochlea is truly being affected by outer and/or
         middle ear pathology. Masking involves presenting a sound through headphones to
         the better ear to keep it occupied while evaluating cochlear function of the opposite (or
         test ear) through BC earphones.

                The audiologist charts the patient's frequency and intensity of pure tones and
         response to AC and BC earphone testing. All audiograms have a key or legend to
         remind the reader of the meaning of the symbols. Below is a brief interpretation of the
         symbols you will see on an audiogram.

         Type                      INTERPRETING AN AUDIOGRAM            Right Ear  Left Ear
         Unmasked air                                                   Symbol     Symbol
         conduction (AC)      Defi nition
         Masked AC                                                           O         X
                              There was no indication to suggest                        n
         Unmasked bone            external or middle ear pathology.         
         conduction (BC)          AC threshold was obtained                             >
         Masked BC                without masking noise                      <          ]
                                                                              [
         No response          Refers to AC threshold in the tested                     
                                  ear that was obtained with masking         
                                  noise in the opposite ear. (Keep one
                                  ear "busy" by putting a masking
                                  noise in the nontested ear to
                                  evaluate the AC in the opposite ear)

                              BC threshold was obtained without
                                  masking noise

                              Refers to BC thresholds obtained in
                                  the tested ear while masking noise
                                  in the opposite ear

                              (Keep one ear "busy" by putting a
                                  masking noise in the nontested ear
                                  to evaluate the BC in the opposite
                                  ear)

                              Literally means no response from the
                                  patient at the maximum output of
                                  a particular frequency

Speech Discrimination

                   Speech discrimination is also documented on the audiogram. It is a measure of how
                   well a person understands what he or she hears when words are presented 30 to
                   40 dB above the determined SRT. It uses word recognition during the evaluation to
                   assess the patient's understanding of speech. The patient is asked to repeat words
                   and the words chosen are phonetically balanced, meaning the speech sounds used
                   occur within the same frequency. For example, hot dog, baseball, etc.

                          Speech discrimination scores are measured in percentage with a range from 0%
                   to 100% (100 being the best). Normal speech discrimination is greater than 90%. If a
                   patient has documented sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and speech discrimination
                                                        INTERPRETING AUDIOGRAMS AND TYMPANOMETRY  107

                   greater than 80%, the patient will typically find hearing aids useful. If a patient has
                   documented SNHL and poor speech discrimination less than 40%, hearing aids will
                   not be beneficial and it would just make the undefined sounds louder.

Tympanometry

                   Tympanometry or "T-gram" is a device that measures the mobility of the TM, mid-
                   dle ear system including the conduction of the middle ear bones. It is a helpful tool
                   when evaluating the presence of fluid in the middle ear, patency of tympanostomy
                   tubes, and confirms the distinction between sensorineural and conductive hearing loss
                   (CHL). A pneumatic otoscopic examination is used in conjunction with tympanometry
                   and improves the accuracy of the diagnosis.

                                    INTERPRETING A TYMPANOGRAM

Figure 5.2:   Type  Interpretation                                    Tracing
Tympanogram.  A
              As
                    Normal middle ear function                        Normal maximum
              Ad                                                          height on tracing

              B      The TM is stiffer than normal. Can result from:  Lower than normal
                        Reduced mobility of the TM related to             peak height on
              C            scarring                                       tracing
                        A small amount of fluid in the middle ear
                           space
                        Ossicular fixation that partially decreases
                           the mobility (e.g., otosclerosis)

                     The TM is more moveable than normal. Can         Higher than normal
                       result from:                                       peak height on
                        Disarticulation of the bony structures in         tracing
                           the middle ear
                        A TM that has healed over a previous
                           perforation but is thinner and more
                           mobile than expected

                     The TM is not moving at all. Can result from:    No evidence of peak
                                                                          height on tracing.
                        Middle ear fluid                                  "Flat tympanogram"

                        Severe scarring of the TM

                        Tympanosclerosis

                        Cholesteatoma or middle ear tumor

                        Cerumen or obstruction in ear canal

                        A large volume (>2.0) type B could indicate:

                         · Perforation in the TM
                         · Patent tympanostomy tube
                         · Previous mastoidectomy

                    Can result from:                                  Pressure greater than
                     Eustachian tube dysfunction
                                                                          -150 mm H2O, which
                                                                          indicates negative peak

                                                                          pressure on tracing
108  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

                          Tympanometry is done by securely inserting the instrument probe into the open-
                   ing of the EAC. A sound stimulus generates acoustic energy into the ear canal at the
                   same time that a vacuum pump introduces positive and negative pressures. The device
                   detects returning sound energy and graphs the energy on the tympanogram tracing.
                   The peak air pressure on the tympanogram is equal to the middle ear pressure. Normal
                   middle ear pressure is between 0 and -150 mm H2O, which means the function of the
                   eustachian tube is normal. Ear pressures that are greater than -150 mm H2O indicate
                   poor eustachian tube function.

                     Type A                              Type B                              Type C
1400                                1400                                1400
1200                                1200                                1200
1000                                1000                                1000
 800                                 800                                 800
 600                                 600                                 600
 400                                 400                                 400
 200                                 200                                 200

   -400 -300 -200 -100 0 +100 +200     -400 -300 -200 -100 0 +100 +200     -400 -300 -200 -100 0 +100 +200

                    Type AS                             Type AD
1400                                1400
1200                                1200
1000                                1000
 800                                 800
 600                                 600
 400                                 400
 200                                 200

   -400 -300 -200 -100 0 +100 +200     -400 -300 -200 -100 0 +100 +200

FIGURE 5.2 Tympanogram.

TYPES OF HEARING LOSS

Type                                Description
                                     Air conductive HL = decreased hearing through the
Air conductive
    hearing loss (HL)                  external and middle ears.
                                     Bone conductive HL = decreased hearing through the
Bone conductive HL
                                       inner ear (cochlea).

                                                                                                                     (continued)
Type                                                   TYPES OF HEARING LOSS  109
SNHL
Sensory HL        Description
Noise-induced HL
Mixed HL           Decreased hearing involves the cochlea and auditory
Central HL           nerve, hair cells, and nerve endings.

Fluctuating HL     Noise-induced HL is related to prolonged exposure of loud
Sudden HL            noises (>90 dB) over time.
Asymmetric HL
Congenital HL      Involves both sensorineural and conductive HL.

Genetic HL         The patient can hear the sound but has a hard time
                     understanding or processing the sound that was heard.

                   Involves the brain's ability to perceive and ultimately
                     understand what was heard.

                   Usually referred to as an auditory processing disorder.
                   Advanced age is the most common factor in this condition.

                     It is rare to see central HL in infants and children.
                   Usually an auditory processing disorder coexists with

                     learning, language, or attention deficits.

                   Fluctuating HL variably adjusts over time.
                   Examples of fluctuating HL: Meniere's disease,

                     autoimmune inner ear disease (related to systemic lupus
                     erythematosus, Wegener's granulomatosis, etc.).

                   Rapid onset HL ( 30 dB at three consecutive frequencies
                     on audiogram) occurring over a 72-hour period or less in
                     one or both ears.

                   Considered a medical emergency.

                   Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) affecting one ear and
                     not the other.

                   Hearing loss present at birth.
                   Genes play an important role in congenital HL and is

                     thought to account for more than 50% of all hearing
                     loss at birth (American Speech-Language-Hearing
                     Association).
                   Nongenetic factors for congenital hearing loss can include
                     the following:
                      Maternal infections (rubella, cytomegalovirus [CMV],

                         herpes simplex virus, etc.); CMV remains the most
                         common congenital infection and etiology of hearing
                         loss
                      Toxemia during pregnancy (from ototoxic medications,
                         drugs, alcohol, etc.)
                      Hypoxia
                      Hyperbilirubinemia
                      Birth injuries
                      Prematurity and very low birth weight
                      External ear malformations
                      Skeletal malformations

                   Bottom line: Patients suspected of having hearing loss
                     due to a genetic cause need to see a genetic specialist for
                     further evaluation, genetic testing, and counseling.

                                                                                                   (continued)
110  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

                 Type                    Description

                                          There are more than 400 known genetic causes involving
                                            hearing loss.

                                          Genetic hearing loss can be inherited in an autosomal
                                            dominant, autosomal recess, X-linked recessive manner as
                                            well as by mitochondrial inheritance.

                                          Genetic counseling and risk assessment depends on the
                                            specific genetic diagnosis.

                                          Middle ear, mastoid disease, and SNHL can be seen in
                                            children with Down's syndrome.

                       TABLE 5.1 AUDIOMETRIC TESTING RESULT POSSIBILITIES

                 Air Conduction  Bone Conduction Thresholds
                     Thresholds
                                 Normal  Normal               Abnormal

                                         Normal hearing       Not possible

                                 Abnormal Conductive hearing loss Sensorineural hearing loss

Conductive Hearing Loss

                   CHL involves any pathology involving the opening of the EAC, TM, ossicles, and/or
                   middle ear space. There is a loss of auditory stimulus with the cochlear receptor cells
                   because of something blocking the sounds ability to reach that point.

Chapter 6:       Pathologies Involving the External Auditory Canal
Evaluation and   That Cause Conductive Hearing Loss
Management
of External Ear   Cerumen impaction: Usually only causes 30 to 40 dB of hearing loss
Conditions.       Otitis externa
                  Hematoma of EAC
                  Foreign body in EAC
                  Exostoses (bony projections in the EAC)
                  Benign or malignant tumors of the EAC
                  Congenital atresia
                  Abnormal formation of the auricle
                  Previous mastoidectomy

Chapter 7:       Pathologies Involving the Tympanic Membrane
Evaluation and   That Cause Conductive Hearing Loss
Management
of Middle Ear     TM perforation
Conditions.       TM retraction
                  Atrophic flaccid membrane
                  Tympanosclerosis

Chapter 7:       Pathologies Involving the Ossicles That Cause Conductive Hearing Loss
Evaluation and
Management        Otosclerosis (OS) or ossicular fixation
of Middle Ear     Ossicular discontinuity. NOTE: Consider with hearing loss greater than 50 dB.
Conditions.
                                                                  TYPES OF HEARING LOSS  111

Chapter 7:      Pathologies Involving the Middle Ear
Evaluation and  That Cause Conductive Hearing Loss
Management
of Middle Ear    Otitis media. NOTE: Otitis media is the most common cause for CHL in children.
Conditions.      Middle ear effusion (serous otitis media)
                 Hemotympanum
                 Eustachian tube dysfunction or blockage (e.g., allergies or tumors)
                 Cholesteatoma
                 Temporal bone trauma
                 Otic barotrauma
                 Masses or tumors within the middle ear (e.g., glomus tympanicum or glomus jugu-

                   lare)
                 Dehiscence of the roof of the middle ear (tegmen mastoideum)
                 Superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome

                Important History Examination Questions

                 Onset
                 Progression (acute vs. chronic)
                 Unilateral versus bilateral
                 Family history of hearing loss
                 Presence of tinnitus (unilateral vs. bilateral)
                 Ear fullness or pressure
                 Presence of dizziness or vertigo
                 Recent head trauma
                 Associated ear pain or ear discharge
                 Changes in vision or speech
                 Previous history of ear surgery

                Physical Examination
                Tuning Fork Test
                 Weber test: Localizes to the affected ear
                 Rinne test: Is negative (abnormal)

Figure 5.3:     Audiometric Findings
Conductive       This audiogram shows CHL in the left ear. NOTE: On the audiogram, an "X" indicates
hearing loss
(left ear).        the left ear.
                 The ">" represents the patient's normal hearing threshold if he or she did not have

                   CHL.
                 The "X" indicates all of the sounds the patient is able to hear at this time with CHL

                   present.
                 The area between the "X" and the ">" represents the sounds that the patient would

                   not currently hear because of pathology interrupting the transmission of those
                   sounds reaching the cochlea hair cells. This is called an "air-bone" gap.

                Tympanometry Findings With CHL

                 Type As: Occurs with fixation of the ossicles as in OS
                 Type Ad: Occurs with ossicular discontinuity
                 Type B: Occurs with pathology involving the TM and/or middle ear space
                 Type C: Occurs related to eustachian tube dysfunction
112  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

Hearing Level in decibels (dB)  -10
                                   0
                                         250  500 1000 2000 4000 8000
                                 10
                                 20
                                 30
                                 40
                                 50
                                 60
                                 70
                                 80
                                 90
                                100
                                110

                                    125

                                              Frequency in Hertz (Hz)  FIGURE 5.3 Conductive
                                                                       hearing loss (left ear).

Chapter 7:                               Surgical Treatment for Conductive Hearing Loss
Procedure                                 Myringotomy with or without placement of tympanostomy tubes (PE tube) for the
Procotol:
Myringotomy                                 treatment of chronic otitis media
With and                                  Myringoplasty for the treatment of TM perforation
Without PE                                Tympanoplasty (reconstruction of the TM)
Tube Insertion                            Stapedectomy or stapeotomy (if CHL is due to the fixation of the stapes as with OS)
section.                                  Ossiculoplasty if ossicular discontinuity exists
                                          Mastoidectomy (e.g., for chronic otitis media, to remove a cholesteatoma or diseased
Chapter 7:
Procedure                                   air cells)
Protocol:
Paper Patch
Myringoplasty
section.

Sensorineural Hearing Loss

                                         SNHL involves any pathology that affects the inner ear (cochlea), vestibulocochlear
                                         nerve (CN VIII), or the central processing centers of the brain (termed central auditory
                                         processing disorder). Most of the time, SNHL is a result of poor sensory hair cell func-
                                         tion within the cochlea. The sensory hair cells can be damaged at birth (CHL) or dam-
                                         aged at some point in a person's lifetime (acquired hearing loss), either acutely or over
                                         a long period of time. Keep in mind that SNHL may be associated with vertigo and bal-
                                         ance disorders, related to the close proximity of the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII).

                                         Pathologies Involving the Inner Ear (Cochlea)

                                         That Cause Sensorineural Hearing Loss
                                          Congenital:

                                             Premature birth
                                             Lack of development of the cochlea
                                             Prenatal rubella exposure
                                             Chromosomal syndromes (rare)
                                          Acquired:
                                             Presbycusis (most common cause): Age-related hearing loss that occurs in the

                                               high frequencies
                                             Noise-induced (acute or prolonged exposure): A major cause of preventable hear-

                                               ing loss.
                                                                      TYPES OF HEARING LOSS  113

NOTE: For more information on this topic, see the section on NIHL in this chapter.

    Sudden SNHL (SSNHL): Defined as 30 dB or more loss over at least three contigu-
      ous frequencies occurring within 3 days or less.

NOTE: For more information on this topic, see the section on SSNHL in this chapter.

    Barotrauma
     · The pressure from barotrauma can cause rupture of the oval or round win-
         dows, which can leak perilymphatic fluid from the inner ear.
     · Increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure from physical strain can cause
         inner cochlear membrane rupture.

    Inflammatory conditions
     · Caused by measles, viral, syphilis, meningitis, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infec-
         tion, and so on.

    Physical trauma (temporal bone fracture)
    Ototoxic drugs; examples include: aspirin, furosemide, methotrexate, erythromy-

      cin, gentamicin, tobramycin.
     · The hearing loss is typically bilateral and can be permanent.
     · Patients with compromised renal function and/or patients receiving more than

         one ototoxic drug at a time are at greatest risk.
    Autoimmune disorders

NOTE: For more information on this topic, see section on Hearing Loss Due to Autoim-
mune Inner Ear Disease in this chapter.

    Perilymph fistula: Tear or defect in one or both of the small thin membranes (oval
      window and round window) between the middle and inner ears.

NOTE: For more information on this topic, see Chapter 8: Evaluation and Management of
Inner Ear Conditions.

    Vascular occlusion or hypoxia
    Meniere's disease: Causes fluctuating SNHL that affects mainly the low frequency

      range

NOTE: For more information on this topic, see Chapter 8: Evaluation and Management of
Inner Ear Conditions.

    Meningitis
    Systemic diseases; examples include: multiple sclerosis, diabetes, Paget's disease,

      and so on.

Pathologies Involving the Vestibulocochlear Nerve (CN VIII)
That Cause Sensorineural Hearing Loss
Pathologies affecting CN VIII are usually related to something that causes impinge-
ment on the nerve itself, such as the following:

 Physical trauma (temporal bone fracture)
 Cerebellopontine angle (CPA) tumor (e.g., acoustic neuroma or vestibular schwannoma)
 Infections (e.g., meningitis, syphilis, viral, or bacterial infection from the spread of

   otitis media)

Pathologies Involving the Central Processing Centers
of the Brain That Cause Hearing Loss
Central auditory processing disorder is difficult to detect because the hearing
impairment usually results from damage to the brain pathways from the auditory
114  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

               nerve and/or brainstem. The patient may have SNHL with normal speech dis-
               crimination, but the overall history in comparison to the audiogram does not
               explain the patient's lack of word recognition. It is important to rule out the
               following:

                History of brainstem injuries or head trauma
                Lesions or tumors affecting the brain or brainstem structures
                Ototoxic medications
                Ask about a history of any learning, language, or attention deficit disorders. Usually

                  this coexists with a central auditory processing disorder.

               Important History Examination Questions

                Onset
                Progression (acute vs. chronic)
                Unilateral versus bilateral
                Family history of hearing loss
                Presence of tinnitus (unilateral vs. bilateral)
                History of noise exposure
                Ear fullness or pressure
                Fluctuation in hearing
                Presence of dizziness or vertigo
                Recent head trauma
                Recent infection
                Medication usage
                Neurological impairment
                Previous history of ear surgery
                Learning, language, or attention deficit disorders

               Physical Examination: Tuning Fork Test
               Weber: Localizes to the normal ear
               Rinne: Is positive (normal), although both air and bone conduction are equally dimin-
               ished

Figure 5.4:    Audiometric Findings
Sensorineural
hearing loss    The audiogram in Figure 5.4 shows SNHL in the right ear (as evidenced by "O" plot-
(right ear).      ted on the graph).

                The area above the "O" represents the sound the patient would not hear (which is
                  softer than the threshold).

                The area below the "O" indicates all of the sounds the patient would be able to hear
                  (which is louder than the thresholds).

               Treatment for Sensorineural Hearing Loss
                SNHL is most commonly treated with hearing aids after other pathology is ruled

                  out.
                   Audiologists are able to fit hearing aids to patients with wide ranges and degrees

                     of hearing loss.
                   It is important to remember that the patient must be ready to pursue hear-

                     ing aid options. If not, there will be a low rate of compliance and hearing aid
                     success.
                There is no medical or surgical treatment that can reverse noise-induced hearing loss
                  (NIHL).
                                                                                     TYPES OF HEARING LOSS  115

                                         Sensorineural Hearing Loss Audiogram

Hearing Level in decibels (dB)  -10
                                   0
                                         250  500 1000 2000 4000               8000
                                 10
                                 20
                                 30
                                 40
                                 50
                                 60
                                 70
                                 80
                                 90
                                100
                                110

                                    125

                                              Frequency in Hertz (Hz)

                                         Air conduction  Bone conduction

                                                                                     FIGURE 5.4 Sensorineural
                                                                                     hearing loss (right ear).

                                         Surgical Treatment for Sensorineural Hearing Loss
                                          Cochlear implants: Stimulate the cochlear nerve directly; indicated in cases of pro-

                                            found sensorineural deafness

                                         NOTE: For more information on this topic, see section Criteria for Management of Cochlear
                                         Implantation in this chapter.

Mixed Hearing Loss

Figure 5.5:                              With a mixed hearing loss (MHL), there are conductive and sensorineural components.
Mixed hearing                            The goal is to focus on correcting the conductive component, if possible, because the
loss.                                    sensorineural component is permanent.

Noise-Induced Hearing Loss

                   Either occupational or recreational exposure to loud noise can cause NIHL. This type
                   of hearing loss is preventable. There are no medical or surgical treatments that can
                   reverse NIHL, so the primary focus should be identifying a patient at risk, counseling
                   on the dangers of loud noise exposure, and preserving hearing by initiating measures
                   to prevent further damage.

                  Etiology
                    Hearing loss due to noise exposure causes damage to the outer hair cells in the organ

                      of Cori (cochlea) first, followed by inner hair cell damage, and ultimately permanent
                      neural degeneration.
                    Exposure to loud noise for seconds to hours can cause a temporary SNHL that recov-
                      ers almost completely, usually within 24 hours. The ability for recovery is dependent
                      on the intensity and frequency of the noise.
                    The most common nonoccupational cause of NIHL is gunfire.
116  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

Hearing Level in decibels (dB)  -10
                                   0
                                        250  500         1000 2000 4000    8000
                                 10
                                 20
                                 30
                                 40
                                 50
                                 60
                                 70
                                 80
                                 90
                                100
                                110

                                   125

                                             Frequency in Hertz (Hz)

                                        Air conduction:  Bone conduction:
                                             Left ear         Left ear
                                             Right ear        Right ear

                                                                                 FIGURE 5.5 Mixed hearing
                                                                                 loss (bilateral ears).

                                         After repeated exposure of a particular decibel, a person can experience changes in
                                           the hearing thresholds that is permanent.

                                         Persistent noise induced permanent hearing loss does not occur after exposure to the
                                           loud noise is removed from that person's environment.

                                         A person can have permanent hearing loss due to a very intense short-duration,
                                           single exposure to a sound. It is thought that this literally tears membranes, ruptures
                                           cells, damages the organ of Corti, and so on. Damage this severe can also be associ-
                                           ated with TM rupture and/or ossicular injury.

                                         In general, continuous noise exposure over many years is considered more
                                           damaging than interrupted noise exposure that allows the ear to have a rest
                                           period.

                                        Evaluation and History
                                         Document exposure of occupational or nonoccupational loud noise exposure and

                                           duration.
                                         Document what measures the patient took to protect from the loud noise expo-

                                           sure.

                                        Does the patient:

                                         Have aural fullness, muffled hearing, or tinnitus after exposure to a particular loud
                                           noise environment (e.g., work)?

                                         Have a hobby such as woodworking or hunting?
                                         Work as a professional gardener (exposure to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, etc.)?
                                         Play a musical instrument for a living or as a hobby?
                                         Wear headphones and play music at a high volume, particularly in an already noisy

                                           environment?
                                         Wear hearing protection? If so, when did they start?
               TYPES OF HEARING LOSS  117

Figure 5.4:    Audiometric Findings
Sensorineural   "Notching" on the audiogram
hearing loss
(right ear).       Typically there is a dip at 3,000, 4,000, or 6,000 Hz with better hearing at both
                     lower and higher frequencies.

               NOTE: Figure 5.4 is an example of a potential NIHL.

               Diagnosis
                Audiometric findings ideally over a long period of time (many years) are recom-

                  mended to see the comparisons.
                Take into account the patient's history.
                Rule out external and middle ear disorders.
                If asymmetric hearing loss exists, rule out retrocochlear pathology with an MRI of

                  the IACs.

               Management
                Persons working in a occupational setting with exposure to loud noise exceeding 90 dB

                  over an 8-hour period are required by law to have periodic audiometric monitoring.
                Persons exposed to occupational or nonoccupational high volume levels need to be

                  counseled on wearing a hearing protection device.

               Hearing Protection Devices
                Ear muffs

                   Enclose entire external ears
                   Usually used in conjunction with earplugs as "dual aids" to help with the expo-

                     sure to extremely loud noise
                Ear plugs

                   Expands to fit the EAC
                Custom mold ear plugs

Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss

                   SSNHL is considered a medical emergency. SSNHL is defined as SNHL in one or both
                   ears that occurs rapidly within 72 hours or less. Most of the time, the hearing loss is
                   unilateral and the chance of hearing recovery is good. However, delay in diagnosis,
                   moderate to severe hearing loss, and associated vestibular symptoms are all poor indi-
                   cators of hearing recovery.

                  Etiology
                    Only 10% to 15% of SSNHL cases are found to have a specific etiology (Jafek & Stark,

                      1996).
                    One third of patients with SSNHL report symptoms of upper respiratory infection

                      within 1 month prior to onset (Jafek & Stark, 1996).
                    Possible etiologies of SSNHL could include (but are not limited to) the following:

                       Vascular: NOTE: Just because a patient may have vascular risk factors does not mean
                         this puts them at greater risk for SSNHL in his or her lifetime. The cochlea receives
                         its entire blood supply from the cerebellar artery with no collateral vasculature.
                         Cochlear function is sensitive to changes in blood supply, so vascular compromise
                         can occur with the following:

                      · Thromboembolism
                      · Sickle cell disease
                      · Vascular disease or alteration of microcirculation
118  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

                      · Vertebrobasilar insufficiency
                      · Coronary artery bypass surgery
                      · Hypercoagulable states
                       Tumor:
                      · CPA masses such as an acoustic neuroma can cause impingement of CN VIII

                            within the IAC.
                      · Only 1% to 3% of SSNHL is due to an acoustic neuroma (Jafek & Stark, 1996).
                      · Temporal bone metastasis
                       Inflammatory: NOTE: Inflammatory causes may impair the cochlea or CN VIII. They
                            include the following:
                      · Autoimmune
                      · Multiple sclerosis
                      · Relapsing polychondritis
                      · Systemic lupus erythematosus
                      · Wegener's granulomatosis
                       Traumatic:
                      · Temporal bone fracture
                      · Perilymph fistula causes leakage of perilymphatic fluid through the oval and

                            round windows.
                      · Otologic surgery
                      · Barotrauma can lead to cochlear membrane rupture.
                       Infectious: NOTE: Infectious causes may impair the cochlea or CN VIII.
                      · Syphilis (congenital or acquired)
                      · Herpes virus (simplex, zoster, varicella, CMV)
                      · Meningococcal meningitis
                      · Labyrinthitis
                      · Influenza
                      · Spread of otitis media

                  Incidence
                    SSNHL occurs in all age groups.
                    Estimates of the annual incidence of SSNHL range from 5 to 20 cases per 100,000

                      persons (Bailey & Johnson, 2001).

                  Evaluation and History
                   If SSNHL is suspected, evaluation including audiometric testing should be done as
                   soon as possible.

                    Ask the patient: Is the hearing loss:
                       Fluctuant or recurrent?
                       Unilateral or bilateral?
                       Associated with dizziness? Tinnitus? Aural fullness? Then consider Meniere's.

                  Audiometric Criteria
                    A hearing loss of  30 dB at three consecutive frequencies on audiogram that cannot be

                      identified by history and/or physical examination occurring within 72 hours or less

                  Labs
                    Laboratory testing is generally not indicated.
                    If there is a strong history, the following lab tests may be helpful in narrowing down

                      the etiology.
                       Coagulation studies to rule out coagulopathy if indicated by history
                                                                      TYPES OF HEARING LOSS  119

    FTA-Abs antibody test to rule out syphilis, congenital or acquired
    Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) to screen for autoimmune or inflammatory

      disease
    CBC with differential to screen for blood dyscrasias.
    Anti-heat shock protein 70 lab test to evaluate for the detection of anti-68 kDa

      serum antibodies, which is an inner ear protein that distinguishes among different
      causes of SNHL. This test is the only available diagnostic marker that can identify
      an autoimmune origin of hearing loss. However, a negative test does not rule
      out autoimmune-related hearing loss. NOTE: The test can be falsely elevated if the
       patient was recently on oral steroids.

Imaging Studies
 If the SSNHL is idiopathic (ISSNHL), retrocochlear pathology should be ruled out

   with either of the following:
    MRI of the IACs:

     · The gold standard test for diagnosing CPA tumor/mass
    Auditory brainstem response (ABR):

     · ABR testing reflects function of the retrocochlear neural pathways.
     · If ABR testing is abnormal, MRI to evaluate the IACs is necessary to radiograph-

         ically rule out pathology that may be affecting the nerve of hearing.
    Audiometric followup within 6 months of diagnosis to confirm if hearing loss is stable

      or worsening. If worsening, further testing with either ABR or MRI is warranted.
 Vestibular tests are obtained when further information regarding vestibular function

   is needed.

Treatment
 It is reported that spontaneous recovery of hearing loss rates range from 47% to 63%

   combining categories of complete and good or partial hearing loss recovery (Chen
   et al., 2003).
    Lack of vestibular symptoms, low degree of hearing loss, and low frequency loss

      are all good prognostic factors for a greater likelihood of spontaneous recovery
      with or without treatment.

Corticosteroids (Oral)
 Corticosteroids should be offered as initial treatment to patients with ISSNHL.

    Corticosteroids are thought to reduce cochlea and auditory nerve inflammation.
    A 14-day course of 60 mg prednisone (with taper) is recommended (Slattery,

      Fisher, Iqbal, & Liu, 2005).

Intratympanic or Transtympanic Steroid Injection
 Intratympanic steroid injection has theoretical benefits of high delivery of steroid

   concentration, which is injected through the TM into the middle ear space. The per-
   fusion of the steroid occurs through the round windows via the middle ear space.
 No standard protocol has been developed for the use of intratympanic steroid injec-
   tion therapy because of vast opinions on delivery technique, medication used, dose,
   and dosing schedule. More studies need to be done before a definitive therapy
   protocol can be recommended. Studies have shown that intratympanic injection of
   dexamethasone improves hearing in patients with severe or profound SSNHL after
   treatment failure with standard therapy (Ho, Lin, Shu, Yang, & Tsai, 2004).
    Therefore, there is evidence to consider offering intratympanic (IT) steroid injec-

      tion when a patient has incomplete recovery from ISSNHL after failure of initial
      management with oral steroids.
120  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

                    Antiviral Therapy
                    This is a controversial therapy option. There are studies that have shown no added

                      benefit of antiviral therapy either alone or in combination with oral corticosteroids.
                      The implication for considering antiviral therapy is thought to be related to the
                      assumption that a viral infection may be a contributing cause for the ISSNHL.

                  Management
                    Patients with incomplete recovery of hearing may benefit from amplification with

                      hearing aids.
                    Repeat audiograms to ensure stability of hearing over a period of time is recom-

                      mended.

HEARING LOSS DUE TO OTOSCLEROSIS

Chapter 7:         OS is an abnormal growth of sclerotic lesions of bone in the middle ear that mainly
Otosclerosis       affects the stapes footplate attached to the oval window of the cochlea. The abnormal
and Ossicular      bony growth impairs movement of the stapes and therefore sound transmission to the
Fixation section.  inner ear. OS is thought to be primarily a hereditary condition. Patients usually present
                   with a slowly progressive CHL over a period of years.

Type of Hearing Loss

                    The primary form of hearing loss is CHL, because the sound cannot completely be
                      transmitted to the cochlea due to the abnormal bony growth impairing movement
                      of the stapes.

                    It is still disputable whether or not OS can cause SNHL.

Audiometric Findings

                    With pure-tone audiometry, patients present with progressive low frequency CHL.
                    As OS progresses, it increases the stiffness of the entire stapes, resulting in low fre-

                      quency and high frequency hearing loss.
                    There will be an air-bone gap that usually begins in the low frequencies and, as the

                      disease progresses, the air-bone gap widens or gets worse.
                    Speech discrimination is usually excellent in patients with OS.
                    The TM may be Type As, which indicates a stiff TM due to stapes fixation. However,

                      early on in the disease process, the TM can be Type A, which generally indicates
                      normal middle ear function.
                    There is belief that as OS spreads, it can involve the cochlea, resulting in a MHL (both
                      conductive and sensorineural components); however, this is still disputable. NOTE: If
                        SNHL occurs as a result of OS, it usually manifests late in the disease process.

Carhart's Notch

Figure 5.6:         Classic audiometric finding in patients with OS
Otosclerosis        Carhart's notch is present in BC
Carhart's notch     BC shows approximately a 20-dB loss at 2,000 Hz but less decibel loss in the low and
(right ear).
                      high frequencies (before and after) the 2,000-Hz range.
                    It is considered to be an artifact due to stapes fixation.
                    After successful stapes surgery, the Carhart's notch disappears.
                                                                      HEARING LOSS DUE TO BAROTRAUMA  121

Hearing Level in decibels (dB)  -10
                                   0
                                        250  500  1000 2000 4000 8000
                                 10
                                 20
                                 30
                                 40
                                 50
                                 60
                                 70
                                 80
                                 90
                                100
                                110

                                   125

                                             Frequency in Hertz (Hz)   FIGURE 5.6 Otosclerosis
                                                                       Carhart's notch (right ear).

HEARING LOSS DUE TO BAROTRAUMA

Chapter 7: Otic                         Barotrauma can affect the external, middle, or inner ear related to sudden pressure
Barotrauma                              changes that occur within the pockets of confined air spaces within these areas. Usu-
section.                                ally the air within these spaces is evenly balanced and equal for sound to transmit. If
                                        air pressure outside the ear suddenly changes, as with flying or diving, this causes an
                                        increase in air pressure within the middle ear.

                                               The middle ear is the most common site of barotrauma, primarily because of the
                                        relationship of eustachian tube function. When outside pressure decreases, the air in
                                        the middle ear will expand and vent through the eustachian tube on its own. However,
                                        when outside pressure increases, the air in the middle ear and within the eustachian tube
                                        is compressed. This tends to collapse the eustachian tube. A failure to equalize the eusta-
                                        chian tube (as with the Valsalva maneuver) results in damage to structures of the middle
                                        ear and adjacent tissues. Therefore, the most important single identifying indicator for
                                        barotrauma is recent history of exposure to changes in pressure differentiation.

                                               Barotrauma can lead to the following:

                                         Negative pressure in the middle ear space resulting in TM retraction
                                         TM perforation
                                         Hemotympanum: As outside pressure builds, small vessels within the middle ear

                                           mucosa dilate and rupture causing edema and a hemotympanum.
                                         Rupture of the oval or round windows, which can lead to a perilymphatic fistula

                                            A perilymphatic fistula is a tear or defect in one or both of the oval or round win-
                                              dows between the middle and inner ears.

                                         Barotrauma can cause a leakage of perilymphatic fluid from the inner ear.

Type of Hearing Loss

                    CHL: Related to TM perforation or the development of a hemotympanum or middle
                      ear effusion.

                    SSNHL: May be attributed to a perilymphatic fistula and/or perilymph leakage.

                     NOTE: Usually associated with dizziness and sometimes associated with an audible "pop."
                     It can permanently cause damage to the inner ear and hearing loss.
122  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

Audiometric Findings

                    The tympanogram would show a Type B if fluid occupies the middle ear space or a
                      Type B accompanied with a large volume if there is a TM perforation.

                    The tympanogram would show a Type C if there was eustachian tube dysfunction,
                      leading to negative pressure of the TM (i.e., the TM was being sucked in the middle
                      ear space).

                    CHL in one or both ears
                    SSNHL in one or both ears
                    MHL (both conductive and sensorineural components) in one or both ears

HEARING LOSS DUE TO AUTOIMMUNE INNER EAR DISEASE

Chapter 8:        Autoimmune inner ear disease as a cause of hearing loss is poorly understood and
Autoimmune        is usually diagnosed once other causes have been ruled out. It most often presents
Inner Ear         as an unexplained, rapidly progressive hearing loss. Patients may have a coexist-
Disease section.  ing autoimmune-related disorder. Physical examination findings of the ear are
                  often normal. It is generally difficult to make a definitive diagnosis in most cases.
                  It is speculated that the hearing loss is caused by antibodies or immune cells that
                  attack the inner ear, causing permanent damage. There is no specific lab test to
                  determine if autoimmune inner ear disease exists. A common approach is to look
                  for other evidence (within patient history and/or lab tests) that an autoimmune
                  process exists.

Type of Hearing Loss

                    SSNHL
                    SNHL

Audiometric Findings

                    Tympanogram is Type A indicating normal middle ear function.
                    Speech discrimination may be abnormal.

IMPAIRMENT OF AUDITORY DISCRIMINATION

                   Along with pure-tone audiometry, auditory discrimination or word recognition is a
                   fundamental tool in determining the degree of hearing loss. In addition, it can help
                   assess if the patient may do well with hearing aids, although this is not the only single
                   determining factor.

                          Auditory discrimination scores are documented on the audiogram as SRT scores.
                   The test estimates the ability of the patient to recognize words. The objective during
                   the test is to obtain the lowest level in decibel at which the patient can understand
                   50% of spoken words. The words presented (one ear at a time) to the patient during an
                   audiogram to test SRT are two-syllable words with equal stress on each syllable, such
                   as hot dog, baseball, playground, and so on. The audiologist calculates the percentage of
                   words correctly repeated by the patient.
                                                          TINNITUS  123

      SPEECH DISCRIMINATION SCORES: INTERPRETING RESULTS

90-100%  Excellent understanding of speech

80-90%   Good understanding of speech

70-80%   Fair understanding of speech

60-70%   Poor understanding of speech

<60%     Markedly reduced understanding of speech

Poor auditory discrimination scores can occur related to the following reasons:

 Reduced audibility: Patients with SNHL have considerably more difficulty under-
   standing speech in a noisy environment.
    Hearing aids can help.

 Abnormal central auditory processing disorder: The patient can hear the words but
   has a hard time understanding or processing what was heard.
    Hearing aids will not help.

 Diminished cognitive function: The patient can hear the words but due to an intel-
   lectual process is unable to perceive, comprehend, or understand what was heard.
    Hearing aids will not help.

 Injury of the auditory nerve or cochlea:
    Hearing aid benefit depends on the severity of the injury.

 Retrocochlear pathology affecting the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII)
NOTE: ABR or MRI of the IAC is indicated for a speech discrimination difference greater

than 15% between both ears to rule out retrocochlear pathology.

TINNITUS

                   Tinnitus is a complex symptom and not a disease. It can vary from one tone, multiple
                   tones, high pitched, low pitched, intermittent, and/or constant. It can be defined as
                   buzzing, ringing, clicking, hissing, whistling, static, and so on. The most important
                   thing to address when evaluating a patient with tinnitus is whether or not the sound
                   heard is pulsatile or nonpulsatile (i.e., does the sound coincide with the heartbeat) and
                   whether or not the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral.

Pulsatile Tinnitus (Synchronized With Heartbeat)

                   Pulsatile tinnitus may be heard by the patient (subjective) or by the examiner (objec-
                   tive). It is related to change in blood flow in the vessels near the ear or a change in
                   awareness of the blood flow. The involved vessels include the arteries and veins of the
                   neck, base of the skull, and in and around the ear itself.

                          Causes of pulsatile tinnitus that is synchronized with the heartbeat can include
                   the following.

                  Vascular Abnormalities
                    Perceived sound--rushing, blowing, or wooshing sound
                    It is sometimes impossible to differentiate venous anomalies. Imaging studies can

                      help make the diagnosis.
                       For diagnosing most arteriovenous malformations, the initial test of choice is a CT

                         of the temporal bones with contrast.
124  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

                       MRI angiography can be used for diagnosing most arterial conditions.
                       Arteriography is optional for those cases with normal MRI angiography and a

                         high suspicion of arteriovenous malformation.

                  Arterial Bruits
                    The sound of blood flow related to:

                       Carotid artery

                     NOTE: An audible finding of a carotid bruit on physical examination indicates further need for
                     evaluation with a carotid artery ultrasound to rule out carotid artery stenosis.

                       Vascular loops within the internal auditory meatus pressing on the vestibuloco-
                         chlear nerve (CN VIII).
                      · Diagnosis is made by CT of the temporal bones, MRI of the IAC, or MRA.

                  Jugular Bulb Abnormalities (Venous Hums)
                   The jugular vein is in close proximity to the inner ear. Noise in the vessel can be con-
                   ducted into the inner ear. It is unclear why these structures cause sudden onset pulsa-
                   tile tinnitus.

                    High riding jugular bulb:
                       This is a common vascular anomaly.
                       A jugular bulb is considered "high" or "high-riding" if it extends into the middle
                         ear, above the level of the floor of the IAC or tympanic annulus (the thickened
                         peripheral rim of the pars tensa of the TM).

                    Dehiscent jugular bulb:
                       Dehiscence of the floor of the middle ear can allow for protrusion of the jugular
                         bulb into the middle ear space.
                       Uncommon but very important to rule out if a bluish mass is present behind the
                         TM. NOTE: Important to rule out a dehiscent jugular bulb if considering a myringo-
                            tomy. Significant bleeding can occur if incised. NOTE: The bluish mass of a dehiscent
                            jugular bulb is different than the reddish mass of a glomus tumor.
                       Can be altered by head position, activity, or pressure over the jugular vein
                       No treatment is available for jugular bulb dehiscence.

                  Glomus Jugulare Tumor or Glomus Tympanicum
                    Glomus tumors are rare, benign, slow-growing, vascular tumors that arise from

                      within the jugular foramen of the temporal bone.
                    Tumors that originate from the jugular bulb and extend to involve the middle ear are

                      referred to as glomus jugulare tumors or glomus tympanicum.
                    Although rare, they are the most common tumor of the middle ear and are second to

                      an acoustic neuroma as the most common tumor of the temporal bone.
                    Because of its slow-growing onset, it usually presents later in life.
                    The lesion may be visible on examination as a reddish blue mass behind the TM. If the

                      tumor is adjacent to the TM, it may cause CHL and be visible as a pulsatile mass.
                    Often these tumors do not need surgical intervention and can be followed by imag-

                      ing only.

                  Persistent Stapedial Artery
                    Rare congenital vascular anomaly
                    The stapedial branch of the posterior auricular artery (that supplies the stapedius

                      muscle in the inner ear) is normally present in the fetus. The stapedial artery nor-
                      mally closes at birth, leaving no arteries within the inner ear or behind the eardrum.
                                                                                                          TINNITUS  125

                      If it is present at birth, it is called a persistent stapedial artery. It may or may not be
                      visible on examination in the middle ear space. It can be detected through imaging
                      evaluation.
                    If present, the artery can generate pulsatile tinnitus related to the blood flow through
                      the artery adjacent to the middle ear structures.
                    The artery can be removed through surgical methods.

Pulsatile Tinnitus (Not Synchronized With the Heartbeat)

                   Causes of pulsatile tinnitus not synchronized with the heartbeat can include the fol-
                   lowing:

                    Palatal myoclonus
                       Perceived sound--irregular rapid clicking
                       Caused by mucous membranes of the eustachian tube snapping together in
                         response to the involuntary movement of the muscles in the soft palate when
                         they contract.
                       Can affect one or both sides of the soft palate.
                       Usually appears in adults
                       Can last indefinitely
                       Palatal myoclonus may be detected by doing a flexible fiberoptic nasopharyngos-
                         copy examination to evaluate the palate from the nasopharynx.
                       If bothersome, treatment relies on medication including muscle relaxants (i.e.,
                         clonazepam, diazepam).

                    Idiopathic, Stapedial and Muscle spasm
                       Perceived sound--irregular rapid clicking
                       The malleus and stapes are attached to two small muscles, the tensor tympani,
                         and stapedius muscle.
                       For no known reason, these muscles can go into rhythmical contraction.
                       If bothersome, treatment relies on medication including muscle relaxants (i.e.,
                         clonazepam, diazepam).

                    Patulous eustachian tube
                       Perceived sound--ocean sound that may be synchronous with breathing. May also
                         complain of "muffled" hearing.
                       Related to excessive openness of the eustachian tube
                       Usually diminished or alleviated by lying down.
                       Patients may complain of abnormal awareness of own voice (autophony).
                       Conditions that are associated with patulous eustachian tube include preg-
                         nancy, hormone therapy, radiation therapy, stress, excess caffeine use, and
                         weight loss.
                       No specific treatment has been identified. It may be helpful for patients to recline
                         or lower the head when symptoms occur. A trial of a nasal steroid may be helpful
                         in some cases.

Pulsatile Tinnitus (Other Causes That May or May Not Be Synchronized With Heartbeat)

                   Causes of pulsatile tinnitus that may or may not be synchronized with the heartbeat
                   can include the following:

                    Strenuous exercises
                    Pregnancy
126  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

                    Severe anemia
                    Obesity

                       Leads to an increase in intraabdominal and intrathoracic pressure from elevation
                         of the diaphragm. This causes an increase in venous flow and can translate into
                         pulsatile tinnitus within the ear.

                    Thyroid goiter or masses in the neck
                       May put external pressure on the carotid artery and cause turbulence or blood
                         flow stenosis

                    Atherosclerosis
                       Suspect in patients over 50 years old having other concurrent diseases such as
                         hypertension, diabetes, or hyperlipidemia, or in smokers.

Nonpulsatile Tinnitus

                   Nonpulsatile tinnitus is more common than pulsatile tinnitus and is mostly always
                   subjective. Nonpulsatile subjective tinnitus can be associated with the following:
                    Presbycusis or hearing loss:

                       The presence of tinnitus does not absolutely imply hearing loss; however, 85% of
                         tinnitus patients have hearing loss in the 250- to 8,000-Hz range (Jafek & Stark,
                         1996).

                       Tinnitus that is sensorineural in origin does not have a clear physiological expla-
                         nation. It may be caused by abnormalities of the cochlea, cochlear nerve, auditory
                         pathway, auditory hair cells, and so on. NOTE: An easy way to explain to the patient
                            the cause of tinnitus (once all other causes have been excluded): "The brain is look-
                            ing for a sound that it is not receiving, so it produces a high pitch ringing sound
                            instead."

                    Noise exposure
                    Otosclerosis
                    Meniere's disease
                    Head trauma

                       Skull fracture
                       Whiplash injury
                    Acoustic neuroma
                    Ear infections
                    Cerumen impaction or foreign body in the EAC
                    Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) problems
                    Medications (examples, but are not limited to):
                       Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
                       Aspirin compounds
                       Aminoglycoside ototoxicity
                       Antidepressants
                       Diuretics
                       Narcotics
                       Sedatives/hypnotics
                       ACE inhibitors and beta-blockers
                    Depression
                    Anxiety
                    Multiple sclerosis
                    Metabolic deficiency
                       Vitamin deficiency
                       Hypo- or hyperthyroidism
                       Hyperlipidemia
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  127

Tinnitus Management

                   Overall, tolerance of tinnitus generally gets better over time. Because of the realm of specu-
                   lation of the pathophysiology of tinnitus, numerous treatments have been tried. Once oto-
                   logic and/or medical disorders have been identified and treated, if tinnitus is still present
                   and affects the patient's quality of life, the following recommendations can be made:

                    Avoid chocolate, coffee, tea, cola, or other caffeine-containing products.
                    Avoid aspirin or NSAIDs or any other implicated medications, if possible.
                    Use noise-masking techniques such as a radio or fan when sleeping to "mask" out

                      the tinnitus. NOTE: Explain to the patient that the brain would rather focus on the radio
                        or fan than on the perceived tinnitus.

                    Antidepressant or antianxiety medications if indicated.
                    A hearing aid may be helpful. The increased sounds from the hearing aid masks the

                      tinnitus perceived by the patient.
                    There are many herbal products and over-the-counter remedies that claim to be

                      effective at treating tinnitus. Inform your patient that few of these substances have
                      been studied and if taken, may inadvertently cause undo side effects or interactions
                      with current medications.
                    Consider referral to a local tinnitus support group if the tinnitus is socially disruptive.

Links and Sources

                    American Tinnitus Association: www.ata.org

CRITERIA FOR MANAGEMENT OF COCHLEAR IMPLANTATION

                   Cochlear implants are useful in cases of profound hearing loss in both ears. Although
                   hearing aids amplify sounds, if the cochlea is severely damaged, amplification will
                   not be effective. Cochlear implants replace the function of the damaged hair cells by
                   converting sound into electrical impulses that are relayed to the vestibulocochlear
                   nerve (CN VIII). Electrodes are placed into the cochlea and electrical impulses relay
                   the sound signal to CN VIII. Sounds produced by cochlear implants are not the same
                   as normal hearing sounds. The speech processor of the cochlear implants selects out
                   specific characteristics of sound that help in speech understanding.

                          Imaging with CT or MRI is performed prior to cochlear implantation to evaluate
                   the inner ear, facial nerve, vestibulocochlear nerve, brain, and brainstem. This is to rule
                   out any other cause for the person's hearing loss before surgery is done.

                          Cochlear implants are indicated for patients above 2 years of age who have
                   profound bilateral SNHL, have an intact CN VIII, and show little or no benefit from
                   hearing aids. Patients who have already learned how to speak tend to do better than
                   patients who have not.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery. (2012). Clinical practice guidelines: Sudden
                   hearing loss. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 146(3 Suppl), S1-S35.

            American Academy of Pediatrics, Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. (2007). Year 2007 position state-
                   ment: Principles and guidelines for early hearing detection and intervention programs. Pediatrics,
                   120(4), 898-921.
128  5. HEARING AND TINNITUS

            American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. Hearing loss at birth (congenital hearing loss). Retrieved
                   from http://www.asha.org/public/hearing/Congenital-Hearing-Loss/. February 16, 2013.

            Archer, S. M., Barrs, D. M., Brown, S. R., Chandrasekhar, S. S., Fife, T. D., Ford, P., . . . Mikulec, A. A.
                   (2013). Quantification of hearing loss associated with superior semi-circular canal dehiscence.
                   American Journal of Otolaryngology, 13, 21-25.

            Armbrecht, E. S., Lowe, M. E., McEvoy, T. P., & Mikulec, A. A. (2013). Quantification of hearing loss asso-
                   ciated with superior semicircular canal dehiscence. American Journal of Otolaryngology, 13, 21-25.

            Bailey, B. J., & Johnson, J. T. (2001). Head and neck surgery--otolaryngology (4th ed., Vol. 2). Philadelphia,
                   PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

            Bluestone, C. D., Stool, S. E., Alper, C. M., Arjmand, E. M., Casselbrandt, M. L., Dohar, J. E., et al. (2002).
                   Pediatric otolaryngology (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders.

            Buttross, S. L., Gearhart, J. G., & Peck, J. E. (1995). Early identification and management of hearing im-
                   pairment. American Family Physician, 51(6), 1437-1447.

            Chen, C. Y., Halpin, C., & Rauch, S. D. (2003). Oral steroid treatment of sudden sensorineural hearing
                   loss: A ten year retrospective analysis. Otolaryngology and Neurootology, 24, 728-733.

            Chou, R., Dana, T., Bougatsos, C., Fleming, C., & Beil, T. (2011). Screening adults aged 50 years or older
                   for hearing loss: A review of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Annals of
                   Internal Medicine, 154, 347-355.

            Cueva, R. A. (2004). Auditory brainstem response versus magnetic resonance imaging for the evalua-
                   tion of asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope, 114(10), 1686-1692.

            Gelfand, S. (2009). Essentials of audiology (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Thieme.
            Ho, H. G., Lin, H. C., Shu, M. T., Yang, C. C., & Tsai, H. T. (2004). Effectiveness of intratympanic dexame-

                   thasone injection in sudden-deafness patients as salvage treatment. Laryngoscope, 114(7), 1184-1189.
            Jafek, B. W., & Stark, A. K. (1996). ENT secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus.
            Johansen, E. C., Lindholdt, T., Damsbo, N., & Eriksen, E. W. (2000). Tympanometry for the diagnosis

                   and treatment of otitis media in general practice. Family Practice, 17, 317-322.
            Joint Committee on Infant Hearing, American Academy of Audiology, American Academy of Pediat-

                   rics, American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, Directors of Speech and Hearing Programs
                   in State Health and Welfare Agencies. (2000). Year 2000 position statement: Principles and guide-
                   lines for early hearing detection and intervention programs. Pediatrics, 106(4), 798-817.
            Lee, K. J. (2003). Essential otolaryngology head and neck surgery (8th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
            Margolis, R. H., & Hunter, L. L. (1999). Tympanometry: Basic principles and clinical applications. In F.
                   E. Musiek & W. F. Rintelmann (Eds), Contemporary perspectives in hearing assessment (pp. 89-130).
                   Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
            Mehta, B. A., Metes, J. J., Noujaim, S. E., Patel, S. C., Silbergleit, R., & Quint, D. J. (2000). The persistent
                   stapedial artery. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 21, 572-577.
            Onusko, E. (2004). Tympanometry. American Family Physicians, 70(9), 1713-1720.
            Roizen, N. J. (2003). Non-genetic causes of hearing loss. Mental Retardation and Development Disabilities
                   Research Review, 9(2), 120-127.
            Schmida, M. J., Peterson, H. J., & Tharpe, A. M. (2003). Visual reinforcement audiometry using digital
                   video disc and conventional reinforcers. American Journal of Audiology, 12(1), 35-40.
            Slattery, W. H., Fisher, L. M., Iqbal, Z., & Liu, N. (2005). Oral steroid regimens for idiopathic sudden
                   sensorineural hearing loss. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 132(1), 5-10.
            Stachler, R. J., Chandrasekhar, S. S., Archer, S. M., Rosenfeld, R. M., Schwartz, S. R., Barrs, D. M., . . .
                   Robertson, P. J. (2012). American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery. Clini-
                   cal practice guideline: Sudden hearing loss. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 146(3 Suppl),
                   S1-S35.
            Yasan, H. (2007). Predictive role of Carhart's notch in pre-operative assessment for middle-ear surgery.
                   Journal of Laryngology and Otology, 121(3), 219-221.
            Yueh, B., Shapiro, N., MacLean, C. H. (2003). Screening and management of adult hearing loss in pri-
                   mary care. JAMA, 289, 1976-1985.
