6 Evaluation and Management
               of External Ear Conditions

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF EAR PAIN

                   The medical term for ear pain is otalgia. Not all otalgia originates from the ear. Otalgia
                   can occur as a result of a problem with the ear itself, termed primary otalgia. It can
                   also occur from an outside source that radiates pain to the ear, making it feel like the
                   source is directly related to the ear when it is not. Otalgia that is not directly ear related
                   is called "referred otalgia." The cause of primary otalgia is usually obvious on physical
                   examination. Referred otalgia is often difficult to diagnose because the innervation of
                   the ear is very complex and there can be many sources. Dental pain, temporomandibu-
                   lar joint (TMJ) pain, and cervical spine pain are among the most commonly reported
                   causes of referred otalgia.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF OTALGIA

                   A broad differential diagnosis is essential to avoid missing a tumor causing referred pain.

Primary                                Referred

 Auricular infection                    Carotidynia:
 External otitis media                     Vascular neck pain that can radiate to
 Malignant otitis externa                     the ear
                                           It occurs as one-sided tenderness of the
   (necrotizing pseudomonas                   carotid artery, near the bifurcation.
   infection that usually affects          Diagnosis is made from the type
   immunocompromised and/or                   of pain, associated symptoms, and
   diabetic patients)                         location of the pain.
 Herpes zoster oticus                      Treated with medications often used
 Carbuncle or furuncle (folliculitis)         for migraines and can disappear
   of the external auditory canal             spontaneously
   (EAC)
 Tumors or infected cysts in the        Cervical spine/cervical radiculopathy
   auricle or EAC                       Gastroesophageal reflux (GERD)
 Foreign body or cerumen                Myofacial pain syndromes
   impaction                            Migraine
 Otitis media                           Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
 Bullous myringitis (viral infection    Parotid gland:
   of the tympanic membrane [TM])
 Mastoiditis                               Parotitis/sialadenitis
                                           Parotid neoplasm

                                                                                                (continued)
130  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

             Primary                            Referred

              Eustachian tube dysfunction        Pharyngitis
              Barotrauma                         Teeth and TMJ:
              Cholesteatoma
              Preauricular sinus fistula            Bruxism NOTE: Can produce bilateral
              Polychondritis                           otalgia
              Neuralgias of the tympanic
                                                    Dental infection
                branch of the glossopharyngeal      Erupting teeth
                nerve (although rare)               Impacted teeth
                                                    Malocclusion
Figure 2.1:                                      Temporal arteritis
Skull bone                                       Tonsillitis
landmarks.                                       Trigeminal neuralgia
                                                 Tumors of the hypopharynx, nasopharynx,
                                                   base of tongue, tonsillar fossa, larynx
                                                 Eagle syndrome:
                                                    Rare
                                                    Otalgia caused by an elongated or

                                                       calcified styloid process (slender
                                                       elongation off the temporal bone).
                                                    Can occur after a tonsillectomy or
                                                       pharyngeal trauma
                                                    Diagnosed with CT neck imaging study
                                                    Surgical therapy includes removal of
                                                       the problematic portion of the styloid
                                                       process.

                    Obviously, if the patient had an abnormal ear examination, treating the underly-
             ing ear condition would be the management plan for primary otalgia. If the ear exami-
             nation (including nasal and fiberoptic laryngoscopy), tympanometry, or pneumatic
             otoscopy is normal and the history does not coincide with the most common causes
             of referred ear pain, then consider imaging study (CT temporal bones) to rule out cho-
             lesteatoma and other causes.

PREAURICULAR SINUS FISTULA OR CYST

                    Also called "preauricular cyst," "preauricular pit," or "congenital preauricular or
                      auricular fistula"

Etiology

              Congenital condition that results from ineffective closure of the first and second
                branchial arches (that normally come together and form the auricle during fetal
                development)

Incidence

              Less than 1%
              Bilateral fistulas are more likely to be inherited.
              POLYCHONDRITIS AND CHONDRITIS OF THE AURICLE  131

Presentation

Figure 1.2:    Nodule, dent, pit, or dimple located generally anterior, inferior to the crus of the
Pinna.           helix (the ascending limb of the helix).

               Fistulas are usually unilateral, but can be bilateral. They never close on their
                 own.

               The tract is lateral and superior to the facial nerve and parotid gland.

Complications

                    Patients can present with the following:
                       Purulent discharge from the tract: Accompanied with erythema and pain; most
                         common pathogen: Staphylococcus species
                       Skin debris from the tract

Associated Conditions

                    Patients with preauricular fistulas can have the following associated conditions
                      (although rare). Screening is not recommended to rule out any of these findings
                      unless clinically indicated.
                       Helix abnormalities
                       Narrow external auditory meatus
                       Ossicular malformations
                       Renal defects: Branchial-oto-rengal (BOR) syndrome is a genetic disorder that
                         involves the kidneys, ears, and neck

Management

                    Most patients are asymptomatic and do not need treatment.
                    If infected, antibiotic therapy is indicated.
                    Incision and drainage or needle drainage if an abscess is present

Surgical Option

                    Surgical excision of the sinus tract is recommended for recurrent or persistent infec-
                      tions.

                    The real problem in the surgical treatment is the high recurrence rate. The type
                      of technique used and surgeon experience can improve the success rate of the
                      surgery.

                    Complications of surgery include facial nerve deficits due to the close proximity of
                      the facial nerve.

POLYCHONDRITIS AND CHONDRITIS OF THE AURICLE

                   Polychondritis of the auricle is inflammation of the perichondrium (the layer of connec-
                   tive tissue that surrounds the cartilage of the ear). Chondritis of the auricle is inflam-
                   mation of the ear cartilage. Once infection settles in the perichondrium or cartilage of
                   the ear, it can be very difficult to treat. Therefore, the earlier treatment is begun, the
                   better.
132  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

Etiology

           Usually results from a laceration of the auricle
           Noninfectious causes include relapsing polychondritis, which is a process of inflam-

             mation and deterioration of various cartilaginous structures within the body--in
             this case, the ear.

Physical Examination Findings

                    Swelling, edema of auricle
                    Significant tenderness on palpation
                    Erythema of the skin over the affected area with possible crusting, weeping, or

                      squamous debris affecting the cartilage
                    Inflammation at the opening of the EAC
                    Inflammation in the preauricular region in some cases

Treatment

                    Ear drops and oral antibiotic coverage for both anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, par-
                      ticularly Pseudomonas.

                    Oral corticosteroids need to be considered for severe inflammation and in cases of
                      relapsing polychondritis.

                    Debridement of the crusting and squamous debris in the EAC is very important to
                      a successful outcome.

                    In severe cases, IV antibiotics coverage for Pseudomonas may need to be done. Infec-
                      tious disease may need to be consulted.

                    Culture may need to be taken if not successfully treated initially.

HEMATOMA OF THE AURICLE

                   Hematoma of the auricle occurs as a result of blunt trauma, injury, or a shearing force
                   to the auricle. Hematoma formation is commonly found in wrestlers and boxers. When
                   the injury occurs, blood accumulates in the subperichondrial space (the space between
                   the perichondrium and cartilage of the auricle).

Physical Examination Findings

                    Hematoma formation causes loss of the outline of the normal conchal folds
                    Edema
                    Erythema
                    Pain on palpation

Complications

                    Hematoma formation creates a barrier between the cartilage and the perichondrium.
                      This deprives the cartilage of nutrients and predisposes the ear to necrosis and
                      infection.
                                                                                   HEMATOMA OF THE AURICLE  133

                    Failure to evacuate the hematoma in time (usually within 7 days) can lead to car-
                      tilage necrosis and fibrosis, which leads to permanent disfigurement known as
                      "cauliflower ear."

Management

                   The goal is to completely evacuate the hematoma and prevent its reaccumulation and
                   thereby prevent deformity. This is not an easy task. It is very difficult to preserve the
                   normal contour of the helical rim and conchal bowl while successfully trying to evacu-
                   ate the hematoma without reaccumulation. There are numerous methods and opinions
                   on how this should be done. The following bullet points discuss possible ways of suc-
                   cessfully managing this condition.

                    Treatment consists of needle aspiration or incision and drainage (I and D). If bolster
                      or sutures are used, sterile technique is essential to avoid cartilage infection and
                      postprocedure antibiotics are given until suture removal.

                    If a skin incision is done, try and keep the incision parallel to the natural auricular
                      skin folds.

                    Irrigation of the site after the hematoma is evacuated and can be consid-
                      ered with either sterile saline or topical antibiotics to reduce the likelihood of
                      infection.

                    If an I and D is done, it is optional to leave a small drain in the incision to allow
                      the wound to drain. Usually the drain is kept in place for no more than 24 to 48
                      hours.

                    After the blood is evacuated, a compression dressing with materials, such as a dental
                      roll or cotton are coated in antibiotic ointment and shaped into location. Then the ear
                      is covered with a pressure dressing (using plain gauze and Kling dressing wrap) to
                      prevent reaccumulation.
                       A simple compression dressing involves the following: Place cotton coated
                         in antibiotic ointment or dry cotton over the hematoma excavation site on the
                         auricle. Then fill the crevices surrounding the cotton with either moist gauze
                         (soaked in saline) or Vaseline gauze. A large amount of dry gauze is placed
                         securely behind the ear to allow for ear support. Then the anterior portion of
                         the ear is covered with multiple layers of fluffed 4 × 4 dry gauze. This provides
                         coverage for the front of the ear and enough pressure once the Kling or elastic
                         bandage is applied. Then apply the Kling or elastic bandage securely around
                         the patient's head with enough pressure that is not too tight, but yet not too
                         loose.

                    It is important to closely follow these patients (within 1 or 2 days after pressure
                      dressing application) to check if reaccumulation occurred.

                    Whether or not irrigation with topical antibiotics is done, prophylactic oral
                      antistaphylococcal and antipseudomonas antibiotic therapy should be
                      initiated.

Prevention

                    Wrestlers should be reminded about the importance of wearing protective headgear,
                      even during practice.
134  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

                      PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: EAR CLEANING

                      Indications

                        Ear discomfort
                        Hearing problems
                        Cerumen impaction
                        Otitis media
                        Otitis externa
                        Foreign body

                      Contraindications

                       Other than patient intolerance, there is no contraindication to ear cleaning using a
                       binocular operating microscope. Irrigation of the ear or soaking of the EAC with
                       hydrogen peroxide, baby oil, or water should not be done with a perforated TM.

                      Procedure Protocol

                       The ears should be examined with a binocular operating microscope. The largest
                       possible speculum that can fit into the ear canal is to be selected. The patient should
                       be comfortably seated on the examination table; if the patient is a child, he or she
                       should be securely restrained to prevent sudden movement. A #3, #5, or #7 Frazier
                       suction should be used to clean out the ear. Hard wax or foreign bodies are best
                       removed with a 1- or 3-mm right-angled hook or curette. Ear hooks and ear curettes
                       should be used by gently advancing the instrument along the skin of the ear canal
                       and then sweeping toward the center of the ear canal to scoop out the debris. Suc-
                       tion is performed by removing debris first in the middle of the ear canal and then
                       gently working toward the delicate and tender wall of the external canal. It is for
                       this reason that suction is the most comfortable method for cleaning the ears. Soft
                       wax and squamous debris that is impacted deep against the ear drum should never
                       be removed with a curette. Suction may be effective, but the TM should be visible to
                       have absolute certainty of the depth of the instrument relative to the TM.

                              Small pieces of debris may also be irrigated out of the ear using body tem-
                       perature tap water and an appropriate ear irrigation syringe. The patient should
                       be observed for thermal nystagmus and dizziness. Irrigation should not be used
                       in the presence of any TM perforation. If the ear canal cannot be cleaned com-
                       pletely and there is not clear visualization of the TM, antibiotic ear drops should
                       be prescribed and the patient should be asked to return on a different day to
                       reevaluate. An otowick should be inserted in the EAC if the ear canal is too swol-
                       len to permit instillation of antibiotic drops. Caution should be used on patients
                       taking blood thinners such as Coumadin to prevent bleeding or hematoma.

                      PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: OTOWICK INSERTION

                       In order for topical ear drops to be effective in cases of external otitis, the medi-
                       cation must be able to make direct contact with the underlying skin of the EAC.

                                                                                                                                                (continued)
                   DERMATITIS OF THE AURICLE AND EAC  135

An otowick (essentially a sponge) can be inserted in the EAC to allow for suc-
cessful placement of the topical medications. The wick should not be a cotton
ball because it can fall apart and become lodged in the EAC.

Indications

Once the maximum amount of debris and/or infection is removed from the EAC
using a binocular operating microscope, if the EAC is edematous without visual-
ization of the TM, an otowick can be inserted.

Contraindications

History of contact allergy to the otowick

Procedure Protocol

With forceps, gently ease the otowick as far as possible in the EAC. Then instill
suitable topical antibiotic and anti-inflammatory ear drops in the EAC. Second-
ary to the inability to confirm an intact TM, do not prescribe any medications
that could be ototoxic. The patient should be reevaluated within 24 to 48 hours
so that the wick can be removed and replaced if needed. Remove the otowick
microscopically with forceps. This process is continued until the drops can be
directly instilled into the EAC without the need for the otowick. The wick can
also fall out spontaneously in some cases.

DERMATITIS OF THE AURICLE AND EAC

                   Patients presenting with dermatitis of the auricle and EAC may complain of intense
                   ear pruritus with or without otalgia. It is important to determine the instigating trig-
                   ger and treat the symptoms with appropriate medical therapy. Physical examination
                   findings of the auricle and EAC can include: scaling, dry, flaky skin, crusting, edema,
                   oozing, weeping, and/or fissuring. Regardless of the cause, oral antihistamines may
                   be administered for relief from the pruritus. If skin lesions are secondarily infected,
                   topical and/or oral antistaphylococcal antibiotics can be initiated.

Cause of the Skin  History                       Medical Management
Condition                                        and Prevention
                    May have a skin
 Psoriasis            condition affecting other   Topical corticosteroid cream
 Eczema               parts of the body too         BID × 2 weeks, then as
 Seborrheic                                         needed for flare-ups
                    May have other atopic
   dermatitis         past medical history        DermOtic (fluocinolone otic)
                      such as allergic rhinitis     drops 0.01% oil
                      or asthma                      For ages 2 years and above
                                                     Five drops in affected ear(s)
                                                        BID × 7 to 14 days, then as
                                                        needed for flare-ups

                                                                                      (continued)
136  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

          Cause of the Skin      History                       Medical Management
          Condition                                            and Prevention
          Contact
          dermatitis              May have a history of         Medication management is
                                    nickel allergy or contact     the same as those used to
          Allergies                 dermatitis affecting          treat skin conditions
                                    other parts of the body
          Otomycosis                                            Patch testing (usually through
          Dermatitis caused       Evaluate if they are using      a dermatologist) can be done
          by trauma to the          different hair products,      to determine specifically
          external auditory         detergents, etc.              what contact allergen may be
          canal (EAC; e.g.,                                       the contributing cause
          Q-tip use)              For hearing aid
                                    patients, consider that     Wear an ear plug or cover
                                    the patient may be            the auricle when in the
                                    allergic to the hearing       shower to avoid contact with
                                    aid or the chemicals          hair products and lessen the
                                    used to clean the             chance of excess moisture to
                                    hearing aid                   the affected area

                                  May be related to             Medication management is
                                    possible airborne             the same as those used to
                                    allergens as well as          treat skin conditions
                                    food allergies
                                                                Antihistamines for relief of
                                  Evaluate for other              pruritus
                                    allergic rhinitis
                                    symptoms (which may         Desensitization with
                                    or may not be present)        immunotherapy can be
                                                                  helpful for some patients

                                 See Fungal Otitis Externa (Otomycosis) in this chapter.

                                  History of using a            The cornerstone of
                                    foreign object to             prevention is to avoid putting
                                    "clean" the ears              any object in the EAC.

                                 NOTE: This impairs the         If ear pruritus is the main
                                 canal's natural defenses,        concern and there is no
                                 causes excessive                 evidence of an active infection,
                                 dryness, erythema, and           DermOtic (fluocinolone otic)
                                 lacerations to the EAC.          0.01% ear drops can help

          Other causes to consider include the following:

           Emotional or psychological stress
           Pregnancy or hormonal changes
           Idiopathic

ACUTE OTITIS EXTERNA

Etiology  Acute otitis externa (AOE) is an inflammatory and infectious process that affects the EAC
          and may involve the auricle and/or TM. AOE rarely occurs in children less than 2 years of
          age; therefore, most AOE treatment guidelines are indicated for those older than 2 years.

           Multifactorial because anything that disrupts the normal epithelium of the ear canal
             can permit invasion of bacteria
                     ACUTE OTITIS EXTERNA  137

                  The normal pH balance of the EAC can be altered as a result of the following:
                     Excessive cerumen cleanings
                     Water exposure or excessive moisture environment (as with sweating)
                     Alkaline ear drops (i.e., excessive use of swimmer's ear preparations)
                     Debris from dermatitis conditions of the EAC (eczema, psoriasis, etc.) can encour-
                       age infections.
                     Local trauma from hearing aid use, self-cleaning, and so on
                     AOE can also be a result of a secondary infection from an acute otitis media as
                       a result of perforation of the TM or infection that flows through tympanostomy
                       tubes or a TM perforation.

Patient Complaints and Physical Examination Findings

                   It varies depending on disease severity and can include all or some of the following:

                    Otalgia
                    Tenderness with palpation of tragus or pinna
                    Fullness or pressure in the ear
                    Hearing loss
                    Tinnitus
                    Jaw pain
                    Ear canal edema
                    Otorrhea or debris in EAC
                    Ear canal erythema
                    Ear pruritus
                    Regional lymphadenitis (mostly to preauricular and anterior cervical lymph nodes)
                    TM erythema
                    Can also occur as a result of EAC obstruction from cerumen impaction, foreign body,

                      and so on

Causative Organisms

Chapter 4:        Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common organisms in
Evaluation and      bacterial causes of AOE.
Management
of Facial Nerve   Viral infections as the only causative factor in AOE are very rare.
Conditions.          Caused by varicella, measles, or herpes virus
                     Herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt syndrome).

                  Fungal infections may be present as a copathogen to a bacterial AOE.

Audiometric Findings

                    Tympanogram will show good mobility of the TM in most cases (Type A tympano-
                      gram), which indicates no middle ear involvement.

                    In some cases with no middle ear effusion, the tympanogram will show a Type B
                      due to significant inflammation of the TM. At this point, it is hard to differenti-
                      ate between true middle ear effusion and otitis media. Treatment with a systemic
                      antibiotic is indicated (in conjunction with topical antibiotic ear drops for AOE).

Medical Management

                    Topical antibiotic ear drops are the preferred treatment for AOE with an intact TM
                      with no middle ear involvement.
138  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

 Modifying factors that would change therapy considerations and suggest oral anti-
   biotic therapy in addition to topical antibiotic ear drops with or without topical and/
   or systemic corticosteroids include whether or not the patient:
    Has a tympanostomy tube or perforated TM:
     · Antibiotics ear drops can get into the middle ear space and have the potential
         for crossing the round window membrane, reaching the inner ear. Therefore, it
         is important to use ear drops that are not ototoxic, because ototoxicity can cause
         hearing loss with prolonged use.
     · Tympanometry can be helpful to determine if the TM is intact. However, if in
         doubt, do not use an ototoxic medication.
    Is immunocompromised
    Has a history of prior radiation in the surrounding region: Radiation can damage
      the EAC by causing a skin reaction that alters normal pH balance.
    Has a history of diabetes
    Has HIV infection

 Pain relief with over-the-counter analgesics (Tylenol or nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
   tory drugs [NSAIDs]) is usually enough to relieve the ear pain. Some patients with
   severe otalgia may require a narcotic preparation (Tylenol with codeine, for exam-
   ple). However, reserve this medication option for limited cases and adults only.

 It is very important to the successful management of AOE that the patient's EAC be
   regularly debrided and cleaned using a binocular operating microscope with suction.

 In cases of severe EAC edema, an otowick may need to be inserted in the canal to
   allow for proper delivery of the ear drops.

 In cases where the patient is not improving within 72 hours after initiating antibiotic
   therapy, consider changing the medication. Also consider that there could be a fungal
   component and a culture of the ear canal may help to identify the cause of infection.

 During the treatment phase of an acute infection, advise the patient to minimize
   water exposure to the ear.

 Patients who wear hearing aids should avoid wearing them until after the infection
   resolves.

Pharmacotherapy Options

                    Regardless of the topical agent used, most patients should have clinical resolution
                      within 7 to 10 days. However, there is greater efficacy with a quinolone antibiotic
                      (Floxin and Cipro or Ciprodex Otic) compared to a nonquinolone antibiotic.

                    The ear drops should be applied with the patient lying down with the affected ear
                      upward. The ear drops should remain in place for a minimum of 3 to 5 minutes. Leave
                      the ear open to dry and avoid wearing an ear plug after installation of the ear drops.

                    Common antibiotic preparations include the following:

Trade Name                       Active Drug(s)
Otic Domeboro                    Acetic acid, aluminum acetate (ototoxic)
VoSol HC                         Acetic acid, hydrocortisone (HC) (ototoxic)
Cipro HC                         Ciprofloxacin, HC (not ototoxic)
Ciprodex                         Ciprofloxacin, dexamethasone (not ototoxic)
Cortisporin Otic                 Neomycin, polymyxin B, HC (ototoxic)
Floxin Otic                      Ofloxacin (not ototoxic)
                                                                                       CHRONIC OTITIS EXTERNA  139

Prevention

                    Limit water accumulation and moisture retention in the EAC.
                       Use a hair dryer at the lowest setting an arm's length away from the EAC to dry
                         the ear canal after water exposure.
                       Wear ear plugs.
                       Use cotton with petroleum jelly.

                    Maintain a healthy skin barrier by avoiding trauma and not self-cleaning the EAC
                      with Q-tips or other objects.

                    Use acidifying ear drops after swimming.
                       Use equal parts of isopropyl ("rubbing") alcohol and 5% acetic acid (white vin-
                         egar), or equal parts of isopropyl and water in the ear canal as long as there is not
                         a tympanostomy tube or TM perforation.

CHRONIC OTITIS EXTERNA

                   Chronic otitis externa (COE) is a very frustrating problem for the patient and provider
                   managing the condition. No one single treatment plan will be successful for every
                   patient with COE. The mainstay of treatment is to search for an underlying cause or
                   trigger and continue debridement of the EAC on a regular basis using a binocular
                   operating microscope with suction. The complication of COE is thickening of the skin
                   in the EAC and, ultimately, fibrosis. Findings on examination are the same as in AOE,
                   except that the condition is not as easily treatable.

Potential Causes

                    Noncompliance to medications prescribed
                    Underlying autoimmune process such as Sjogren's disease, sarcoidosis, and amy-

                      loidosis
                    CT scan of the temporal bones may be helpful to rule out opacification of the mas-

                      toid and any signs of bony erosion.

Pharmacotherapy Options

                    Treating COE is not a one-treatment-option-fits-all approach.
                    Just as in AOE, treatment options will adjust depending on whether or not the patient:

                       Has a tympanostomy tube or perforated TM
                      · Antibiotics ear drops can get into the middle ear space and have the potential
                            for crossing the round window membrane, reaching the inner ear. Therefore, it
                            is important to use ear drops that are not ototoxic, because ototoxicity can cause
                            hearing loss with prolonged use.
                      · Tympanometry can be helpful to determine if the TM is intact. However, if in
                            doubt, do not use an ototoxic medication.

                       Is immunocompromised
                       Had prior radiation in the surrounding region

                      · Radiation can damage the EAC by causing a skin reaction that alters normal
                            pH balance.

                       Has a history of diabetes
                       Has HIV infection
                    The following options can be considered:
                       Decadron, Pred Forte 1% (dexamethasone sodium phosphate) ophthalmic drops
140  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

            Kenalog 0.25% cream or ointment (triamcinalone acetonide)
            Can use equal parts of isopropyl ("rubbing") alcohol and 5% acetic acid (white

              vinegar), or equal parts isopropyl and water in ear canal
            An acidifying powder such as boric acid can be sprayed into the EAC

Education

            Limit water accumulation and moisture retention in the EAC.
            Emphasize the importance of avoiding trauma and not self-cleaning the EAC with

              Q-tips or other objects.

Considerations

                    Keep in mind that COE has the potential to lead to malignant (necrotizing) otitis
                      externa (MOE). See more information on this topic in this chapter.

                    However, unlike with MOE, COE does not involve structures beyond the soft tissues
                      of the EAC. A CT of the temporal bones can determine this finding.

MALIGNANT OTITIS EXTERNA

                   MOE is also called necrotizing otitis externa and temporal bone osteomyelitis. Due to
                   newer antibiotics, particularly fluoroquinolones, MOE is not as common as it once was.
                   Now it predominately affects the elderly, diabetics, and the immunocompromised, or
                   persons with current malignancy or on chemotherapy.

Etiology

            This aggressive infection usually begins as an otitis externa that does not respond
              to initial treatment. The infection extends into the cartilaginous skeleton of the ear,
              and through fissures it reaches the temporal bone, causing osteitis. The infection can
              extend to the base of the skull. If left untreated, this condition can cause potentially
              life-threatening complications.

Causative Organisms

                    Main pathogen: Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                    Other pathogens can include

                       Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant S. aureus [MRSA])
                       Gram-negative bacteria
                       Fungi

Patient Complaints and Physical Examination Findings

                    Are the same as with AOE and COE, except more pronounced
                    Specific findings that correlate to possible MOE include the following:

                       Cervical lymphadenopathy
                       Excruciating deep pain
                       Pre- or postauricular swelling
                       Tenderness of the masseter muscle
                                                      FUNGAL OTITIS EXTERNA (ALSO CALLED OTOMYCOSIS)  141

                       TMJ involvement, which may lead to trismus
                       Cranial nerve involvement or facial nerve palsies in severe cases

Otoscopic Findings

                    Hallmark of this condition is the presence of granulation tissue on the floor of the
                      EAC and at the bone-cartilage junction (at the inferior aspect of the canal).

Procedures to Consider

                    Consider ordering the following labs:
                       Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
                       CBC with differential

                    Culture of granulation tissue removed from the EAC to exclude a malignant process
                    Culture of the ear drainage to confirm pathogen suspected
                    CT of temporal bones with contrast to rule out the following:

                       Extension beyond the EAC
                       Erosion of the anterior canal wall
                       Involvement of the TMJ
                       Involvement of the temporal bone, mastoid, or base of skull
                    MRI with and without gadolinium enhancement is beneficial if trying to determine
                      the extent of soft tissue disease at the skull base. It is a helpful diagnostic tool to
                      assess the extent of the disease process.

Pharmacotherapy and Management Options

                    The patient needs to be counseled that antibiotic treatment will be required for at
                      least 4 to 6 weeks with frequent (if not daily) microscopic ear debridement.

                    Long-term systemic antibiotic therapy with a fluoroquinolone
                    Topical application of anti-inflammatory and fluoroquinolone antibiotic ear drops

                      (either Ciprodex or Floxin)
                    Gentamicin or tobramycin with or without ticarcillin or piperacillin in conjunction

                      with a fluoroquinolone
                    If diabetic, aggressive management to get better control of diabetes
                    If immunocompromised, correct immunosuppression if possible
                    Aggressive microscopic debridement of EAC
                    In severe refractory cases, the patient may need to be hospitalized and placed on IV

                      antibiotic therapy.
                    Consider consulting infectious disease.

FUNGAL OTITIS EXTERNA (ALSO CALLED OTOMYCOSIS)

          Otomycosis is a mycotic (fungal) infection of the skin of the EAC.

Etiology

           Otomycosis can occur in conjunction with a bacterial COE.
           Any alterations in moisture, warmth, and darkness can lead to a fungal infection.

             This is no different in the EAC.
142  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

                    Immunosuppression, long-term antibiotic therapy, diabetes, HIV infection, and poor
                      hygiene are also causative factors.

Patient Complaints and Physical Examination Findings

                    Symptoms are similar to those of otitis externa (both acute and chronic); however,
                      pruritus is the predominant symptom complaint, more so than otalgia.

Causative Organisms and Associated Physical Examination Findings

                    Aspergillus niger species (most common) appears as a moist, thick, white plug dotted
                      with black debris.

                    Candida species appears as thick white debris with sprouting hyphae.

Management Options

                    Thorough microscopic cleaning or debridement is very important to remove the fun-
                      gal debris from the EAC.

                    After the debris is removed, a topical antifungal drying powder is applied. These
                      include:
                       Boric acid 4% powder
                       Nystatin powder
                       Amphotericin B powder
                       Chloromycetin-sulfanilamide-tinactin powder

                    Other treatment options can include:
                       Domeboro (aluminum sulfate-calcium acetate), which is an acidifying solution
                       Lotrimin (clotrimazole cream or solution)
                       Cresylate (metacresyl acetate)
                       1% Gentian violet

                     NOTE: These therapies are contraindicated if a TM perforation exists. Gentian violet in
                     particular will stain clothing. A small amount of this product goes a long way.

                       Sporonox (itraconazole) is the only orally administered antifungal agent effective
                         against Aspergillus.

                    Patients who wear hearing aids should avoid wearing them until after the infection
                      resolves.

LACERATIONS OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

                   The skin of the EAC is very thin and can be easily traumatized. Lacerations within the
                   EAC occur as a result of direct trauma to the canal wall. There are a wide variety of
                   causes that can lead to a canal wall laceration. These include (but are not limited to):
                   trauma during ear cleaning, Q-tip use, and a live insect within the EAC.

                          The physical examination should include examining the EAC and inspecting the
                   TM for a hemotympanum (presence of blood in the middle ear space) and/or a TM
                   perforation. Considering the proximity of the facial nerve (cranial nerve [CN] VII), it is
                   important to perform a thorough examination of that cranial nerve. There may be pres-
                   ence of a hematoma or crust in the ear canal that needs to be excavated microscopically.

                          Bleeding from a laceration in the EAC is usually self-limiting; however, it is
                   important to keep the ear dry to avoid development of an AOE. If there is evidence of
                                                        FOREIGN BODY IN THE EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL  143

                   an acute infection as a result of the laceration (see symptoms of AOE), antibiotic ear
                   drops are indicated.

FOREIGN BODY IN THE EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

                   Both children and adults can have foreign objects in their EAC; however, it is more
                   common in children. The patient may present with symptoms, although sometimes
                   there are no symptoms and the object is discovered during physical examination. Vari-
                   ous objects can be found in the ear canal, which can include insects, beads, food, paper,
                   pebbles, toys, and even a small watch or hearing aid battery.

Patient Presenting Symptoms

                   Ear pressure, fullness, and otalgia are the most common presenting symptoms.
                   However, there can be a wide variety of symptoms, which are the same as those
                   found with AOE.

Physical Examination Findings

                    Physical examination findings depend on the object and how long it has been in the
                      ear.

                    TM perforation can occur as a result of direct injury from the object. It is important to
                      rule out whether the TM is intact or not after the object is removed.

Removal of the Foreign Object

                    Removal of any foreign object is best done microscopically. However, not every
                      medical office has this capability. Therefore, gently irrigating the ear with room tem-
                      perature water is an option, but not for every foreign object. Below explains when
                      irrigation is or is not appropriate.
                       Batteries in the ear canal are a medical emergency. There is a possibility that the battery
                         can leak acid into the ear. Do not irrigate.
                       Food and seeds: Do not irrigate. This can cause it to swell inside the EAC, leading to
                         pain and further difficulty trying to remove the object.
                       Insects: If the TM is intact, irrigation is appropriate. However, if it is uncertain
                         whether or not there is a perforation, do not irrigate. If the insect is alive, use
                         nonototoxic antibiotic ear drops (e.g., Ciprodex, Floxin) to drown the insect and
                         then remove it microscopically.

                    Removal of a foreign object under general anesthesia is appropriate for uncoopera-
                      tive children and with deeply embedded objects.

Management

                    If the object was in the EAC for a short period of time with no abnormal find-
                      ings on physical examination, no further treatment is needed once the object is
                      removed.

                    If infection or abrasion is evident after removal of the foreign body, treat the infec-
                      tion with an appropriate antibiotic and steroid ear drop for 5 to 7 days.
144  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

EXOSTOSIS OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

                   Exostosis is also called "surfer's ear." Exostosis are benign bony growths in the ear canal.
                   Most patients are unaware of the lesions until they are incidentally discovered during oto-
                   logic examination. The bony growths are thought to be the result of cold water exposure
                   to the periosteum (the layer of connective tissue that surrounds the bony ear canal) result-
                   ing in periostitis and bone formation. They look like pearly white, round, or sometimes
                   irregularly shaped growths. They are very tender to touch during microscopic evaluation.
                   Otherwise, the patient is usually asymptomatic. There may be multiple growths in the
                   EAC, which can occlude the ear canal and lead to cerumen impaction and conductive
                   hearing loss. Most cases of exostoses require no intervention. However, if there are mul-
                   tiple lesions impacting hearing capability, surgical excision of the growth is indicated.

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF THE AURICLE AND EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

                   Congenital disorders of the auricle and EAC are rare. Brief overviews of the disorders
                   follow.

Congenital Disorders of the Auricle

                  Congenital Swellings Affecting the Auricle
                    Hemangiomas:

                       An abnormal build-up of epithelial cells that line blood vessels.
                       They are usually not present at birth but appear as a small bruise or red bump

                         instead. They grow and change rapidly during the first months of life.
                       They are not confined to the ear but can occur anywhere on the skin surface.
                    Pre- or postauricular lymphangiomas (cystic hygroma):
                       Lymphangiomas are malformations of the lymphatic system that involve skin and

                         subcutaneous tissue.
                       It occurs as a soft bulge under the skin and is not confined to the pre- or postau-

                         ricular region. They can be located anywhere on the body.
                       It may not be present at birth, but may present later in life as it slowly grows.
                    Postauricular dermoid cyst:
                       Pocket under the skin that contains tissue, normally present in the outer layers

                         of skin. It occurs during embryonic development when the skin layers do not
                         properly grow together. These cyst can contain hair follicles, hair, blood, fat, bone,
                         cartilage, and sweat glands.

                  Congenital Anomalies Affecting the Auricle
                   Anotia: Complete absence of the auricle
                   Microtia: Underdevelopment of the auricle
                   Melotia: Congenital displacement of the auricle onto the cheek
                   Polyotia: Presence of an extra auricle on one or both sides of the head

Congenital Disorders of the External Auditory Canal

                  External Auditory Canal Atresia
                    The EAC is closed or absent.
                    Very rare congenital disorder.
                  BENIGN MASSES OR TUMORS OF THE AURICLE AND EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL  145

              Caused by failure of the canal to normally form during embryonic development.
                Involves the first branchial cleft.

              Bony atretic plate may be present at the level of the ear drum instead of the opening
                of the EAC.

              Ossicular malformations are common with this condition.

             Preauricular Sinus
             See section on Preauricular Sinus Fistula or Cyst earlier in this chapter.

             Collaural Fistula
              A tract runs between a pit in the ear canal and the neck skin (usually behind the

                angle of mandible close to the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle).
              Recurrent infection is a problem with this fistula and, therefore, it needs excision.

                Excision may rarely involve the facial nerve as the fistula may pass through the
                parotid gland and in between the facial nerve branches.

MASTOIDECTOMY CAVITY GRANULATION OR INFECTION

Chapter 7:   A mastoidectomy is performed to remove infection from the mastoid bone or cho-
Chronic      lesteatoma formation. This surgery can also be done as an approach to other structures
Mastoiditis  in the ear as with cochlear implantation or to approach tumors within the middle ear
section.     or facial nerve. See additional information on mastoidectomy in Chapter 7: Evaluation
             and Management of Middle Ear Conditions--Chronic Mastoiditis.

                    A common complication after a mastoidectomy is recurrent otorrhea from super-
             ficial inflammation of the lining of the mastoid bowl that was created. Even with proper
             cleaning, the mastoid cavity can drain. Debris builds-up and infection can occur. It is
             important that the patient return to the office on a regular basis (every 6-12 months)
             for microscopic evaluation and cleaning or debridement. Routine mastoid cavity care
             involves not only cleaning the mastoid bowl and ear canal, but also examining the
             mastoid microscopically for cholesteatoma formation.

                    Granulation tissue may develop and otorrhea may persist from the tissue in the
             mastoid cavity after a mastoidectomy. If the granulation tissue does not resolve with
             the use of topical antibiotic and steroid ear drops (i.e., Ciprodex HC), the granula-
             tion tissue in the mastoid bowl may need to be debrided under general anesthesia.
             Although rare, uncontrolled infection of the mastoid cavity over many years can pre-
             dispose to carcinoma.

                    The same organisms that occur with AOE, COE, and also with fungal otitis
             externa cause infection after a mastoidectomy. Therefore, treatment and management
             of infection is essentially the same.

BENIGN MASSES OR TUMORS OF THE AURICLE
AND EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

Benign Masses or Tumors of the Auricle

                  Chondrodermatitis Nodularis Chronica Helicis
                    Cause is unknown. May be related to prolonged excessive pressure in the area
                    Small painful nodule with a raised rolled edge and central ulcer or crust caused by a

                      chronic inflammatory condition of the helix of the ear
146  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

                 Actinic keratosis, basal cell, and squamous cell carcinoma is high on the differential
                   diagnosis list. Biopsy needs to be done to confirm

                Kimura Disease
                 Cause unknown
                 Rare, inflammatory disorder that causes nontender subcutaneous swellings with a

                   smooth or nodular surface in mainly persons of Asian descent
                 They can occur anywhere on the body but more commonly in the head and neck

                   region

                Idiopathic Cystic Chondromalacia
                 Also called "pseudocyst"
                 Cause unknown
                 Rare, painless, cystic swelling of the concha of the pinna
                 When a biopsy is performed, a characteristic finding is an intracartilaginous space

                   with no epithelial lining.
                 Definitive treatment is to surgically remove the lesion if the space becomes infected

                Keloid
                 Hypertrophic firm, rubbery, shiny, fibrous nodules that are scar tissues resulting

                   from an overgrowth of granulation tissue after trauma
                 They are not restricted in occurring only on the auricle of the ear; they can occur

                   anywhere else on the body.

Benign Masses or Tumors of the External Auditory Canal

Chapter 7:      Canal Wall Cholesteatoma
Evaluation and   Rare condition
Management       Cholesteatomas in general can arise from the external ear canal, ear drum, and mid-
of Middle Ear
Conditions.        dle ear space. This section will only discuss canal wall cholesteatoma.
                 When there is chronic inflammation of any mucous membrane surface, it can start to

                   change into a lining similar to skin. A cholesteatoma is a collection of that skin debris
                   that forms a cyst.
                 These cysts are usually found in the inferior portion of the canal lateral to the TM.
                   They can also occur along incision lines after ear surgery.
                 If not managed, the cholesteatoma has the potential for invading into the middle ear
                   space and damage structures of the middle ear and surrounding area.

                Exostoses
                See the section on Exostosis of the External Auditory Canal in this chapter.

                Osteoma
                 Cause unknown
                 As with exostoses, osteomas of the EAC are caused by excess growth of bone.
                 It presents as a solitary, unilateral, slow-growing mass that originates in the suture

                   in the outer half of the EAC.

                Pleomorphic Adenoma
                 Rare
                 Cause unknown
                 Arises from ectopic ceruminal glands of the external auditory meatus
                 Excision is the mainstay of treatment.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  147

MALIGNANT MASSES OR TUMORS OF THE AURICLE
AND EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

                   As with any tumor or mass discovered, a thorough head and neck examination is nec-
                   essary to identify nerve palsies and lymph node involvement. Therapy includes surgi-
                   cal excision and, perhaps, adjunct therapy as well depending on the spread and extent
                   of the tumor. Metastasis can affect any of the surrounding structures including lymph
                   nodes and the parotid gland. A biopsy in all cases of a lesion that persists for longer
                   than a 4- to 6-week duration is warranted. Malignant masses that affect the auricle can
                   also affect the EAC.

Malignant Masses of the Auricle and External Auditory Canal

                  Melanoma
                    Melanoma can be found anywhere on the body, including the ear.
                    The helix is most often involved; however, there have been cases of melanoma

                      located inside the EAC.
                    They may present as flat-pigmented lesions or as raised lesions.
                    These tumors are aggressive.

                  Squamous Cell Carcinoma
                    Often ulcerated lesion with irregular borders, surrounding erythema, and indura-

                      tion. Sometimes scaling or crusting is present.
                    In the ear canal, the earliest sign may be frequent bloody or serosanguineous dis-

                      charge. There may be associated pain and history of COE.

                  Basal Cell Carcinoma
                    Majority of these tumors occur in the preauricular or postauricular areas.
                    Usually painless, well-circumscribed ulcer with a raised border that slowly increases

                      in size

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Bafaqeeh, S. A. (2000). Eagle syndrome: Classic and carotid artery types. Journal of Otolaryngology, 29(2),
                   88-94.

            Bressler, K., & Shelton, C. (1993). Ear foreign-body removal: A review of 98 consecutive cases. Laryngo-
                   scope, 103(4 Pt 1), 367-370.

            Bush, F. M., Harkins, S. W., & Harrington, W. G. (1999). Otalgia and aversive symptoms in temporoman-
                   dibular disorders. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 108(9), 884-892.

            Chen, R. C., Khorsandi, A. S., Shatzkes, D. R., & Holliday, R. A. (2009). The radiology of referred otalgia.
                   AJNR. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 30(10), 1817-1823.

            Cohen, P. R., & Grossman, M. E. (1990). Pseudocyst of the auricle. Case report and world literature
                   review. Archives of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 116(10), 1202-1204.

            Ely, J. W., Hansen, M. R., & Clark, E. C. (2008). Diagnosis of ear pain. American Family Physician, 77(5),
                   621-628.

            Hajioff, D. (2004). Otitis externa. Clinical Evidence, 12, 755-763.
            Heilbrun, M. E., Salzman, K. L., Glastonbury, C. M., Harnsberger, H. R., Kennedy, R. J., & Shelton, C.

                   (2003). External auditory canal cholesteatoma: Clinical and imaging spectrum. AJNR. American
                   Journal of Neuroradiology, 24(4), 751-756.
            Ho, T., Vrabec, J. T., Yoo, D., & Coker, N. J. (2006). Otomycosis: Clinical features and treatment
                   implications. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of American Academy of
                   Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 135(5), 787-791.
148  6. EXTERNAL EAR CONDITIONS

            Kesser, B. W. (2011). Assessment and management of chronic otitis externa. Current Opinion in Otolaryn-
                   gology and Head and Neck Surgery, 19(5), 341-347.

            Kuttila, S., Kuttila, M., Le Bell, Y., Alanen, P., & Suonpää, J. (2004). Characteristics of subjects with sec-
                   ondary otalgia. Journal of Orofacial Pain, 18(3), 226-234.

            Markou, K., Karasmanis, I., Vlachtsis, K., Petridis, D., Nikolaou, A., & Vital, V. (2008). Primary pleomor-
                   phic adenoma of the external ear canal. Report of a case and literature review. American Journal of
                   Otolaryngology, 29(2), 142-146.

            Munguia, R., & Daniel, S. J. (2008). Ototopical antifungals and otomycosis: A review. International Jour-
                   nal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 72(4), 453-459.

            Roland, P. S., & Stroman, D. W. (2002). Microbiology of acute otitis externa. Laryngoscope, 112(7 Pt 1),
                   1166-1177.

            Rosenfeld, R. M., Brown, L., Cannon, C. R., Dolor, R. J., Ganiats, T. G., Hannley, M., . . . Witsell, D. L.;
                   American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery Foundation. (2006). Clinical
                   practice guideline: Acute otitis externa. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of
                   American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 134(4 Suppl), S4-S23.

            Rosenfeld, R. M., Singer, M., Wasserman, J. M., & Stinnett, S. S. (2006). Systematic review of topical anti-
                   microbial therapy for acute otitis externa. Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery: Official Journal of
                   American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, 134(4 Suppl), S24-S48.

            Ruckenstein, M. J. (2005). Infections of the external ear. In C. W. Cummings Jr (Ed.), Otolaryngology: Head
                   and neck surgery (4th ed., pp. 2979-2987). Philadelphia, PA: Mosby.

            Rutka, J. (2004). Acute otitis externa: Treatment perspectives. Ear, Nose, and Throat Journal, 83(9 Suppl
                   4), 20-21; discussion 21.

            Scheinfeld, N. S., Silverberg, N. B., Weinberg, J. M., & Nozad, V. (2004). The preauricular sinus: A review
                   of its clinical presentation, treatment, and associations. Pediatric Dermatology, 21(3), 191-196.

            Shah, R. K., & Blevins, N. H. (2003). Otalgia. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, 36(6), 1137-1151.
            Teixido, M., Seymour, P., Kung, B., Lazar, S., & Sabra, O. (2011). Otalgia associated with migraine. Otol-

                   ogy and Neurotology: Official Publication of the American Otological Society, American Neurotology Soci-
                   ety [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology, 32(2), 322-325.
