7 Evaluation and Management
               of Middle Ear Conditions

EUSTACHIAN TUBE DYSFUNCTION

Figure 1.3:   The majority of conditions that affect the middle ear start with dysfunction of the eusta-
External,     chian tube (ET). The ET connects the space from behind the tympanic membrane (TM)
middle, and   to the nasopharynx. It has three functions: (a) to protect the middle ear, (b) to drain
inner ear.    middle ear secretions, and (c) to equalize pressure between the nose and middle ear.
              The ET is normally closed at rest. It opens when there is a pressure difference between
Figure 1.12:  the nasopharynx and the middle ear space. A pressure difference can occur as a result
Oropharynx,   of negative pressure in the middle ear, nose blowing, nose sniffing, swallowing, yawn-
hypopharynx,  ing, sneezing, infection, inflammation, or purposely doing the Valsalva maneuver.
trachea, and
larynx.              The ET is wider at the proximal end (opening into the nasopharynx) and the dis-
              tal end (opening in the middle ear) than in the mid-portion. The lining of the ET is the
              same tissue as the nasal and sinus cavities. Any condition that alters the tissue in these
              areas can affect the function of the ET.

                     Eustachian tube dysfunction (ETD) can lead to accumulation of fluid in the mid-
              dle ear space. The accumulation of fluid in this area can lead to an infection, resulting
              in otitis media (OM) and mastoiditis in chronic conditions.

                     The ET at birth is 50% of its adult length and lies in a more horizontal than ver-
              tical position, making draining and the protective function of the ET less effective. If
              there are no genetic factors, the ET achieves its final adult size and position between 5
              and 7 years of age.

Causes of Eustachian Tube Dysfunction

                    Upper respiratory infection (URI)--most common cause
                       Bacterial or viral URI can lead to ETD.
                       Viruses can directly damage ET lining and can result in decreased mucociliary
                         clearance.

                    Adenoid hypertrophy (the adenoidal tissue can obstruct the ET)
                    Inflammatory causes that affect the nasopharynx and ET:

                       Allergies
                       Sinusitis
                       Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
                    Cigarette smoke exposure can damage the cilia and contribute to inflammation
                    Nasopharyngeal tumors can obstruct the ET
                    Craniofacial abnormalities, which can affect the anatomical position of the ET,
                      include the following:
                       Cleft palate
                       Down's syndrome
150  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                       Pierre Robin syndrome
                       Turner's syndrome
                    Immunodeficiency secondary to radiation or chemotherapy
                    Barometric pressure changes can put greater demand on a poorly functioning ET,
                      leading to ETD
                    Day care attendance
                    Pacifier usage

Symptoms

                   Can include but are not limited to the following:

                    Ear fullness
                    Ear pressure
                    Ear ache
                    Intermittent otalgia
                    Tinnitus
                    Muffled hearing
                    Difficulty clearing or popping ears
                    Dysequilibrium

Physical Examination Findings

                  Otoscopic Findings
                    Bony landmarks may appear prominent if the TM is retracted. Otherwise, otoscopic

                      findings of ETD are usually normal.

                  Endoscopic Findings
                    Inflammation or congestion in the nasal cavity
                    Hypertrophic nasal turbinates
                    Peritubal inflammation (around opening of ET in the posterior nasopharynx)
                    Possible adenoid hypertrophy or nasopharyngeal mass obstructing the ET

Audiological Examination Findings

                  Tympanogram
                    Type B with low volume suggests middle ear effusion (MEE).
                    Type B with high volume suggests TM perforation.
                    Type C suggests negative pressure in the middle ear space and confirms ETD with-

                      out the presence of fluid.

                  Audiogram
                    Conductive hearing loss (CHL) can exist in severe cases of ETD without evidence

                      of MEE.

Medical Management Options

                    Intranasal steroid spray
                    Oral decongestants
                    Topical decongestant (Afrin) for 3 to 5 days only (secondary to rebound side effects

                      if used longer)
                                                                              EUSTACHIAN TUBE DYSFUNCTION  151

                    Oral and nasal antihistamines
                    Leukotriene antagonists (Singulair)
                    Adequate management of GERD with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
                    Immunotherapy

Surgical Options

                    Pressure equalizer (PE) tube insertion without evidence of fluid in the middle ear
                      space is controversial. There is evidence that chronic ETD without MEE may benefit
                      from PE tube insertion in up to 30% to 50% of cases. PE tube insertion without MEE
                      may also make the patient's symptoms worse and it may also produce no additional
                      benefit.

Prevention and Considerations

                    Smoking cessation and/or preventing passive smoke exposure
                    Limit day care exposure when possible. This can lessen the development of frequent

                      URIs
                    Encourage breastfeeding for the first 3 to 6 months of life.
                    Discourage supine bottle-feeding or "bottle propping"
                    Limit pacifier use
                    Patients with ETD must be careful when flying or diving because of the risk of

                      barotrauma. NOTE: Precautionary measures to take for a person with ETD before flying
                        or diving include the following:
                        1. Afrin decongestant nasal spray, three times on the day before the event and on the

                            day of the event. If flying, also use 30 minutes before landing.
                        2. Oral decongestants (Sudafed)--if not contraindicated--the day before the event and

                            on the day of the event

Patulous Eustachian Tube

                   The ET is normally maintained in a closed position. A patulous ET is when the
                   ET remains intermittently opened. It has been seen in patients experiencing rapid
                   weight loss, mucosal atrophy (as occurs after radiation therapy), or muscular dys-
                   function (multiple sclerosis, stroke, or motor neuron disease conditions) and during
                   pregnancy.

                          Patients will usually complain of an echo sound or roaring tinnitus, aural full-
                   ness, aural congestion, and their voice or breath sounds like it is reverberating in
                   their ears. Treatment can temporarily improve if patients position their head in the
                   recumbent position. They can do this by lying down, putting their head between
                   their knees, or hanging their head upside down. This increases venous stasis and
                   causes compression of the ET, which temporarily closes it. Compression of the
                   jugular vein can produce the same venous congestion and relieve ET symptoms
                   in some cases. ET inflammation that occurs as a result of uncontrolled allergies or
                   during an URI can give the patient some relief. Because the problem lies within the
                   ET itself, PE tube insertion is not beneficial and in some cases makes the symptoms
                   worse.

                  Pharmacotherapy Options
                    Anticholinergics (Atrovent nasal spray)
                    Premarin nose drops have been used and can be effective in symptomatic cases

                      when all other management options are exhausted. It works by increasing mucous
152  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                      secretion, causing congestion around the ET orifice with improvement in ET
                      closure.
                       Premarin nasal drop preparation:

                      · 25 mg in 30 mL normal saline. 3 gtts three times a day in the nostril on the
                            affected side; or oral administration with 10 gtts of the liquid in a glass of fruit
                            juice three times a day

                       Side effects include the following:
                      · Parotid swelling and/or pain caused by enhanced secretory activity within the
                            gland. If this occurs, cut the medication dose in half or discontinue.

OTITIS MEDIA

Figure 7.1:    OM is an inflammatory process of the middle ear space that results in fluid accumu-
Bulging        lation in the middle ear. There are three main factors that lead to fluid accumulation
tympanic       in the middle ear space: (a) the primary factor is secretions from the nasopharynx
membrane       that enter through the ET; (b) ETD; and (c) pressure differential between the middle
as seen with   ear and nasopharynx. There are a variety of infectious and inflammatory processes
otitis media.  that can affect the functional stability of the middle ear as well. The diagnosis
               of acute, recurrent acute, subacute, and chronic otitis media is dependent on the
               length of time the fluid has remained in the middle ear space.

               Acute Otitis         Recurrent Acute         Subacute Otitis     Chronic Otitis
               Media                Otitis Media            Media               Media

               Effusion that lasts  Three or more           Effusion that       Effusion that
                  for less than        episodes of acute       persists longer     persists for
                  3 weeks'             otitis media in 6       than 3 weeks        more than
                  duration             months or 4 or          but resolves        3 months'
                                       more episodes           in less than        duration
                                       in 12 months,           3 months'
                                       with complete           duration
                                       resolution of signs
                                       and symptoms
                                       between the
                                       episodes

                          OM can affect patients of all ages; however, it predominately affects infants and
                   young children secondary to the relationship of the ET as discussed in the previous
                   section.

Otitis Media With Effusion

                   OM with effusion (OME) is also known as serous OM, MEE, "glue ear," and nonpuru-
                   lent OM. It is the presence of fluid in the middle ear space without signs or symptoms
                   of an acute infection. OME may accompany viral URIs, be a prelude to AOM, or be a
                   sequela of AOM. When OME is identified mistakenly as AOM, antibacterial agents
                   may be prescribed unnecessarily.

                          OME occurs as a direct result of ETD. The mainstay of medical and pharma-
                   cological management is the same as with ETD. Indications to manage OME more
                                                                                                     OTITIS MEDIA  153

                                                                                               FIGURE 7.1 Bulging
                                                                                                          tympanic membrane as seen
                                                                                                          with otitis media.

                   aggressively or with antibiotic therapy are when there is marked hearing loss, delayed
                   development of speech, balance disorders, structural changes of the TM and ossicles,
                   effusion that persists beyond 3 months, and/or signs and symptoms of infection. Surgi-
                   cal management with a myringotomy (incision of the TM) or PE tube insertion is indi-
                   cated for cases of OME that have not resolved spontaneously or have not responded
                   to medical therapy.

Acute Otitis Media
                   AOM is also known as suppurative OM. AOM is when there is fluid accumulation
                   in the middle ear space accompanied with signs and symptoms of a bacterial or viral
                   infection. This fluid is typically present for 3 weeks or less in the middle ear space. The
                   most common etiological factor in AOM is an URI.
                          In order to have a certain diagnosis of AOM, three criteria must be met: (a) rapid
                   onset of symptoms, (b) presence of MEE, and (c) signs and symptoms of middle ear
                   inflammation.

                  Causative Organisms
                    Most common bacterial causes include the following:

                       Streptococcus pneumoniae (25%-50% of cases)
                       Haemophilus influenzae (15%-30% of cases)
                       Moraxella catarrhalis (3%-20% of cases)
                    Most common viral causes include the following:
                       Respiratory syncytial virus
                       Influenza A and B, and parainfluenza
                       Human rhinovirus
                       Coronavirus

                  Incidence
                    AOM is the most frequent diagnosis for office visits in children.
                    Eighty percent or more of AOM resolves spontaneously without medical management.

                  Risk Factors for the Development of Acute Otitis Media
                    Bottle feeding or feeding in a supine position, with rates significantly lower among

                      infants who were breastfed for the first 6 to 12 months of life
154  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                    Persistent ETD
                    First or second hand smoke exposure

                  Patient Symptoms

                    It is important for the diagnosis to confirm a history of an acute onset.
                    The following symptoms may or may not be present:

                       Otalgia
                       Crackling in the ear
                       Aural fullness or pressure
                       Hearing loss
                       Tinnitus
                       Otorrhea. NOTE: Suspect TM perforation or otitis externa if otorrhea exists.

                  Physical Examination Findings
                    Hallmark finding: TM immobility
                    Purulent fluid accumulation in the middle ear space
                    TM inflammation and/or bulging as fluid accumulates
                    The two primary bony landmarks of the TM (malleal short process and umbo) may

                      be difficult to distinguish.
                    TM perforation can exist due to increased pressuring in the middle ear space from

                      fluid accumulation. Otorrhea would be present in this scenario.
                    The following symptoms may or may not be present:

                       Fever
                       Enlarged and sometimes painful anterior cervical lymph nodes on the ipsilateral

                         side of the AOM. NOTE: Visualization of the TM with identification of a MEE and
                            inflammatory changes is necessary to establish the diagnosis of AOM.

                  Audiometric Findings
                    Tympanogram:

                       Type B, without a large volume (a large volume would indicate a perforation)
                       A tympanogram line would be flat (considered Type B), indicating decreased TM

                         mobility.
                    Audiogram:

                       CHL
                      · The degree of CHL may vary from 10 to 50 dB and will depend on the thickness
                            of the middle ear exudate, middle ear fibrosis, and TM edema.
                      · The CHL usually predominately affects the low frequencies.

                       Mixed hearing loss
                      · May exist if underlying sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) was present before
                            the onset of AOM.

                  Treatment Options
                    For persons older than 2 years, observation for 48 to 72 hours without the use of

                      antibiotic therapy in an uncomplicated AOM (i.e., no fever or pain) is an option if
                      there is assurance that the patient or parent will keep the follow-up appointment for
                      evaluation.
                       The likelihood of recovery without antibiotic therapy depends on the severity of

                         the signs and symptoms present at the initial examination.
                    Recurrent AOM options include: observation as mentioned, antimicrobial treatment,

                      PE tube placement, and/or adenoidectomy.
                                                                     OTITIS MEDIA  155

See Table 7.1:    Initial Antibiotic Management Considerations
Effective          If there has been no antibiotic therapy in the past 6 weeks and there is mild otalgia
antibiotic
coverage             or fever less than 102.2°F:
against selected      Amoxicillin 80 to 90 mg/kg per day × 7 to 10 days
antimicrobials.    If there has been no antibiotic therapy in the past 6 weeks and there is moderate to
                     severe otalgia or fever greater than 102.2°F and/or failed initial therapy after the first
                     48 to 72 hours:
                      Amoxicillin 90 mg/kg per day with 6.4 mg/kg per day of clavulanate (Augmen-

                        tin) in two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                   If the patient has a drug allergy to amoxicillin or penicillin and the reaction was not a

                     Type I hypersensitivity reaction (urticarial or anaphylaxis), consider the following:
                      Omnicef (cefdinir) 14 mg/kg per day in one or two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                      Ceftin (cefuroxime) 30 mg/kg per day in two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                      Vantin (cefpodoxime) 10 mg/kg per day, once daily × 7 to 10 days

                                  TABLE 7.1 EFFECTIVE ANTIBIOTIC COVERAGE AGAINST
                                                     SELECTED ANTIMICROBIALS

                                    Nonresistant   Drug-          Haemophilus      Moraxella
                                    Streptococcus  resistant      influenzae       catarrhalis
                                    pneumoniae     Streptococcus
                                                   pneumoniae                            X
                                                                                         X
                  Macrolides        X                             X
                                                                                         X
                  (Zpak, Biaxin,                                                         X
                                                                                         X
                  erythromycin)                                                          X
                                                                                         X
                  Standard dose     X                             X
                                                                                         X
                  amoxicillin

                  (Usual dose =

                  875 mg BID)

                  Doxycycline       X                             X

                  Cephalosporins    X                             X

                  (selected)

                  High-dose                        X              X
                     amoxicillin

                  (3-4 g/day)

                  Amoxicillin with                                X

                  clavulanate

                  (Augmentin)

                  Trimethoprim/     X                             X

                  sulfametho-

                  xazole (TMP/

                  SMX)

                  (Bactrim BID)

                  Respiratory                      X              X
                     fluoro-
                     quinolones

                  (Levaquin,
                     Avelox, etc.)
156  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                    If the patient has a drug allergy to amoxicillin or penicillin and the reaction was a
                      Type I hypersensitivity reaction (urticarial or anaphylaxis), consider the following:
                       Zithromax (azithromycin) 10 mg/kg per day on day 1, followed by 5 mg/kg per
                         day × 4 days as a single daily dose
                       Biaxin (clarithromycin) 15 mg/kg per day in two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                       Pediazole (erythromycin-sulfisoxazole) 50 mg/kg per day × 7 to 10 days
                       Bactrim (sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim) 6 to 10 mg/kg per day × 7 to 10 days
                       Cleocin (clindamycin) 30 to 40 mg/kg per day in three divided doses × 7 to 10 days

                    If a child is unable to keep medication down or cannot otherwise tolerate oral medi-
                      cation, consider:
                       Rocephin (ceftriaxone) 50 mg/kg single IM injection

                     NOTE: Be sure to prescribe antibiotic ear drops in addition to systemic antibiotics if a TM
                     perforation exists.

                  Antibiotic Management Considerations After Failure of Initial Therapy
                    If the patient fails to respond to initial management within 48 to 72 hours

                       Reassess the patient to confirm if AOM exists.
                       Exclude other potential causes of illness.
                       Change the initial antibiotic prescribed.
                    If amoxicillin was initially prescribed, consider a beta-lactamase-producing organ-
                      ism such as Haemophilus influenzae or Moraxella catarrhalis as the primary cause for
                      the infection, consider increasing the dose of amoxicillin and adding clavulanate: 90
                      mg/kg per day with 6.4 mg/kg per day of clavulanate (Augmentin) in two divided
                      doses × 7 to 10 days.
                    If the patient has a drug allergy to amoxicillin or penicillin and the reaction was not a
                      Type I hypersensitivity reaction (urticarial or anaphylaxis), consider the following:
                       Omnicef (cefdinir) 14 mg/kg per day in one or two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                       Ceftin (cefuroxime) 30 mg/kg per day in two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                       Vantin (cefpodoxime) 10 mg/kg per day once daily × 7 to 10 days
                    If the patient has a drug allergy to amoxicillin or penicillin and the reaction was a
                      Type I hypersensitivity reaction (urticarial or anaphylaxis), consider the following:
                       Zithromax (azithromycin) 10 mg/kg per day on day 1 followed by 5 mg/kg per

                         day × 4 days as a single daily dose
                       Biaxin (clarithromycin) 15 mg/kg per day in two divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                       Cleocin (clindamycin) 30 to 40 mg/kg per day in three divided doses × 7 to 10 days
                    If a child is unable to keep medication down or cannot otherwise tolerate oral medi-
                      cation, consider:
                       Rocephin (ceftriaxone) 50 mg/kg per day × 3 consecutive days intramuscularly

                         (IM) or IV.

                  Considerations After Antibiotic Therapy Resolves
                  Acute Otitis Media
                    Persistent noninfectious MEE after antibiotic therapy accompanied with resolution

                      of acute symptoms is common and should not indicate a need to initiate another
                      course of antibiotics.
                       Reassurance and additional close monitoring of MEE resolution is appropriate.

                  Other Treatment Suggestions
                    Nasal saline irrigation
                    Analgesics for pain
                    Consider pharmacotherapy options to manage ETD. See ETD topic within this chap-

                      ter for further information.
                    OTITIS MEDIA  157

             Surgical Options
              Myringotomy (incision in the TM) or tympanocentesis (needle drainage through the

                TM) with or without a PE tube insertion may be performed if severe pain exists, to
                relieve pain from increased pressure in the middle ear.
                 It can also be considered to make a bacteriological diagnosis by obtaining culture

                   and sensitivity of the purulent exudate in the middle ear space.
                 NOTE: Nasal endoscopy should be done first to rule out any blockage of the ET in the

                    posterior nasopharynx.

             Suggestions for Prevention and/or Reduction in Recurrence of Infection
              Vaccinations for influenza and pneumococcal vaccine
              Smoking cessation and/or preventing passive smoke exposure
              Altering day care center attendance patterns or lessening day care attendance for

                children can reduce the incidence of recurrent AOM
              Encourage breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life
              Discourage supine bottle-feeding or "bottle propping"
              Limit pacifier use

Bullous Myringitis

Figure 7.2:  Bullous myringitis is a form of a viral AOM in which there is a rapid onset of unilateral
Bullous      otalgia and the development of vesicles (bullae) on the TM. The causative organism is
myringitis.  unknown. The patient may have associated URI symptoms. On microscopic examina-
             tion, the TM has reddish vesicles on the surface. The lesions are usually limited to the TM.
             In rare cases, the infection can spread to the middle ear. If the vesicles rupture, it results
             in a transient clear yellow or bloody tinged otorrhea. A secondary bacterial infection is
             common. In most cases, bullous myringitis resolves rapidly without treatment or with
             just symptomatic treatment using oral analgesics for pain control. If a secondary bacterial
             infection is suspected, antibiotic with or without a steroid ear drops are prescribed.

                                                                                               FIGURE 7.2 Bullous
                                                                                                          myringitis.

Chronic Otitis Media

                   After an AOM, noninfectious fluid can persist in the middle ear space (especially in
                   children) for up to 3 months. Unresolved inflammatory process of the middle ear and
                   mastoid that persists beyond 3 months is referred to as chronic otitis media (COM).
158  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                COM is an indication that is an altered state of the normal middle ear function. This is
                usually related to multiple causes, but the main cause is ETD. Long-term infection can
                produce various degrees of ulceration and ossicular erosion. It most commonly affects
                the incus and/or the head of the stapes, which often is replaced by fibrous tissue. Bone
                changes can occur in the mastoid and eventually leads to the formation of sclerotic
                bone. In COM, bacteria can also reach the inner ear by the way of the internal auditory
                canal (IAC) causing widespread destruction that can affect balance and lead to hearing
                loss. There is still uncertainty regarding the correlation between the degree of SNHL
                and the direct causal relationship with COM.

                Causative Organisms
                The causative organisms of COM are different from AOM:

                 Pseudomonas aeruginosa (40%-65% of cases)
                 Staphylococcus aureus (10%-20% of cases)
                 Other pathogens can include: Streptococcus pyogens, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Bacte-

                   roides, Peptostreptococcus, and Propionibacterium.

Patient Symptoms

                   The following symptoms may or may not be present:

                    Otalgia
                    Crackling in the ear
                    Aural fullness or pressure
                    Hearing loss
                    Tinnitus
                    Otorrhea

                     NOTE: Suspect TM perforation or otitis externa if otorrhea exists.
                     NOTE: If dizziness exists, this should raise the suspicion of inflammation affecting the
                     inner ear (labyrinthitis).

Figure 1.4:     Physical Examination Findings
Tympanic         Hallmark finding: Persistent TM immobility
membrane.        Fluid accumulation in the middle ear space

Figure 7.3:     Tympanic Membrane Abnormalities as a Result
Tympanic        of Chronic Otitis Media
membrane         TM retraction in which either the pars tensa, pars flaccida, or both areas of the TM can
perforation
with scarring.     become retracted and lie deeper within the middle ear space. This is called atelectasis.
                    Could indicate the development of more serious sequelae (ossicular discontinuity,

                      cholesteatoma, or both)
                    Keratin (collection of dead skin cell debris) can accumulate within the retraction

                      pocket. This is known as a cholesteatoma.
                    Retraction of the TM into the middle ear space can lead to disruption of the ossi-

                      cles and eventually lead to bone erosion.
                 The two primary bony landmarks of the TM (malleal short process and umbo) may

                   be difficult to distinguish.
                 TM perforation can exist.
                 Myringosclerosis is calcification or scarring of the TM. It looks like chalky white

                   patches on the TM.
                 Tympanosclerosis can involve the ossicles of the middle ear and in some cases,

                   impair hearing.
                                                                                  OTITIS MEDIA  159

                                                                            FIGURE 7.3 Tympanic
                                                                                     membrane perforation (large)
                                                                                     with tympanic membrane
                                                                                     scarring (left ear).

Audiometric Findings
 Tympanogram:

    Type B, without a large volume (a large volume would indicate a perforation)
    A tympanogram line would be flat (considered Type B), indicating decreased TM

      mobility. This could occur as a result of fluid in the middle ear space or severe
      tympanosclerosis.
 Audiogram:
    CHL and mixed hearing loss
     · COM produces mild to moderate CHL in more than 50% of cases.
     · CHL results from disruption of normal TM movement and transfer of sound.

         There is a consistent relationship between the severity of the disease process
         and the degree of CHL.
     · Mixed hearing loss includes the damage that causes CHL plus hair cell damage from
         a bacterial infection that has penetrated the inner ear and caused SNHL as well.

Possible Complications of Chronic Otitis Media
 Delayed speech
 Delayed language development
 TM perforation
 Cholesteatoma:

    Related to reoccurring COM, which can lead to an accumulation of desquamating
      epithelium of keratin (dead skin cells) within the middle ear space

    If untreated, cholesteatoma continues to slowly grow and may cause: TM perfora-
      tion, facial nerve paralysis, balance disturbance, and hearing loss

 Mastoiditis:
    Spread of infection that affects the mastoid
    Acute mastoiditis is rare. Look for postauricular tenderness and swelling
    Chronic mastoiditis leads to erosion of the walls of the middle ear and mastoid
      cavity. NOTE: A CT of the temporal bones can be helpful in identifying the severity
       and extent of mastoiditis.

 Labyrinthitis:
    COM can spread to cochlea and vestibular system affecting hearing and balance

Imaging Studies
 A CT scan of the temporal bones is useful to evaluate the temporal bone for extracra-

   nial complications of OM including mastoiditis.
160  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

Figure 7.4:   Management Considerations
Normal
tympanostomy  NOTE: Nasal endoscopy should be considered prior to surgical options to rule out block-
tube.
              age of the ET in the posterior nasopharynx, especially if the COM is unilateral in an adult

              to ensure no nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

               After following pharmacotherapy recommendations for AOM, if recurrent AOM
                 and/or COM exists, consider:
                  PE tube insertion: At the same time a myringotomy with PE tube insertion is done,
                    a culture and sensitivity of the purulent exudate in the middle ear space can be
                    taken.
                  When recurrent attacks of AOM occur following extrusion of the first set of PE
                    tubes, then an adenoidectomy and another PE tube insertion are recommended,
                    irrespective of the size of the adenoids.
                  Consider workup for immune problems in patients with recurrent OM or COM
                    despite the presence of functioning PE tubes.
                  Mastoidectomy (surgery to remove the damaged mastoid air cells in the skull
                    behind the TM) and a tympanoplasty (reconstructing scarred or damaged TM) are
                    other surgical options that can be considered.

                                                                                      FIGURE 7.4 Normal
                                                                                              tympanostomy tube
                                                                                              (Armstrong).

              PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: MYRINGOTOMY WITH AND WITHOUT
              TYMPANOSTOMY OR PRESSURE EQUALIZER TUBE INSERTION

              A myringotomy is a procedure in which a tiny incision is created in the TM.
              This can be done alone or accompanied with a PE tube insertion (for the pur-
              pose of keeping the incision open in the TM that was created by the myrin-
              gotomy and thus gaining access to the middle ear space). Most myringotomy
              procedures are done in the office with application of a topical anesthetic (usu-
              ally phenol). However, children or persons who cannot keep their head immo-
              bilized for a period of time or those who have a severely retracted TM should
              have the procedure done under sedation in the operating room. Prior to the
              procedure (in or outside of the office) be sure to collect audiometric and tym-
              panometry findings.

                                                                                                                                   (continued)
                   OTITIS MEDIA  161

Indications

 Severe AOM or impending mastoiditis or intracranial complication due to oti-
   tis media (myringotomy only is generally done to provide prompt pain relief
   and to accelerate the resolution of the process)

 Poor response to antibiotic for OM
 Hearing loss greater than 30 dB in patients with otitis media with effusion

   (OME; can consider myringotomy only without PE tube insertion if acute)
 Recurrent episodes of AOM (more than three episodes in 6 months or more

   than four episodes in 12 months)
 OME for more than 3 months
 Chronic retraction of tympanic membrane or pars flaccida
 Control of the effects of barotrauma
 Craniofacial abnormalities that predispose to middle ear dysfunction (i.e.,

   cleft palate)
 Middle ear dysfunction due to head and neck radiation and skull base surgery

Tympanostomy or Pressure Equalizer Tube Types

Types              Mean Time to Extrusion (In Months)
Paparella I        7
Shepard            8-9.8
Armstrong Grommet  10.7-16.8
Reuter Bobbin      17.2
T-tube             20.7
Paparella II       45

Risks and Complications

Although complications from a myringotomy and PE tube insertion are uncom-
mon, they can still exist. Complications can include:

 External auditory canal (EAC) laceration
 Granuloma formation
 Chronic tympanic membrane perforation

   NOTE: The longer the PE tube is in place, the greater the chance for a permanent
   TM perforation to occur. PE tubes generally stay intact anywhere from 3 months
   to 1.5 years or longer
 Injury to the ossicles during the procedure
 TM retraction, flaccidity (decrease tone and firmness of the TM), and myringo-
   sclerosis (scarring of the TM) can occur as a result of the damage to the TM

In-Office Procedure Protocol

The patient should be placed supine on the examination table in a room with a
binocular operating microscope. The patient should be instructed to keep the

                                                       (continued)
162  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

             PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: MYRINGOTOMY WITH AND
             WITHOUT TYMPANOSTOMY OR PRESSURE EQUALIZER TUBE
             INSERTION (continued)

             head immobilized during the procedure. Consent should be obtained. Risks and
             complications need to be discussed.

                    An appropriate size ear speculum is selected. The auricle is retracted pos-
             teriorly and the speculum is inserted in the EAC. The EAC should first be exam-
             ined for any skin debris or cerumen, which should be removed so that the TM
             is clearly visible.

                    Evaluate the area where the incision will be made, which will be within the
             limits of the pars tensa. Be aware of potential middle ear vascular anomalies, such as
             an aberrant carotid or glomus tumor. If this is suspected, defer the procedure until
             confirmation can be obtained via CT of the temporal bones (if not already done).

                    Phenol is applied to the TM in the pars tensa region. The incision is made into
             the anterior one half of the TM, commonly anterioferiorly, taking care to stay within
             the limits of the pars tensa and avoiding injury to the ossicular chain in the postero-
             superior quadrant. The incision should be approximately 2.5 to 4 mm in length and
             be radially oriented from the umbo to annulus. The depth of the myringotomy inci-
             sion is carefully controlled to avoid trauma to the medial wall of the middle ear.

                    Occasionally, a previous scar, atrophic portions of the TM, or retraction
             pockets dictate placement of the incision. In these situations, the myringotomy
             incision is made in the high anterosuperior portion of the TM. After making the
             myringotomy incision, any middle ear effusion present is gently aspired from
             the middle ear using suction. Care is taken not to apply suction directly on the
             TM, because this may lead to bleeding.

                    Grasp the PE tube with alligator forceps on the outer flange and insert the tube
             down the speculum toward the TM. Place the inner flange of the PE tube through
             the myringotomy incision until it is in position. The PE tube may need to be manu-
             ally manipulated into position using a straight pick. If the PE tube was inserted
             because of an infection, instill antibiotic ear drops into the affected ear. Give the
             patient a prescription to continue using the antibiotic ear drops for 5 to 7 days after
             the procedure depending on the initial indication for PE tube placement.

             Follow-Up

             Ask the patient to return to the office if any persistent or profuse bleeding from
             the ear occurs. Otherwise, a general follow-up in the office is usually 1 to 2 weeks
             later to check PE tube placement and patency. A hearing test can be done at this
             time to evaluate improvement or resolution of conductive hearing loss. Then,
             depending on the initial indication for the procedure, follow-up is continued on
             an every-6-months basis until either the PE tube has extruded or the indications
             are met for removing the PE tube.

OTIC BAROTRAUMA

Chapter 5:   Perforation of the TM can be caused by sudden changes in pressure, which is referred
Hearing      to as barotrauma. Barotrauma occurs with dysfunction of the ET and results in pres-
Loss Due to  sure that does not move freely between the nasopharynx and middle ear.
Barotrauma
section.
               DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF TYMPANIC MEMBRANE PERFORATION  163

Methods to Prevent Otic Barotrauma

                   Avoid air travel when symptoms of an URI are present. If this is not possible, the fol-
                   lowing measures can aid in the opening of the ET or optimize patency of the tube dur-
                   ing the flight (particularly the descent).

                       Drink liquids or swallow frequently.
                       Jaw movements or yawning
                       Chewing gum or bottle feeding for children
                       Perform the Valsalva maneuver several times during descent: Valsalva maneuver

                         is forceable expiration with the lips and mouth closed, which raises air pressure in
                         the nasopharynx and forces air into the ET.
                       Perform the Frenzel maneuver several times during descent: The nose is pinched
                         closed and the tongue is placed on the roof of the mouth as forward as possible.
                         The back of the tongue is moved upward. This can be repeated multiple times
                         until equalization occurs.
                       Cirrus ear-plane ear plugs: This is an over-the-counter product that works by reg-
                         ulating the rate at which air moves into and out of the ear, giving the inner ear
                         time to compensate for changes in pressure. NOTE: If this product is used, use it in
                            conjunction with the techniques listed above.
                       Prophylactic pharmacotherapy options:
                      · Topical nasal decongestant spray: Afrin

                            - Prophylaxis during flying: Two sprays in each nostril, 1 hour before take-off
                               and 30 minutes before descent

                      · Oral decongestant: Sudafed (pseudoephedrine)
                            - Prophylaxis during flying: 60 to 120 mg 30 minutes the day before the flight
                               and before take-off

                      · Oral antihistamines may have a benefit in drying mucus that may be blocking
                            the ET.

                       Myringotomy or PE tubes can be inserted for high-risk persons.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF TYMPANIC
MEMBRANE PERFORATION

Figure 7.5:     Tympanic perforations can be caused by a variety of reasons. The perforation can
Large tympanic  range from a small tear of the pars tensa to massive injury involving the ossicular
membrane        chain, labyrinthine windows, and facial nerve. In the majority of TM perforations, the
perforation.    ear drum heals spontaneously without visible scars. Large perforations may also heal
                completely without treatment.

Differential Diagnosis Tympanic Membrane Perforation Etiologies

                    Foreign body: Q-tip, pencils, etc.
                    Flying objects: Insect, etc.
                    Gunfire: May cause sufficient air displacement
                    Infection: Otitis externa, OM, mastoiditis
                    Physical trauma: Blow to the ear or improper attempt at ear cleaning
                    Temporal bone fractures
                    Barotrauma: Severe atmospheric changes in pressure
                    Cholesteatoma
                    Inflammatory: Uncontrolled allergies, sinusitis
                    Thermal burns of the TM (hot fragments that enter the EAC as with welders)
164  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                                                                                               FIGURE 7.5 Large tympanic
                                                                                                          membrane perforation.

Patient Symptoms
                  General Complaints That May or May Not Exist
                    Audible whistling sound
                    Hearing loss
                    Tinnitus
                    Otalgia
                    Bleeding
                    Vertigo
                    Otorrhea

                  Patient Complaints Specific to an Acute Perforation
                    Relief of otalgia after "pop" sound in ear. May be accompanied with otorrhea
                    May have disequilibrium

                  Patient Complaints Specific to a Chronic Perforation
                    The patient may be asymptomatic.
                    Should not have disequilibrium

Physical Evaluation
                   Document:
                    Facial nerve function
                    If nystagmus exists (this evaluates vestibular function)
                    TM appearance:
                       Traumatic perforations have ragged, sharp edges usually with fresh blood in the
                         ear canal or middle ear.
                       Thermal burns of the TM have a tendency to become infected. Purulent otorrhea
                         may be apparent.
                    TM perforation location:
                       If the perforation is located in the posterosuperior quadrant of the TM, suspect
                         cholesteatoma until ruled out.
                       If the perforation is in the anterior quadrant of the TM, suspect poor ETD.
                    EAC appearance:
                       Traumatic perforation may have an associated EAC skin laceration.
               DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF TYMPANIC MEMBRANE PERFORATION  165

                     NOTE: On microscopic evaluation, clear liquid may indicate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak,
                     particularly important to evaluate in patients with fractures of the temporal bone.

Audiometric Findings

                    Obtain an audiogram to assess the degree of CHL or any injury to the ossicular chain
                      or cochlea.
                       A large air-bone gap (> 20 dB) raises the suspicion for an ossicular chain disruption.
                       A CT of the temporal bones should be ordered if there is suspicion of traumatic
                         injury or damage to the middle or inner ear to evaluate the extent of the injury.

                    Tympanogram with a TM perforation will show a Type B with a large volume.

Goal of Medical Therapy for Tympanic Membrane Perforation

                    Control reoccurrence of otorrhea
                    Consider surgical options when indicated

Surgical Indications for Tympanic Membrane Perforations

                   Surgical indications to close the perforation and restore hearing are reserved for
                   patients:

                    Without recurrent chronic OM or otorrhea
                    With persistent TM perforation and CHL

Surgical Management Options

                    Paper patch myringoplasty:
                       Small perforations can be closed with a paper patch. See Procedural Protocol:
                         Paper Patch Myringoplasty in this chapter.

                    Myringoplasty:
                       A myringoplasty is the reconstruction of a perforation of the TM. This surgery
                         assumes that there is normal middle ear function and ossicles. During the sur-
                         gery, the TM is not elevated from its normal position. Most surgeons use fascia,
                         perichondrium, or cartilage as a graft. Fascia from the temporalis muscle is the
                         most commonly used graft for the TM.

                    Adipose or "fat graft" myringoplasty:
                       "Fat graft" is usually a plug of fat (can be harvested from ear lobe) and placed
                         through the perforation after edges are freshened.
                       Normally the surgery is performed completely through the EAC.

                    Tympanoplasty:
                       A tympanoplasty involves reconstruction of the TM and also includes address-
                         ing middle ear pathology such as cholesteatoma, ossicular chain problems,
                         and, during surgery, it usually involves elevating the TM from its normal
                         position. See risks and complications of surgery with tympanoplasty and mas-
                         toidectomy in the Chronic Mastoiditis section of this chapter.
                       There are five different types of tympanoplasty procedures:
                      · Type I: Surgery to correct damage to the TM. There is no ossicular involvement.
                            This is the same as a myringoplasty except that in the case of a tympanoplasty,
                            the TM may be lifted from its normal position.
                      · Type II: Surgery to correct damage to the TM and malleus. The TM with or
                            without malleus is grafted to the incus.
166  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                      · Type III: The malleus and incus are eroded. Therefore, the TM is grafted to the
                            stapes because the stapes is still intact.

                      · Type IV: The malleus and incus are eroded or absent. The stapes is eroded as
                            well but the footplate is still mobile. Therefore, the TM is grafted to the mobile
                            footplate.

                      · Type V: The malleus, incus, stapes, and stapes footplate are eroded or absent.
                            The TM is grafted to the horizontal semicircular canal.

                       Reconstructive prosthesis used in tympanoplasty procedures are generally classi-
                         fied as the following:
                      · TORP (total ossicular replacement prosthesis)
                      · PROP (partial ossicular replacement prosthesis)

Postoperative Care and Instructions

                    Myringoplasty and tympanoplasty:
                       Avoid nose blowing and sneeze with mouth open for at least 3 to 4 weeks.
                       Avoid heavy lifting (>10 lbs) or straining for at least 6 weeks. This includes avoid-
                         ing activities that increase pressure behind the TM.
                       Dry ear precautions for at least 3 to 4 weeks.
                       Repeat audiogram 4 to 6 weeks post myringoplasty and 2 to 3 months post tym-
                         panoplasty.

                     NOTE: The surgeon who performed the procedure should manage postoperative care fol-
                     lowing a tympanoplasty.

Cautionary Measures With a Tympanic Membrane Perforation

Chapter 6:     The patient should be instructed to keep the ear as dry as possible.
Pharmaco-      Never use irrigation of any kind to clean the EAC.
therapy        Be cautious when prescribing ear drops (as some may be ototoxic).
Options for
Treating AOE
section.

              PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: PAPER PATCH MYRINGOPLASTY

              Usually this procedure can be done in the office. For uncooperative patients, it can
              be done in the operating room. The procedure itself takes less than 5 minutes.

              Indication

              Small to medium noninfected chronic TM perforation that occupies no more
              than one quadrant of the TM and is accompanied by a less than 30 dB conduc-
              tive hearing loss.

              Contraindications

               Active ear infection
               Squamous epithelium on the medial surface of the TM
               Poor eustachian tube function (relative contraindication)

                                                                                     (continued)
                                                                                                     MASTOIDITIS  167

                      Complications

                        The paper patch can displace and end up on a different location on the TM
                        Failure of TM closure
                        Postprocedure middle ear infection

                      Procedure

                       Record the size and position of TM perforation. Apply 50% trichloroacetic acid
                       (TCA) on a calgiswab and gently apply around the exposed margins of the per-
                       foration being careful not to get any of this medication in the middle ear space. A
                       small disk of cigarette paper is moistened with 10% silver nitrate (trim the paper
                       patch if needed) and picked up with fine-tipped alligator forceps. The TCA
                       causes a mildly irritating effect that stimulates proliferation of the squamous
                       layer of the TM. This allows for reepithelialization over the perforation. The
                       patch is introduced through the speculum and manipulated into position so that
                       it covers the perforation completely with a margin of at least 1.5 mm. It may be
                       necessary to smooth the patch against the TM with a cerumen curette. No pack-
                       ing or dressing is necessary. On follow-up evaluation in 4 to 6 weeks, if partial
                       TM healing has occurred with the first paper patch placement, the procedure
                       may be repeated again. If paper patch placement is unsuccessful and there is no
                       healing after 3 months, consider a tympanoplasty.

MASTOIDITIS

                   Mastoiditis is an inflammatory process of the mastoid cavity of the temporal bone.
                   The mastoid cavity is an extension of the middle ear, so virtually every person with
                   an AOM or COM has some elements of inflammation that involve the mastoid cavity.
                   Acute mastoiditis is associated with AOM and chronic mastoiditis is associated with
                   COM. With easy access and availability of antibiotics today, it is very rare to see severe
                   cases of mastoiditis that lead to intracranial extension.

Causative Organisms

                    Acute mastoiditis
                       Usually caused by the same organisms that cause AOM

                    Chronic mastoiditis
                       Usually caused by the same organism that cause COM

                   Mastoiditis can lead to the following:

                    Periostitis of the mastoid: Inflammation of the periosteum that surrounds the mas-
                      toid cavity bone

                    Osteitis of the mastoid: Inflammation of the mastoid cavity bone, which can lead to
                      bony erosion and cell wall loss

                    Labyrinthitis
                    Cholesteatoma formation: Benign squamous epithelium that alters normal struc-

                      ture, function, and surrounding soft tissue and bone
                    Facial nerve disorders
                    In rare cases, mastoiditis can lead to extension of the inflammatory process and

                      infection to contiguous areas and intracranial extension.
168  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

Physical Examination Findings

                   The following symptoms may or may not be present:

                    Fever
                    Edema, erythema, and tenderness over the mastoid, postauricular region
                    TM perforation
                    Otorrhea
                    Otalgia
                    Hearing loss
                    Facial paralysis
                    Subperiosteal abscess displacing the pinna to the lower portion and to the side (inf-

                      erolateral)

Radiographic Findings

                    With any middle ear fluid, infectious or noninfectious, the mastoid air cells can con-
                      tain fluid. Radiologists may label any opacification or thickening of the mastoid cells
                      as "mastoiditis." However, that does not mean that there is a bacterial cause. Bony
                      destruction of the mastoid air cells is more worrisome for a complication or surgical
                      mastoiditis.

                    CT scan of the temporal bone is the standard test to evaluate mastoiditis.

Antibiotic Therapy

                    Culture and sensitivity (C and S) may need to be obtained from the middle ear space
                      (via tympanocentesis or myringotomy with or without PE tube insertion).

                    Antibiotic therapy options should be the same as with AOM in acute mastoiditis
                      and COM with chronic mastoiditis. The duration of therapy should be 2 to 3 weeks
                      or longer depending on symptomatology. Antibiotic/steroid combination ear drops
                      may need to be prescribed in conjunction with oral antibiotics.

Surgical Options

                    Controversy exists as to which cases of mastoiditis require surgical intervention.
                      Most agree that severe cases of mastoiditis can result in serious or fatal complications
                      and, therefore, surgical intervention in cases of chronic mastoiditis is necessary.

                    Consider consulting a neurootologist.
                    Goals of surgery: Provide proper middle ear aeration, improve hearing, and prevent

                      recurrent infection.
                    Mastoidectomy: Enlarges and cleans the mastoid cavity, but may cause loss of mid-

                      dle ear function. There are two types: canal wall up and canal wall down mastoidec-
                      tomy.
                       Canal wall up mastoidectomy: Removes all of the mastoid air cells but the poste-

                         rior canal wall is preserved
                       Canal wall down mastoidectomy: Removes all of the mastoid air cells in addition

                         to removing the posterior and superior wall of the EAC. The TM is reconstructed
                         to separate the middle ear space from the mastoid cavity and ear canal
                    Tympanoplasty
                    Tympanomastoidectomy
                    Ossiculoplasty
                                                           CHOLESTEATOMA OF MIDDLE EAR AND MASTOID  169

Risks and Complications

                   The risks and complications of tympanoplasty, mastoidectomy, tympanomastoidec-
                   tomy, and ossiculoplasty include the following:

                    Hearing: Less than 1% of patients can develop a complete loss of hearing. More than
                      80% of patients experience improvement in hearing after surgery.

                    Tinnitus: Can be improved, remain the same, or worsen after surgery
                    Dizziness: Permanent balance issues after surgery occurs in 1 out of 500 patients.

                      Less than 5% of patients will have dizziness for up to 1 month postoperatively.
                    Facial nerve paralysis: Very rarely, there can be a unilateral temporary paralysis of

                      the facial nerve that can last up to 6 months or longer and usually spontaneously
                      resolves but can leave permanent residual weakness.
                    Perforation: May result in the inability to successfully close the TM perforation
                    Taste disturbances: Temporary taste disturbances (damage to the CN IX--glossopha-
                      ryngeal nerve) can occur in less than 10% of patients and can last up to 1 year after
                      surgery. Permanent taste disturbance and dryness of the mouth can occur in less
                      than 1% of patients.
                    Infection: Persistent ear infections can occur postoperatively.

CHOLESTEATOMA OF MIDDLE EAR AND MASTOID

                   A cholesteatoma is a skin cyst or abnormal collection of squamous epithelium and
                   keratin debris that can be located in the wall of the EAC, in the middle ear, and mastoid
                   region. As more debris accumulates in the cyst, the cholesteatoma expands.

                          A cholesteatoma is the most common tumor that grows in the middle ear and
                   mastoid. The ability of a cholesteatoma to erode bone is what makes it particularly
                   dangerous. When it erodes it can: (a) lead to ossicular chain destruction, (b) affect the
                   labyrinth leading to a labyrinthine fistula and vertigo, (c) affect the facial nerve causing
                   facial paralysis, and (d) infect the mastoid and intracranial spaces leading to intratem-
                   poral, or intracranial infection and ultimately brain herniation. There are two types of
                   cholesteatomas--congenital and acquired. CHL is the general finding associated with
                   both types.

                          Only approximately 2% to 4% of cholesteatomas are congenital. CHL is the
                   most common presenting symptom of congenital cholesteatoma. There are usually no
                   associated symptoms or history of OM. The cause of a congenital cholesteatoma is
                   unknown, but the thought is that they arise from aberrant epithelial remnants left over
                   when the neural groove closes between the third and fifth week of fetal life. Congenital
                   cholesteatomas are frequently in the anterosuperior quadrant of the middle ear. Treat-
                   ment of congenital cholesteatomas is surgical removal of the cyst considering that if
                   it was left untreated, it could eventually invade surrounding structures and lead to
                   permanent damage, including hearing loss.

                          More than 98% of all middle ear cholesteatomas are acquired. They can occur
                   in the EAC, middle ear, and mastoid. The vast majority develops as a result of COM
                   and is usually associated with a TM perforation. Cholesteatomas can arise long after
                   trauma to the temporal bone because of exposure in mastoid cavity with squamous
                   epithelium related to the fracture. Negative middle ear pressure caused by ETD can
                   result in retraction of the pars flaccida and lead to collection of skin debris in the mid-
                   dle ear. If the retraction pocket adheres to the ossicles or surrounding structures, it will
                   not reverse.

                          Cholesteatomas occurring in the EAC are called canal wall cholesteatomas. They
                   generally occur as a result of trauma or otologic surgery.
170  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

Physical Examination Findings

                    Microscopic examination of the ear is the most important diagnostic maneuver in
                      evaluating the presence of a cholesteatoma.
                       It may be possible to see a mass with the appearance of a small, white pearl behind
                         the TM.

                    If the TM is retracted in the pars flaccida region, suspect a cholesteatoma unless
                      proven otherwise. The same is true if there is a crust or "wax" covering the pars
                      flaccida region.

                    Assess the function of the facial nerve. An area in the middle ear space (epitympa-
                      num) is intimately associated with the horizontal portion of the facial nerve. If a
                      cholesteatoma invades this space, it can lead to facial paresis or paralysis.

Radiographic Findings

                    CT of the temporal bones is the diagnostic test of choice used to assess for the pres-
                      ence of a cholesteatoma.

                    If the cholesteatoma is present in the pars flaccida region of the middle ear, the mass
                      could extend superiorly into Prussak's space and eventually erode and displace the
                      ossicles medially.

                    If the cholesteatoma is present in the pars tensa region of the middle ear, the mass
                      could extend medial to the incus and displace the ossicles laterally.

Treatment

                    Surgical excision is the treatment of choice. This includes removal of the trapped
                      keratinizing epithelium.

                    Other than removing the cholesteatoma, diseased bone and mucosa are also removed.
                      The goal is to preserve as much normal anatomy as possible.

                    Consult a neurootologist or experienced otologic surgeon.
                    Surgical options to remove a cholesteatoma include:

                       Mastoidectomy (canal wall up or canal wall down)
                       Tympanomastoidectomy with or without ossiculoplasty

TEMPORAL BONE FRACTURES

                   The temporal bone is made up of some of the densest bones in the human body. It contains
                   many vital structures including the cochlear and vestibular organs, facial nerve, carotid
                   artery, and jugular vein. When the temporal bone fractures, it usually does not cause other
                   associated problems. However, if it does, associated problems can include the following:

                    Subdural or epidural hematoma
                    Damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) causing SNHL and balance problems
                    Bleeding into the middle ear space (hemotympanum) causing CHL
                    Facial nerve trauma causing facial nerve paresis and paralysis in some cases
                    CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) otorrhea
                    TM perforation
                    EAC laceration

                          Causes of temporal bone fractures include (but are not limited to): motor vehicle
                   accidents, physical assaults, falls, and gunshot wounds.
                                                                                                   OTOSCLEROSIS  171

Classification of Temporal Bone Fractures

                    Longitudinal (80%) fractures:
                       Results from blunt trauma to the temporoparietal region of the skull.
                       The fracture line runs across the superior EAC, through the middle ear, and along
                         the long axis of the petrous pyramid (wedge at the base of the skull between the
                         sphenoid and occipital bones).
                       Findings can include bleeding in the EAC, TM tear, CHL (as a result of ossicular
                         and TM injury), and sanguineous otorrhea (possibly mixed with CSF). NOTE: Most
                            CSF leaks heal spontaneously in 4 to 5 days without surgical intervention.

                    Transverse (20%) fractures:
                       Result from a severe occipital or frontal blow
                       Transverse fractures that involve the jugular foramen almost always cause disrup-
                         tion of the otic capsule.
                       Findings can include SNHL due to damage to the cochlea, facial nerve injury or
                         paralysis, CSF leak, and hemotympanum.

                    Mixed type: Includes both longitudinal and transverse types.

Imaging Studies

                    A CT scan of the temporal bones is useful in assessing injuries complicated by CSF
                      leak, facial paralysis, or suspected vascular injury.

                    A MRI cannot identify a temporal bone fracture.

Referral and Surgical Considerations

                    Usually these patients are managed in the hospital setting initially, because their
                      injuries are likely the result of a traumatic event. Once stable and discharged from
                      the hospital, these patients can follow up with a general otolaryngologist for ongo-
                      ing evaluation of hearing and balance issues. However, this should be in conjunction
                      with a neurologist.

                    The patient may also benefit from being followed by a neurootologist and/or neu-
                      rosurgeon if indicated.

                    Aside from necessary acute surgical interventions (for facial paralysis as an exam-
                      ple), ossicular reconstruction, tympanoplasty, and other surgical measures can be
                      considered 3 to 6 months after temporal bone trauma, because 75% of patients with
                      CHL will return to normal within this time period.

OTOSCLEROSIS

                   Otosclerosis (OS) is an abnormal deposition of bone that mainly affects the footplate
                   of the stapes. The abnormal bone deposition in OS is restricted to the otic capsule and
                   does not affect the rest of the body's skeletal system. Once the footplate of the stapes
                   is affected, it results in CHL because sound cannot be normally transmitted. OS can
                   also involve other parts of the otic capsule and may result in SNHL (which is called
                   cochlear OS) and balance problems, but this is rare and is still an area of debate.

                          OS is the leading cause of CHL in patients who do not have a MEE. The exact cause
                   of OS is unknown, but it is believed that genetics play a role with there being a 20%
                   chance of developing the disease in a child of a parent who has OS. For unknown reasons,
                   women who have OS tend to find that pregnancy can exacerbate the development and
172  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                 progression of the disease. There is also some evidence to suggest an association with
                 viral infections such as measles and the development of OS.

                        The patient usually develops symptoms in early adulthood and the disorder is
                 usually unilateral, but can be bilateral.

Clinical Features

                    Patients usually present with slowly progressive hearing loss over a period of years.
                      Audiometric confirmation of this hearing loss is helpful to accurately diagnose the
                      disease.

                    A positive family history of OS is present in 50% of patients.
                    Tinnitus is present in more than 75% of patients. It varies in intensity and may be

                      unilateral or bilateral, continuous or fluctuating, roaring or hissing in character.
                    The physical appearance of the TM is usually normal. A positive Schwartz's sign

                      (may or may not be present):
                       The TM will have a pink or reddish discoloration due to the vascular otospongio-

                         sis (abnormal bone growth) in the middle ear. This indicates active OS and may
                         be a contraindication for surgery.

Audiometric Findings

Figure 5.6:       CHL usually begins in the low frequencies.
Otosclerosis         Initial stiffening of the stapediovestibular joint causes low frequency stiffness. A
Carhart's notch        slight air-bone gap occurs on the audiogram.
(right ear).         As the footplate becomes fixed, the air-bone gap widens and involves more fre-
                       quencies.

                  Carhart's notch:
                     Classic audiometric finding in patients with OS
                     Carhart's notch is present in bone conduction.
                     Bone conduction shows around a 20-dB loss at 2,000 Hz but less dB loss in the low
                       and high frequencies (before and after) the 2,000-Hz range.
                     It is considered to be an artifact due to stapes fixation.
                     After successful stapes surgery, the Carhart's notch disappears.

                  Tympanogram: Middle ear pressure is not affected by OS. Therefore, the tympano-
                    gram will be normal (or Type A). However, in advanced OS, Type A may be present,
                    indicating stiffness.

Radiographic Studies
                    Radiographic studies are not necessary in the routine evaluation of patients with OS.

Surgical Considerations

                    For many people with OS, no treatment is indicated initially. As the hearing loss
                      progresses, the patient may choose to try hearing aids first to help amplify the
                      sound.

                    Surgical procedures offer an excellent chance for restoring hearing when hearing
                      loss is severe and the degree of success depends mainly on cochlear function.
                       The success rate is more than 90% as measured by return of hearing to normal or
                         near normal.

                    The goal of ossicular reconstruction is to obtain permanent restoration of hearing.
                                                                                                   OTOSCLEROSIS  173

                    If bilateral OS exists, due to the risk of inner ear hearing loss following surgery, only
                      one ear is operated on at a time and the worst ear is always done first.

                    There are three surgical options for OS--total stapedectomy, partial stapedectomy,
                      and stapedotomy. The different surgeries correspond to the amount of the stapes
                      footplate that is removed. The technique chosen depends on the degree of sclerosis
                      and surgeon preference.
                       Stapedectomy: Involves removing the stapes bone completely and replacing it
                         with a prosthesis
                      · TORP (total ossicular replacement prosthesis)
                       Partial stapedectomy: Involves removal of the posterior third of the footplate
                       Stapedotomy: Involves drilling or lasering a hole in the stapes footplate, inserting
                         a prosthesis through the hole to the oval window, and anchoring it to the incus.

Indications and Contraindications for a Stapedectomy,
Partial Stapedectomy, and Stapedotomy

                  Indications
                    CHL with an air-bone gap of at least 15 to 30 dB
                    Presence of a Carhart's notch on the audiogram (relative indication)
                    Speech discrimination scores of 60% or better

                  Contraindications
                    Absolute contraindication is Meniere's disease.

Postoperative Complications After Stapedectomy, Partial
Stapedectomy, or Stapedotomy Procedure

                    Vertigo: Usually positional and can last several hours to several days
                    Tinnitus: Sometimes tinnitus resolves after surgery and hearing improves. However,

                      it is unclear why tinnitus persists after surgery if hearing improves.
                    Facial paralysis: Uncommon and almost always associated with dehiscence of the

                      facial canal. Oral steroids are indicated.
                    Cochlear hearing loss: Worsening SNHL is rare. Can occur in 1% to 2% of patients

                      and the cause is unknown
                    Taste disturbances and oral dryness: Can occur when the chorda tympani nerve

                      (nerve branch of the facial nerve that conveys taste fibers form the anterior two
                      thirds of the tongue) is manipulated. These disturbances usually resolve within
                      1 to 3 months postoperatively.
                    Perilymph fistula: Persistent dizziness with a feeling of falling suggests a perilymph
                      fistula (a tear or defect in one or both of the small, thin membranes between the
                      middle and inner ear). Symptoms may be present immediately following surgery;
                      however, they can also be delayed. A sudden, marked loss of hearing with or with-
                      out dizziness is a surgical emergency.

Postoperative Instructions After Stapedectomy, Partial
Stapedectomy, or Stapedotomy Procedure

                    Sleep on the back or the side of the unoperated ear for 1 to 2 weeks after surgery.
                    For 6 weeks after surgery, no lifting weight 10 lbs or more, no vigorous physical

                      activity, and no bending with head lower than the chest.
                    Do not blow the nose and sneeze with mouth open for 6 weeks following surgery.
                    Air travel should be avoided for 6 weeks after surgery.
174  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

                    Some dizziness or off balance may occur after surgery. Long-term balance distur-
                      bances rarely occur.

                    Water precautions for 6 weeks after surgery
                    It is not unusual to have taste disturbances (metallic taste mostly described) for sev-

                      eral weeks or months following surgery.
                    Weakness of the facial muscles is rare but can occur as a result of an abnormality or

                      swelling of the facial nerve.
                    Swimming is allowed after complete healing but diving is discouraged.
                    Audiometry is deferred until 4 to 6 weeks after surgery unless complications are

                      suspected.

BENIGN MASS OR TUMOR WITHIN THE MIDDLE EAR
AND MASTOID (MOST COMMON)

CHOLESTEATOMA

                   See the section Cholesteatoma of the Middle Ear and Mastoid within this chapter.

Polyps and Granulation Tissue

                    Polyps and granulation tissue look like balls of inflamed tissue, which form grape-
                      like clusters within the middle ear and mastoid.

                    They are usually bright red and bleed easily on vacuuming or any type of manipula-
                      tion.

                    If they do not respond to medical therapy, they should be biopsied.

Cholesterol Granuloma

                    Mass of gelatinous material that fills the mastoid and middle ear as the result of a
                      reactive process in the temporal bone that results in hemorrhage of blood into these
                      areas

                    The hallmark of a cholesterol granuloma is idiopathic hemotympanum or a dark
                      bluish discoloration of the TM that is not associated with trauma.

                    It can damage structures within the middle ear, but this is rare.
                    PE tube insertion is helpful, although surgical excision is necessary to reestablish

                      normal hearing.

Glomus Tympanicum and Glomus Jugulare

                    A tiny tumor that usually presents as pulsatile tinnitus
                    On physical examination, it appears as a reddish-blue mass behind the TM.
                    A glomus tympanicum is exclusively contained within the middle ear cavity. If the

                      jugular bulb is involved, it is called glomus jugulare.
                    A CT scan of the temporal bones can help differentiate between the two masses.

Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors (Schwannomas)

                    Most common are schwannomas and neurofibromas that originate from Schwann
                      cells in the peripheral nervous system.

                    More than 90% of tumors in and around the temporal bone are schwannomas.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  175

                    Most of the time they occur in the inner ear--IAC, cerebellopontine angle (CPA), or
                      jugular foramen. Although rare, they can occasionally occur within or adjacent to
                      the middle ear and in these cases, they arise from the facial nerve.

                    Biopsy of a facial nerve schwannoma in the middle ear will result in facial paralysis.
                      Therefore, CT of the temporal bones is recommended prior to obtaining a biopsy of
                      any middle ear tumor.

                    Treatment is surgical.

MALIGNANT MASS OR TUMOR WITHIN THE MIDDLE EAR AND MASTOID

                   Malignant tumors of the middle ear and mastoid are very rare.

Squamous Cell Cancer

                    Most common of the malignant tumors of the middle ear and mastoid
                    Usually found in patients who have neglected chronic or long-term OM or infection

                      of the mastoid
                    It is unclear how these long-term infections can lead to squamous cell cancer (SCC).
                    Usually a TM perforation exists, which shows suspicious tissue in the middle ear or

                      mastoid that does not heal after appropriate medical therapy. A biopsy is indicated
                      at this point and the diagnosis depends on the biopsy results.
                    If left untreated, SCC of the middle ear and mastoid is a fatal disease.
                    CT of the temporal bones is necessary to determine the extent of bone involvement.
                    MRI can demonstrate the infiltration of the tumor into the surrounding soft tissue. If
                      the tumor spreads into the plate of bone that separates the middle ear and mastoid
                      from the brain, then cure becomes quite difficult.
                    Radiation and/or chemotherapy is generally done after tumor excision.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Acuin, J., for the World Health Organization. (2004). Chronic suppurative otitis media. Burden of illness
                   and management options. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. Retrieved from http://
                   www.who.int/pbd/deafness/activities/hearing_care/otitis_media.pdf. Accessed online March
                   10, 2013.

            American Academy of Family Physicians and American Academy of Pediatrics. (2004). Clinical practice
                   guideline for the diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Retrieved from http://www.aafp.
                   org/online/etc/medialib/aafp_org/documents/clinical/clin_recs/otitismedia.Par.0001.File.
                   dat/final_aom.pdf. Accessed online March 9, 2013.

            American Academy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery. (2010). Clinical indicators: Myringo-
                   tomy and tympanostomy tubes. Retrieved from http://www.entnet.org/Practice/upload/Myringo-
                   tomy-and-Tympanostomy-Tubes-CI.pdf. Accessed online March 10, 2013.

            American Academy of Pediatrics, Subcommittee. (2004). Management of acute otitis media diagnosis
                   and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics, 113(5), 1451-1465.

            Block, S. L., Schmier, J. K., Notario, G. F., Akinlade, B. K., Busman, T. A., Mackinnon, G. E., . . . Nilius, A.
                   M. (2006). Efficacy, tolerability, and parent reported outcomes for cefdinir vs. high-dose amoxicil-
                   lin/clavulanate oral suspension for acute otitis media in young children. Current Medical Research
                   and Opinion, 22(9), 1839-1847.

            Bluestone, C. D., & Klein, J. O. (2003). Otitis media and eustachian tube dysfunction. In C. D. Bluestone,
                   S. E. Stoole, & C. M. Alper (Eds), Pediatric otolaryngology (4th ed., pp. 497-535). Philadelphia, PA:
                   WB Saunders.
176  7. MIDDLE EAR CONDITIONS

            Bunne, M., Falk, B., Hellström, S., & Magnuson, B. (2000). Variability of Eustachian tube function in
                   children with secretory otitis media. Evaluations at tube insertion and at follow-up. International
                   Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 52(2), 131-141.

            Canalis, R. F., & Lambert, P. R. (2000). The ear: Comprehensive otology (p. 566, Patulous eustachian tube,
                   pp. 467-484, Otosclerosis). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

            Chonmaitree, T. (2000). Viral and bacterial interaction in acute otitis media. Pediatric Infectious Disease
                   Journal, 19(5 Suppl), S24-S30.

            Coco, A., Vernacchio L., Horst, M., & Anderson, A. (2010). Management of acute otitis media after pub-
                   lication of the 2004 AAP and AAFP clinical practice guidelines. Pediatrics. Retrieved from http://
                   pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/125/2/214.full.pdf. Accessed on March 9, 2013.

            Cureoglu, S., Yildirim, B. M., & Paparella, M. (2010). Cochlear otosclerosis. Current Opinion in Otolaryn-
                   gology Head and Neck Surgery, 18(5), 357-362. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
                   articles/PMC3075959.

            De Seta, E., Rispoli, G., Balsamo, G., Covelli, E., De Seta, D., & Filipo, R. (2009). Indication for surgery
                   in otosclerotic patients with unilateral hearing loss. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of
                   the American Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and
                   Neurotology, 30(8), 1116-1121.

            Fitzgerald, M. (2001). Study guide for family nurse practitioner certification examination and practice prepara-
                   tion (p. 93). Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis.

            Gates, G. A., Klein, J. O., Lim, D. J., Mogi, G., Ogra, P. L., Pararella, M. M., . . . Tos, M. (2002). Recent
                   advances in otitis media. 1. Definitions, terminology, and classification of otitis media. Annals of
                   Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology. Supplement, 188, 8-18.

            Harris, L., & Huntoon, M. (2008). Core curriculum for otorhinolaryngology and head-neck nursing (pp. 133-
                   135). New Smyrna Beach, FL: Society of Otorhinolaryngology and Head-Neck Nurses.

            Karmody, C. S., & Northrop, C. (2012). The pathogenesis of acquired cholesteatoma of the human
                   middle ear: Support for the migration hypothesis. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of
                   the American Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and
                   Neurotology, 33(1), 42-47.

            Kazahaya, K., & Potsic, W. P. (2004). Congenital cholesteatoma. Current Opinion in Otolaryngology and
                   Head and Neck Surgery, 12(5), 398-403.

            Kim, D. S., Moore, P. L., & Rockley, T. J. (2004). Long-term Paparella II grommet use in the management
                   of persistent childhood otitis media: A 5-year follow-up study. Clinical Otolaryngology and Allied
                   Sciences, 29(5), 553-557.

            Konstantinidis, I., Malliari, H., Tsakiropoulou, E., & Constantinidis, J. (2013). Fat myringoplasty out-
                   come analysis with otoendoscopy: Who is the suitable patient? Otology and Neurotology: Official
                   Publication of the American Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of
                   Otology and Neurotology, 34(1), 95-99.

            Lindstrom, D. R., Reuben, B., Jacobson, K., Flanary, V. A., & Kerschner, J. E. (2004). Long-term
                   results of Armstrong beveled grommet tympanostomy tubes in children. Laryngoscope, 114(3),
                   490-494.

            Luntz, M., Brodsky, A., Nusem, S., Kronenberg, J., Keren, G., Migirov, L., . . . Goldenberg, D. (2001).
                   Acute mastoiditis--the antibiotic era: A multicenter study. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhi-
                   nolaryngology, 57(1), 1-9.

            McCormick, D. P., Saeed, K. A., Pittman, C., Baldwin, C. D., Friedman, N., Teichgraeber, D. C., & Chon-
                   maitree, T. (2003). Bullous myringitis: A case-control study. Pediatrics, 112(4), 982-986.

            Mehta, R. P., Rosowski, J. J., Voss, S. E., O'Neil, E., & Merchant, S. N. (2006). Determinants of hearing
                   loss in perforations of the tympanic membrane. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of the
                   American Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neu-
                   rotology, 27(2), 136-143.

            Mirza, S., & Richardson, H. (2005). Otic barotrauma from air travel. Journal of Laryngology and Otology,
                   119(5), 366-370.

            Mohamad, S. H., Khan, I., & Hussain, S. S. (2012). Is cartilage tympanoplasty more effective than fascia
                   tympanoplasty? A systematic review. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of the American
                   Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology,
                   33(5), 699-705.

            Patel, A., & Groppo, E. (2010). Management of temporal bone trauma. Craniomaxillofacial Trauma and
                   Reconstruction, 3(2), 105-113. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
                   PMC3052678.
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY  177

Pichichero, M. E., & Poole, M. D. (2001). Assessing diagnostic accuracy and tympanocentesis skills in
      the management of otitis media. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 155(10), 1137-1142.

Ramakrishnan, K., Sparks, R. A., & Berryhill, W. E. (2007). Diagnosis and treatment of otitis media.
      American Family Physician, 76(11), 1650-1658.

Rosenfeld, R. M. (2002). Diagnostic certainty for acute otitis media. International Journal of Pediatric Oto-
      rhinolaryngology, 64(2), 89-95.

Rosenfeld, R. M., Culpepper, L., Yawn, B., & Mahoney, M. C.; AAP, AAFP, AAO-HNS Subcommittee on
      Otitis Media with Effusion. (2004). Otitis media with effusion clinical practice guideline. American
      Family Physician, 69(12), 2776-2779.

Shu, M. T., Lee, J. C., Yang, C. C., & Wu, K. C. (2012). Squamous cell carcinoma of the middle ear. Ear,
      Nose, and Throat Journal, 91(1), 14.

Spilsbury, K., Miller, I., Semmens, J. B., & Lannigan, F. J. (2010). Factors associated with developing cho-
      lesteatoma: A study of 45,980 children with middle ear disease. Laryngoscope, 120(3), 625-630.

Subcommittee on Otitis Media with Effusion. (2004). Otitis media with effusion. Pediatrics, 113, 1412-
      1429.

Thys, M., & Van Camp, G. (2009). Genetics of otosclerosis. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of
      the American Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and
      Neurotology, 30(8), 1021-1032.
