8 Evaluation and Management
               of Inner Ear Conditions

UNDERSTANDING THE VESTIBULAR SYSTEM

Figure 8.1:    When it comes to balance, the purpose of the vestibular system of the inner ear
Components of  is to provide the brain with information regarding rotation and linear movement
balance.       (basically, the specific orientation of where the head is in space). Together they give
               information regarding spatial awareness and equilibrium. However, the vestibular
Figure 2.4:    portion is not the only system that is communicating information to the brain. It is
Middle and     important to understand that there is simultaneous interaction of the vestibular sys-
inner ear.     tem with other organ systems that all work together to help maintain balance and
Figure 8.2:    posture.
Vestibular
system.               Balance is achieved and maintained by a complex set of sensorimotor control
               systems that send input information to the brain. The brain acts as the central proces-
               sor. The sensorimotor control systems that send input information to the brain include
               the inner ear (vestibular), eyes (visual), muscle, and joint receptors (proprioception).
               These systems are connected within the central nervous system (CNS) and these reflex
               pathways provide continuous information to the brain without the person knowing.
               The brain takes this information, interprets it, and sends output motor reflexes (that
               maintain posture and equilibrium) and stabilizes the visual gaze based on the informa-
               tion it receives. There are three major vestibular reflexes. The vestibulo-ocular reflex
               (VOR) integrates information between the inner ear (vestibular system) and the eyes
               (specifically the extraocular muscles) to keep the eyes still in space when the head
               moves. The vestibulospinal reflex (VSR) integrates information between the inner ear
               (vestibular system) and the skeletal system to adjust posture for rapid changes in posi-
               tion. The vestibulocollic reflex keeps the head still in space or on a level plane when
               the person walks. The vestibular reflexes that link the vestibular system with the other
               systems generate transient muscle contractions, which contribute to equilibrium and
               eye stability while moving.

                      The vestibular system of the inner ear provides the brain with information regard-
               ing rotation and linear movement. The vestibular system has two receptor organs to
               accomplish the task of detecting rotation and linear movement: three semicircular
               canals (to detect angular acceleration) and two otolith organs (the utricle and saccule)
               to detect linear acceleration.

                      The semicircular canal system exerts direct control over the eyes and keeps the
               eyes still in space while the head moves. It stabilizes eye movements during natural
               movements of the head as when a person walks, runs, or is exposed to vibration. The
               vestibular system controls the eye muscles to stabilize the image of an object on the
               retina as the head moves. This compensatory system is called the VOR. Nystagmus is
               a breakdown of the VOR and occurs when there is an involuntary, rapid, and repetitive
               movement of the eyes. The movement can be side to side (horizontal nystagmus), up
180  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

                              Components of Balance

                                                          Brainstem
                                                          (sorts info)

Sensorimotor                  Integration of                  Motor
Control Input                 Input in CNS                   Output

 Vestibular: Inner ear        Cerebral cortex:      Vestibulo-ocular
                                Functions in           reflex: Eye position
 Visual: Eyes +                thinking and           compensates
                                memory and             for movements
                                contains previously    of the head
                                learned information
                                                      Vestibulo-spinal                   =  Balance

                                                                        reflex: Controls

                                                                        body posture

 Proprioception:              Cerebellum:           Vestibulo-collic
  Muscles and                   Functions as the       reflex: Keeps head
  joint receptors               coordination           on a level plane
                                center and             with movement
                                contains automatic
                                movements
                                previously learned

FIGURE 8.1 Components of balance.

and down (vertical nystagmus), or circular (rotary nystagmus). There are four general
categories of nystagmus:

 Positional: Occurs with certain head or body positional maneuvers
 Gaze-Evoked: Alteration in the direction of the eye movement, as when the person

   looks up or down, left or right. Identified by holding the index finger at off-center
   positions
 Spontaneous: Occurs without stimulation
 Induced: Elicited by stimulation as with rotation testing and electronystagmography
   (ENG) in vestibular testing

       The utricle and saccule systems keep the body vertically oriented with respect
to gravity. The VSR integrates this information from the vestibular system in conjunc-
tion with the proprioceptive receptors of the skeletal system. There are a number of
illusions that can occur with the VSR. For example, spatial illusion as when a pilot is
flying and has a sensation of spinning when in reality the aircraft is flying straight
and level.

       Motion sickness arises when there is conflicting or mismatched sensory input
from the VOR and the VSR. Anything that interferes with normal reflex input can
cause vertigo, which is a perception of head motion when the head is still. Vertigo can
produce symptoms such as blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, and so on.
                                                  UNDERSTANDING VESTIBULAR TESTING  181

                                          Vestibular System

Angular Acceleration                                             Linear Acceleration
    (Head Rotation)                                          (One Directional Movement)

 Anterior/superior canal                                     Utricle:
 and posterior canal:                                         the three semicircular canals
 detects rotations of the                                     open into the utricle. It senses
 head in a sagittal plane                                     motion in the horizontal plane
 (as when nodding) and in                                     (i.e., forward-backward
 the frontal plane (as when                                   movement, left-right
 cartwheeling)                                                movement, or both)

 Horizontal or lateral canal:                                Saccule:
 corresponds to rotation of the head                          senses motion in the sagittal
 around a verticle axis (i.e., the neck)                      plane (up-down movement)
 as when doing a complete spin                                and gravity

Each semicircular canal is a continuous           Both the utricle and saccule use small stones
endolymph-filled hoop. Hair cells sit in the      (otoliths) and a viscous fluid to stimulate their
small swelling at the base called an ampula.      hair cells to detect motion and orientation. The
The function of these canals is to stabilize eye  major role of the utricle and saccule is to keep
movement with head movement.                      the person vertically oriented with respect to
                                                  gravity.

FIGURE 8.2 Vestibular system.

UNDERSTANDING VESTIBULAR TESTING

                   Dizziness is a term that describes an impairment of spatial perception and stability. There
                   are numerous interchangeable descriptions for dizziness; however, the descriptions do not
                   necessarily define the causal factor in the diagnosis. For example, vertigo, off-balance, dis-
                   equilibrium, giddiness, spinning, and light-headedness are all terms to describe dizziness.

                          Since there are literally hundreds of descriptions and causes for dizziness, it
                   is important to rule out whether or not the problem is inner ear-related or not. Ves-
                   tibular testing evaluates the vestibular system and distinguishes among possible
                   peripheral causes while suggesting whether or not a central cause of dizziness exists.
                   The peripheral part evaluates the inner ear balance organs or labyrinth and the ves-
                   tibular nerves. Examples of peripheral causes of dizziness include benign paroxys-
                   mal positional vertigo (BPPV), labyrinthitis, and vestibular neuritis. The central part
                   evaluates the vestibular nuclei in the brainstem and its numerous connections to the
                   cerebellum and higher centers. Examples of central causes of dizziness include mul-
                   tiple sclerosis and other demyelinating diseases, vascular disease, and stroke.

Electronystamography and Videonystagmography

                   Stimulation of the inner ear causes nystagmus. Evaluating this reflex is integral to the
                   evaluation of the vestibular system. An ENG and videonystagmography (VNG) are
182  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

                   tests that evaluate nystagmus and are fundamental in evaluating the VOR. They are
                   based on recording and measuring eye movements or eye positions in response to
                   visual or vestibular stimuli. With ENG testing, skin surface electrodes are attached
                   near the eye and detect the tiny electrical potential that naturally exists between the
                   cornea and the retina. With VNG testing, the eye movements can be recorded using
                   an infrared video camera mounted inside goggles that the patient wears instead of
                   sticky-patch electrodes. During either the ENG or VNG, the movement of the eyes as
                   the patient follows a moving target are evaluated. Most facilities are now using VNG
                   because of a multitude of advantages over the traditional ENG method of assessment.
                   Some of the advantages include cleaner traces and the ability for the VNG to record
                   subtle eye movements. Both tests help to determine the site of the "lesion" or weakness
                   or problem area. There are four main parts to a VNG test and they take approximately
                   45 minutes to 1 hour to complete:

                    Ocular mobility:
                       The patient is asked to follow objects that jump from place to place, stand still, or
                         move smoothly.
                       If the patient is unable to follow the target accurately, it could indicate a central
                         or neurological problem or possibly a problem in the pathway connecting the
                         vestibular system to the brain.

                    Optokinetic nystagmus:
                       The patient follows a continuously moving visual image to see if the eyes appro-
                         priately track these movements.
                       If the patient is unable to follow the target accurately, it could indicate a central
                         or neurological problem or possibly a problem in the pathway connecting the
                         vestibular system to the brain.

                    Positional nystagmus:
                       The purpose of this test is to determine whether different head positions (not head
                         movements) induce or cause nystagmus.
                       Monitors the eyes for nystagmus in at least four different head positions: sitting,
                         supine, right lateral, and left lateral
                       The patient's head is slowly moved into position rather than quickly (because this test
                         looks for nystagmus with different head positions and not quick movements). Each
                         head position is held for 20 seconds with eyes open and 20 seconds with eyes closed.
                       Positional nystagmus may be intermittent or persistent. This test has little
                         localizing value to determine if the problem lies with a peripheral versus cen-
                         tral lesion. However, this test is a valuable indicator of vestibular system dys-
                         function. Other signs and clinical data must be used to localize specifically
                         where the lesion is.

                    Caloric reflex testing:
                       This is the most difficult, most time consuming but most important in the testing
                         battery. It helps to lateralize a vestibular lesion affecting the horizontal semicircu-
                         lar canal.
                       It is the only test that allows stimulation of each ear separately.
                       The technician stimulates the inner ear (one at a time) with warm and then cold air
                         by inserting the air into the external auditory canal (EAC). The temperature differ-
                         ence between the body and the injected air creates movement of the endolymph in
                         the nearby horizontal semicircular canal of that ear and reactive eye movements
                         and nystagmus.
                       If there is absence of the reactive eye movements, this suggests vestibular weak-
                         ness of the horizontal semicircular canal of the side being stimulated.
                       The caloric test cannot be done with someone who has a tympanic membrane
                         (TM) perforation. This can lead to inaccurate results.
                                                                   UNDERSTANDING VESTIBULAR TESTING  183

                     Since there are certain medications and products that can alter the testing results
              of the VNG, the patient is given instructions prior to their scheduled appointment.

              Videonystagmography Instructions for the Patient
              Two days before scheduled appointment:

              Do not:
               Take aspirin or any medication containing aspirin.
               Drink any alcohol or take any medication containing alcohol.
               Take any medications except those used for heart conditions, blood pressure, diabe-

                 tes, seizures, or other life-threatening conditions.
               Take medications such as allergy pills, tranquilizers, sleeping pills, decongestants,

                 pain pills, nerve pills, dizziness medications, cholesterol medications, hormones,
                 herbs and/or vitamins.

              On the day of the scheduled appointment:

              Do not:
               Drink any beverage or take any medication containing caffeine (coffee, tea, soft

                 drink, energy drink, Excedrin).
               Eat solid foods for 2 hours before the test.

              Other tests that can be done to evaluate vestibular function include the following:

Figure 8.3:   Dix-Hallpike Positioning Test
Dix-Hallpike   Used to diagnose the most commonly seen peripheral vestibular disorder, posterior
maneuver.
                 canal BPPV
               Evidence suggests that most patients with BPPV have free-floating particles (otoco-

                 nia) in the endolymph of the posterior semicircular canal of the affected side that are
                 mobilized by the quick force of head movement.
               The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is designed to stimulate the posterior semicircular canal
                 on one side. Testing needs to be performed on each side when evaluating.
               During the maneuver, the examiner looks at the patient's eyes for nystagmus in the
                 lying, head-hanging-down position.

              How to Perform the Dix-Hallpike
               On an examination table, the patient first sits upright.
               The examiner turns the patient's head 45 toward one side (the side being tested)

                 and the patient is instructed to fall back quickly. The examiner holds the patient's
                 head, keeps it turned in the 45 angle and hanging slightly off the examination table
                 for at least 20 seconds, monitoring for nystagmus.
               Repeat for the opposite side.

              Nystagmus Diagnostic Characteristics of Benign
              Paroxysmal Positional
              1. The onset of the nystagmus is delayed for a few seconds before it begins.
              2. The nystagmus quickly disappears (20 seconds to 1 minute).
              3. The nystagmus is accompanied by vertigo that is usually intense if the nystagmus

                  is intense.
              4. The nystagmus is usually beating toward the floor or bottom of the ear when it occurs.

              NOTE: If nystagmus occurs but does not match the above criteria, it is likely a sign the
              problem is not vestibular in origin but rather possibly a CNS disease.
184  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

          Gravity                                   Sagittal body plane
                                                                  45

                                                                                        Vantage
                                                                                          point

Posterior                           Superior
    canal                           canal

 Gravity                                 Utriculus
                              Posterior-canal
A                             ampulla

                   Particles

          Gravity

               Utriculus      Posterior-canal                                                    Vantage
Superior                      ampulla                                                              point

    canal                          Posterior
                                   canal
 Gravity

B Particles

FIGURE 8.3 Dix-Hallpike maneuver.

           Rotary Chair Test
            Used to evaluate the pathway between the horizontal semicircular canal and the eye

              muscles.
            In many instances, rotary chair testing can give more information about the vestibu-

              lar system than can caloric testing.
            Both ears are tested simultaneously with rotary chair testing and, therefore, can eval-

              uate if the patient has bilateral vestibular loss.
                                                                         DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF VERTIGO  185

                    During the test, the patient sits in a rotary chair that oscillates from side to side at
                      a series of programmable rates. An infrared camera mounted to the chair moni-
                      tors the patient's eye movement. The test takes approximately 15 minutes to com-
                      plete.

                    Rotary testing is useful to evaluate changes to vestibular function over time, to mon-
                      itor compensation after acute injury, and to identify residual labyrinthine function
                      for patients who have no response during caloric testing.

Vestibular Rehabilitative Therapy

                   When the vestibular system is disrupted as a result of disease or injury, the brain can
                   no longer rely on this system for information about equilibrium and motion. Balance
                   issues occur and normally these balance issues gradually improve or the body success-
                   fully compensates over time. However, vertigo or disequilibrium may persist because
                   of poor CNS compensation after any acute injury to the vestibular system, even if there
                   is no ongoing labyrinthine dysfunction. Vestibular rehabilitative therapy (VRT) may
                   be helpful for these patients. VRT promotes CNS compensation for inner ear deficits. It
                   can help with benign paroxysmal vertigo, unilateral or bilateral vestibular weakness,
                   or hypofunction that includes labyrinthitis, vestibular neuritis, and so on. The goal of
                   VRT is to retrain the brain to recognize the process signals from the vestibular system
                   in coordination with vision and proprioception.

                          Structured VRT programs, customized to the needs of the individual patient, are
                   performed by a qualified physical therapist (PT) or occupational therapist (OT). The
                   patients are given habituation exercises designed to improved pathological responses
                   to head motion and repositioning movements. For most patients, recovery is rapid and
                   they may only need to go to a few therapy sessions before their symptoms resolve.
                   In some patients, however, symptoms of vestibular dysfunction may persist. These
                   patients will require longer rehabilitation.

                          A relapse of vestibular symptoms after successful VRT does not necessarily mean
                   there is ongoing, relapsing, or progressive labyrinthine dysfunction. The CNS is very
                   fragile and repairing the CNS is a time-consuming process. There can be occasional
                   relapses that can be triggered by fatigue, illness, or a recent change in medications.
                   These patients may need to return to for additional VRT.

Pharmacologic Options for the Person With a Balance Disorder

                   Although vestibular suppressants such as meclizine, scopolamine, and Valium may
                   provide satisfactory relief during an acute vestibular dysfunction crisis, these medica-
                   tions are potentially counterproductive when it comes to central vestibular compensa-
                   tion in the long run. Therefore, it is best to ask the patient not to take these medications
                   unless absolutely needed.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF VERTIGO

                   When evaluating a patient with dizziness, the most important question during history
                   taking is: "How long does the dizziness symptom you are describing last?" This will
                   help narrow down the likely cause. Vertigo that lasts a few seconds is likely BPPV. If
                   the balance issues last for days at a time, it is likely not vestibular.

                          It is important to also differentiate between vertigo, ataxia, and near syncope.
186  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

Vertigo                       Ataxia                       Near Syncope

 Usually cardinal              Inability to maintain        Near-loss of
   symptoms of                   balance                      consciousness
   vestibular disease
                               Ataxia is a description      Does the patient feel
 Sense of rotational             of a wide variety of         better once lying or
   movement of self or           disorders                    sitting down?
   surroundings
                               It is important to           Think:
 Usually exacerbated             rule out associated           Cardiogenic cause
   by head movement              neurological symptoms:        Neurocardiogenic
                                  Check fine motor                (vasovagal)
 Is it reproducible?                 skills.                   Neurological
   If so, it is likely            Slurred speech?              Psychiatric or
   vestibular                     Trouble swallowing?             psychogenic

 The patient's                (If any of these symptoms    NOTE: The problem
   symptoms are               are present, the problem     is not vestibular. The
   intermittent, not          is not vestibular.)          patient may need
   continuous                                              further imaging studies
                                                           or possibly acute
                                                           intervention.

                              DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF VERTIGO

Peripheral                    Central (Brain) Causes       Other Causes
(Vestibular-Related)
Causes

 Benign paroxysmal             Vestibular schwannoma        Drug toxicity, reaction,
   positional vertigo            or acoustic neuroma or       or medication side
                                 any other mass affecting     effects
 Acute vestibular                the vestibulocochlear
   neuronitis                    nerve                      Psychological (anxiety
                                                              or panic disorders)
 Acute labyrinthitis           Migraine (vestibular
 Herpes zoster oticus            migraine)                  Alcohol abuse
                                                              disorders
   (Ramsay Hunt                Multiple sclerosis or any
   syndrome)                     other demyelinating        Cervical vertigo
 Meniere's disease,              disorder                     triggered by head
   endolymphatic                                              and neck movements
   hydrops                     Cerebrovascular                (possible degenerative
 Perilymphatic fistula           disease or stroke            disc disease)
 Otosclerosis                    (vertebrobasilar
 Superior semicircular           ischemic stroke and        Postural hypotension
   canal dehiscence              insufficiency)               (orthostatic
   syndrome                                                   hypotension)

       The brainstem, cerebellum, and peripheral labyrinths are all supplied by the
vertebrobasilar arterial system. Therefore, central and peripheral syndromes overlap.
Below is a comparison between the two and information that can help differentiate
between the possible etiologies of where the vertigo could be originating.
VESTIBULAR LABYRINTHITIS AND NEURITIS  187

Central Syndrome                             Peripheral Syndrome
                                              Illusion of movement caused by
 Due to disease originating from the CNS
 Hemorrhagic or ischemic insults to the         asymmetric input of the vestibular
                                                system
   cerebellum, vestibular nuclei, and their   More likely true inner ear disease if
   connections within the brainstem             there is hearing loss and/or tinnitus
 Vertigo due to an acoustic neuroma is
   also included in the broader category of  Pathophysiology:
   central vertigo                            BPPV
                                              Meniere's
Pathophysiology:                              Vestibular neuronitis
 Vertebrobasilar arterial system problems.    Autoimmune

   For example, arterial occlusion and        Sudden onset
   ischemic infarction                        Intermittent with severe symptoms
 Multiple sclerosis
 Acoustic neuroma                             Affected by head position and
 Neoplasm (1%)                                  movement

 Gradual onset. Progresses over time          Nausea and vomiting can be more
                                                frequent and severe
 Constant with milder symptoms but acute
   attacks can be disabling                   Motor function, gait, and
                                                coordination are typically intact
 Usually unaffected by head position and
   movement                                   Auditory complaints (change in
                                                hearing or tinnitus)
 Nausea and vomiting may or may not
   occur

 Fine motor coordination problems and
   gait instability

 No auditory complaints

VESTIBULAR LABYRINTHITIS AND NEURITIS

Vestibular neuronitis, vestibular neuritis, and labyrinthitis are the terms used inter-
changeably; however, there are subtle differences among them. They can present uni-
laterally or bilaterally and usually precede an upper respiratory infection. In all of
the conditions, the inflammation disrupts the transmission of sensory information
from the ear to the brain. They can be caused by a viral origin or bacterial invasion.

Vestibular Labyrinthitis                     Vestibular Neuritis or Neuronitis

 Inflammatory disorder of the                 Inflammation or infection of the
   membrane of the labyrinth                    vestibular nerve

 Can affect both the vestibular and           Usually just affects the vestibular
   cochlear organs                              nerve. No cochlear involvement

 Symptoms include sudden vertigo              Symptoms include sudden vertigo
   accompanied by hearing loss                  lasting for several days and gradually
                                                improves over days to weeks
 VNG testing may show nystagmus
   and caloric weakness on the affected       Imbalance issues may linger for
   side, but audiometry will reveal a           months after resolution of the acute
   sensorineural hearing loss as well           disease

                                             (continued)
188  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

          Vestibular Labyrinthitis                  Vestibular Neuritis or Neuronitis

           The patient may have an associated        Recurrence can occur
             otitis media                            VNG testing may show nystagmus

           Treatment includes antibiotic therapy       and caloric weakness on the
             to eliminate the infectious process,      affected side
             high dose steroid therapy for           Treatment: Supportive with
             asymmetric hearing loss to improve        antiemetics, vestibular suppressants
             inflammation affecting the nerve of       only if absolutely needed
             hearing. Consider antiviral therapy     Vestibular rehabilitation is started as
             if herpes zoster oticus is suspected.     soon as possible
             Consider supportive therapy as
             well with antiemetics. Vestibular
             suppressants only if absolutely
             needed

BENIGN PROXYSMAL POSITIONAL VERTIGO

                   BPPV is the most common vestibular disorder in adults. An example scenario a patient
                   with BPPV would describe includes: "I woke up this morning, turned to my right side,
                   and suddenly the room started spinning. I became severely nauseous. It gradually got
                   better over the next few minutes. But now when I move my head, I keep getting dizzy.
                   It gradually seems to be getting better."

Etiology

           The two most common causes for BPPV are posttraumatic (blow to the head) and
             postviral. Patients with previous viral neurolabyrinthitis can have episodes of BPPV
             for months to years after resolution of the viral syndrome.

           Precipitating movements (often side specific) can include the following:
              Turning over in bed
              Getting out of bed
              Bending over or straightening up
              Extending the neck to look up and back

           Canalithiasis theory as to the cause of BPPV (most commonly accepted): Presence
             of otoconia debris (small crystals of calcium carbonate that normally are contained
             in the saccule and utricle) which freely floats within the posterior semicircular canal
             endolymph under the influence of gravity.

           Cupulolithiasis theory as to the cause of BPPV: Normally the cupula of a semi-
             circular canal has the same specific gravity as the endolymph. This theory states
             that a degenerating utricle causes otoconia to settle on the cupula of the posterior
             semicircular canal and therefore causes it to become heavier than the surrounding
             endolymph.

          NOTE: Although otoconia debris mainly affects the posterior semicircular canal, it is

          not limited to affecting that canal only. It can also affect the horizontal and superior

          canals.
   BENIGN PROXYSMAL POSITIONAL VERTIGO  189

1  2

   3
                                                                                                5

   4

FIGURE 8.4 Epley maneuver (for right-sided posterior semicircular canal benign paroxysmal positional vertigo).
190  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

Signs and Symptoms

                    Brief episodes of vertigo with positional change. The patient can complain of light-
                      headedness between episodes

                    No associated hearing loss
                    Tympanogram should be normal: Type A
                    May or may not have nausea
                    Neurological function is normal

Dix-Hallpike Positioning Test

Figure 8.3:    Characteristic nystagmus with posterior semicircular canal BPPV is observed when
Dix-Hallpike     doing the Dix-Hallpike maneuver.
maneuver.         The nystagmus is mixed with a torsional and a downbeating (upper pole of the
                    eye beating toward the ground) movement of the eyeball.
                  The vertigo and nystagmus generally increase initially and then decrease within
                    20 seconds after the start of the positioning test.
                  If repeat Dix-Hallpike positioning tests are done, the nystagmus decreases with
                    repeated positioning. (This in and of itself is diagnostic of BPPV.)

Management

Figure 8.4:    The primary management includes maneuvers to reposition the debris into the utri-
Epley            cle. The most widely used repositioning maneuver is the Epley.
maneuver.         The purpose of the Epley is to remove or reposition the otoconia debris out of the
                    posterior semicircular canal.

               Two days after a single maneuver, if the patient's symptoms still persist, the maneu-
                 ver can be repeated.

               Patients may benefit from vestibular rehabilitation if recurrent symptoms occur.

Surgical Measures

                    Reserved only for a small number of patients with intractable posterior canal BPPV
                      after all other intracranial pathology and causes have been ruled out.

                    Surgery involves blocking the posterior semicircular canal with a bone plug,
                      which prevents otoconia debris from affecting the canal. The surgical success rate
                      is high and it immediately stops the positional vertigo and nystagmus.

              PROCEDURE PROTOCOL: EPLEY MANEUVER

              Indications
               The Dix-Hallpike positioning test indicated BPPV

              Contraindications
               Severe neck disease
               History of recent cervical spine fracture or surgery

                                                                     (continued)
                                      SUPERIOR SEMICIRCULAR CANAL DEHISCENCE SYNDROME  191

           Unstable heart disease
           Carotid bruit on examination indicating carotid stenosis
           Enlarged body habitus may prevent successful maneuver

          Procedure

          1. The patient is placed in the upright position on an examination table with the
             head turned 45 toward the affected side (i.e., the side that was positive on the
             Dix-Hallpike positional test).

          2. The examiner holds the patient's head stable in the 45 angle while at the
             same time the patient is rapidly laid back to the supine head-hanging posi-
             tion, which is maintained for 20 to 30 seconds. Evaluate for nystagmus in this
             position. Once the nystagmus resolves, continue to step 3.

          3. The head is turned 90 toward the other (unaffected) side and held in position
             for about 20 to 30 seconds. If nystagmus exists, it should be less.

          4. Still in this same position roll the body and head as a unit, turning the head
             downward so that the patient's nose is pointing at the floor. This position is
             held for 20 to 30 seconds.

          5. The patient is then brought into the upright position, which completes the
             maneuver.

                  NOTE: The maneuver can be repeated until no nystagmus is induced.

          Post-Epley Instructions for the Patient

           Do not lie flat for 48 hours after the procedure to prevent the otoconia debris
             from reentering the canal. Use two to three pillows to elevate the head when
             sleeping or resting.

           Do not tip the head back, forward, or lean over for 48 hours after the procedure.
           For the next 48 hours, do not do exercise that requires head movement.
           Other than keeping the head upright, normal activities can be resumed.

SUPERIOR SEMICIRCULAR CANAL DEHISCENCE SYNDROME

Etiology  The pathophysiology of superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome depends
          on the presence of a very small defect in the bony wall of the superior semicircular
          canal.

           The syndrome is either congenital or developmental. If congenital, symptoms usu-
             ally do not present until later in life.

           The semicircular canals normally have no "give" and are a closed system. There are
             only two "windows" or openings in the inner ear and they are the oval and round
             windows. However, if there is a creation of a "third window" in one of the semicir-
             cular canals, this can allow transfer of sound and pressure into the vestibular sys-
             tem. This sound and pressure can move endolymph when it should not normally be
             moved. The brain interprets the movement of the endolymph as the body is moving
             and the person can feel dizzy.
192  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

Signs and Symptoms

                    Anything that changes intracranial pressure (ICP) can induce symptoms and cause
                      vertigo.
                       Increased ICP pushes the covering of the "third window" inward. Examples of
                         maneuvers that can increase ICP include:
                       Valsalva maneuver
                       Exercise or lifting weights
                       Jugular venous compression
                       Pressure on the EAC
                       Loud noise can induce symptoms and cause vertigo.
                       Loud noise pushes the covering of the "third window" outward.

                    Patients may often purposely avoid noisy environments in attempt to avoid vertigi-
                      nous symptoms.

                    Tullio phenomenon: Patients complain of vertigo when exposed to loud noise.
                        NOTE:This also occurs with a perilymph fistula, Meniere's disease (MD), and other inner
                        ear disorders.

                    Hennebert sign: Nystagmus can occur if positive or negative pressure is applied to
                      the TM with a sealed EAC (pneumatic otoscopy is used to do this).
                       Positive pressure causes nystagmus toward the affected side.
                       Negative pressure causes nystagmus away from the affected side.
                         NOTE: This too is a nonspecific sign.

Audiometric Findings

                    May be normal or the patient may have low frequency conductive hearing loss
                      (CHL).
                       The CHL occurs because the "third window" dissipates the acoustic energy and
                         thus diminishes the magnitude of the pressure wave in the cochlea. The patient
                         interprets this decrease in acoustic energy as diminished sound volume. CHL is
                         identified on audiometric testing and can look like an audiogram seen in persons
                         with otosclerosis.

Imaging Studies

                    High resolution CT of the temporal bones is required to make the definitive diag-
                      nosis.
                       A 0.5-mm helical CT scan with specific emphasis on the superior canal is
                         preferred (instead of the normal 1.0-mm images in the axial and coronal
                         planes).

Surgical Measures

                    In a patient with mild symptoms, avoidance of symptom-provoking stimuli may be
                      sufficient enough.

                    If pressure in the ear canal is the provoking symptom, a pressure equalizer (PE) tube
                      may help.

                    Surgery is reserved for those patients with debilitating symptoms. The goal
                      of surgery is to ablate the superior semicircular canal or patch the dehiscent
                      bone.
             MENIERE'S DISEASE AND COCHLEAR HYDROPS  193

MENIERE'S DISEASE AND COCHLEAR HYDROPS

Figure 2.4:  The underlying pathophysiological mechanism in Meniere's disease (MD) is endo-
Middle and   lymphatic hydrops. Endolymphatic hydrops occurs as a result of dysfunction in the
inner ear.   endolymphatic sac, which is responsible for the absorption of endolymph. Normally,
             endolymph moves from the cochlea, where it is produced, to the endolymphatic sac,
             where it is absorbed. The endolymphatic sac is located off the posterior wall of the
             saccule. The endolymphatic sac regulates endolymph, which is important for hearing
             and the sense of equilibrium. In a sense, the endolymphatic sac is a pressure regula-
             tor within the inner ear. When the function of the endolymphatic sac is not working
             properly, it can lead to an expansion or increase in pressure of the inner ear as a result
             of the accumulation of fluid within the membranous labyrinth and cochlea. This can
             cause fluctuating hearing loss, fluctuating tinnitus, aural fullness, and episodic vertigo.
             Accurately establishing the diagnosis of MD often takes time, because the episodic
             attacks are sporadic.

Signs and Symptoms

                    May be unilateral initially, but 30% of patients go on to develop bilateral disease
                    Spontaneous episodic attacks that last at least 20 minutes, but can commonly last for

                      several hours (not days or week at a time)
                    A sense of unsteadiness can last for days following an attack.
                    The typical type of clinical symptoms include the following, which is key for

                      the clinical diagnosis (these symptoms commonly occur sequentially in this
                      order):
                       Aural fullness
                       Fluctuating tinnitus: Often described as roaring or buzzing
                       Fluctuating hearing loss
                       Episodic vertigo: During the definitive episode, horizontal or rotary nystagmus is

                         always present.
                    May or may not have associated nausea and/or vomiting

Differential Diagnosis

                    Otosclerosis (especially the cochlear variant), which can have associated vestibular
                      symptoms

                    Acute vestibular labyrinthitis or neuronitis

Audiometric Findings

                    Audiometric results vary depending on the stage of the disease.
                    Hearing loss usually affects the low frequencies. A full restoration of hearing can be

                      expected to follow an attack of MD in the initial stages.
                    The American Academy of Otolaryngology Head-Neck Surgery classified the sever-

                      ity of hearing loss with MD into four stages:
                       Stage 1: A four-tone average hearing loss of less than 26 dB
                       Stage 2: A four-tone average hearing loss between 26 and 40 dB
                       Stage 3: A four-tone average hearing loss between 41 and 70 dB
                       Stage 4: A four-tone average hearing loss of more than 70 dB
194  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

Diagnostic Testing

                    There is no objective diagnostic test to confirm the presence of endolymphatic
                      hydrops.

                  Lab Tests
                    The following lab tests may be helpful to exclude metabolic or an immune-mediated

                      disease, although there are no such lab tests to confirm the presence of endolym-
                      phatic hydrops.
                       CBC with differential, complete metabolic panel, cholesterol panel, thyroid func-

                         tion tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, FTA-ABS (to rule out syphilis), and
                         autoimmune tests (C-reactive protein, immunoglobulins, total complement, anti-
                         nuclear antibody, and rheumatoid factor)

Vestibular Testing

                    Up to 50% of patients with MD who do VNG testing have normal findings. There-
                      fore, the results of this testing are nonspecific for MD.

Medical Management

                    There is no cure for MD.
                    It is impossible to predict when MD will go into remission. Therefore, the goal of

                      treatment is symptomatic relief and hearing preservation.
                    Medication management:

                       Diuretics such as triamterene-HCTZ 37.5 to 25 mg daily
                       Vestibular suppressants such as promethazine, diazepam, or meclizine may be

                         helpful during spells of vertigo
                       Steroid therapy--acute exacerbations of MD may respond to a short burst of

                         tapered oral prednisone
                       Intratympanic gentamicin therapy--done by a trained professional. The gentamicin

                         is absorbed in the inner ear primarily via the round window and damages the ves-
                         tibular hair cells relative to the cochlear hair cells, which can help to control vertigo
                         episodes. It may also decrease endolymph production. Obviously there is a risk for
                         hearing loss and injections are discontinued if there is persistent hearing loss.
                       Intratympanic steroid therapy--done by a trained professional and has been
                         shown to be helpful. It can be an alternative choice to oral steroids secondary to
                         the risk of systemic complications associated with oral steroids.

Dietary Management

                    Dietary restriction: Salt-restricted diet 1,500 to 2,000 mg/day
                    Some may benefit from restrictions on caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol as well.

Medical Management

                    Meniett device: The small portable device is a low-pressure pulse generator that the
                      patient uses a few minutes each day, which may help reduce the excess inner ear
                      endolymph fluid and swelling that occurs with MD. NOTE: This device requires a PE
                        tube insertion in the affected ear to allow for micropressure pulses from the device to
                        pass through the TM, middle ear space, and into the inner ear.
                                                                                        PERILYMPHATIC FISTULA  195

Surgical Management

                    Only 10% or less patients with MD become severely disabled despite medical man-
                      agement. These patients may qualify for surgical options like endolymphatic sac
                      decompression and vestibular neurectomy.

                    Labyrinthectomy is reserved for patients with no residual hearing. This surgery is
                      effective at resolving the debilitating vertiginous episodes.

Patient Resources

                    Patient outreach website: www.menieres.org
                    Meniere's Disease and Information Center: www.menieresinfo.com

PERILYMPHATIC FISTULA

Figure 2.4:  Although a perilymphatic fistula is a rare diagnosis, it is important to be aware of
Middle and   the signs and symptoms that suggest its presence. The bony labyrinth, which cov-
inner ear.   ers the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear, contains the vestibule, semicircular
             canals, utricle, saccule, and cochlea. Perilymph is contained in this area. The oval
             and round windows are at each end of the bony labyrinth. Due to increased pres-
             sure, trauma, or surgery, a large hole can occur in one of the round windows. This
             could lead to leakage of perilymph that is normally contained within this bony
             labyrinth.

Important Historical Factors

                    Temporal bone fracture or head trauma
                    Barotrauma
                    Vigorous Valsalva maneuver as in straining or sneezing
                    Physical exertion
                    Previous stapedectomy or other types of otologic surgery

Symptoms and Signs

                    Clinical manifestations can range in severity from mild to acute signs of vestibular
                      dysfunction and loss of hearing.
                       If a hole in the oval or round window occurred suddenly and was large enough
                         that perilymph could leak out quickly, the patient could develop violent vertigo,
                         nausea, vomiting, and profound hearing loss and tinnitus in that ear.
                       If there was a slow leak caused by a small hole in the oval or round window, the
                         patient may develop sudden onset of vertigo that improves within a short amount
                         of time and mild hearing loss. The patient may not have nausea, vomiting, and
                         tinnitus. In this type of scenario, only situations producing stress on the vestibular
                         apparatus would increase pressure and thus increase the amount of perilymph
                         leakage, accentuating the symptoms.

                     KEY PICTURE: If the patient has vertigo in conjunction with a fluctuating or progressive
                     sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL), suspect a perilymphatic fistula. If the patient experi-
                     ences acute nausea, vomiting, vertigo, and hearing loss during straining or a situation that
196  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

                     increases pressure, consider perilymphatic fistula. The key clinical feature that helps to
                     diagnose this problem: Ask patients if their symptoms get worse when they do a Valsalva
                     maneuver.

Management

                    Conservative medication management if patient symptoms and hearing are improv-
                      ing. Caution patient to avoid straining and prescribe vestibular suppressants as
                      needed.

                    If symptoms or hearing worsens, then the patient may need surgery to repair the
                      leak.

OTOTOXICITY

Ototoxicity is damage that occurs to the inner ear, specifically the cochlea, auditory
nerve, and vestibular apparatus. It can result in SNHL, tinnitus, and/or dizziness. The
symptoms may be permanent or temporary. The degree of ototoxicity depends upon
the drug involved. Most drugs can cause temporary or reversible damage.

       Aminoglycoside IV antibiotics are the most common cause of ototoxicity. Of
the aminoglycosides, gentamicin has been used to destroy the inner ear, which
stops the vertigo attacks in patients with MD. However, this causes permanent
deafness.

                  TABLE 8.1 OTOTOXIC DRUGS AND SUBSTANCES

Drugs and Substances                  Temporary Effects Are    Permanent
(List is not inclusive of all         Usually Reversible Upon  Effects Possible
potential ototoxic substances)        Discontinuing of Drug

Aminoglycosides: Gentamicin,                                   X

tobramycin, neomycin,

streptomycin, erythromycin,

vancomycin, etc.

NOTE: Neomycin and polymyxin B

ear drops are ototoxic.

Aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-           X

inflammatories, and analgesics

Loop diuretics: Bumex, Lasix, etc.    X

NOTE: Hydroclorothiazide and

maxide are not loop diuretics and

therefore, do not cause ototoxicity.

Chemotherapeutic drugs                                         X

Quinine derivatives: Plaquenil,                                X

hydroxychloroquine, quinine

sulfate, etc.

Other substances: Arsenic, lead,                               X

mercury, carbon monoxide, etc.
                                                         VESTIBULAR SCHWANNOMA (ACOUSTIC NEUROMA)  197

AUTOIMMUNE INNER EAR DISEASE

                   Autoimmune processes can affect hearing and vestibular function. Although the
                   pathophysiology of autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED) is rare and not well under-
                   stood, it is thought that autoimmune antibodies or immune cells can have a direct
                   or indirect effect on the function of the inner ear. Progressive hearing loss, dizziness,
                   and/or tinnitus can occur over a few weeks or months. The effects can be unilateral
                   or bilateral. The diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and diagnostic lab tests
                   may be of clinical value to help determine if there's an underlying autoimmune pro-
                   cess. Treatment options are limited to corticosteroids (oral and/or intratympanic)
                   being the only validated treatment option. The realistic expectation of steroid ther-
                   apy for this condition is not to necessarily achieve normal hearing, but to stabilize
                   the progressive nature of the hearing loss and maintain long-term hearing stability.
                   However, further management of the underlying systemic autoimmune disease is
                   warranted.

Examples of Autoimmune Diseases That Can Be Associated With the Inner Ear

                    Sjogren's syndrome
                    Wegener's granulomatosis
                    Systemic lupus erythematous
                    Rheumatoid arthritis

Optional Lab Tests for General Autoimmune Diseases

                    ANA (antinuclear antibody--lupus)
                    Anti-Sm (anti-Smith antibody--lupus)
                    ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate)
                    CBC, platelets, and automated differential
                    TFT (thyroid function tests: TSH, TT4)
                    Acetylcholinesterase (Sarcoid)
                    ANCA-P (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody--Churg-Strauss)
                    Anti-RNP (antiribonuclear protein antibody--mixed connective tissue disease)
                    RF (rheumatoid factor--rheumatoid arthritis)
                    Antigliadin antibodies (for celiac disease)
                    CMP (complete metabolic panel)
                    ANCA-C (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody--Wegners, ulcerative colitis)
                    Anti-SS-A/Anti-SS B (Sjogren's)
                    Complement total (CH50)

VESTIBULAR SCHWANNOMA (ACOUSTIC NEUROMA)

                   Vestibular schwannomas, also known as acoustic neuromas (ANs), are slow growing
                   benign tumors that arise from the vestibular nerve (cranial nerve [CN] VIII), enlarging
                   and extending into the cerebellopontine angle (CPA). It is the most common benign
                   tumor of the internal auditory canal (IAC). The tumor originates from an overproduc-
                   tion of Schwann cells, which normally wrap around nerve fibers to support and insu-
                   late nerves. The growth patterns of ANs are variable and incompletely understood,
                   and there are no reliable predictors of tumor behavior. As the tumor grows, it presses
198  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

Incidence  against the vestibular and cochlear nerves, usually causing unilateral hearing loss,
           tinnitus, and disequilibrium. Further tumor growth can interfere with the trigeminal
           nerve, resulting in facial palsies and other surrounding arteries and veins causing var-
           ies symptoms. Conservative management is appropriate in stable, minimally symp-
           tomatic patients based on the slow overall rate of growth with ANs.

            Nineteen tumors per 1 million per year (Stangerup, Tos, Thomsen, & Caye-Thoma-
              sen, 2010)

            ANs account for 2% of intracranial tumors (Bailey & Johnson, 2001).
            Unilateral ANs are not considered hereditary, but bilateral ANs are usually associ-

              ated with agenetic disorder called neurofibromatosis.

Signs and Symptoms

                   Symptoms can arise even when ANs are the size of only a few millimeters. Symptoms
                   can include:
                    Sudden or progressive SNHL. NOTE: There is no direct relationship between the size

                        of the tumor and the degree of the SNHL.

                    Tinnitus. NOTE: Unilateral tinnitus alone is a sufficient reason to evaluate a patient for
                        an AN.

                    Disequilibrium

Diagnostic Studies

                    MRI of the IAC with gadolinium contrast is the gold standard for the diagnosis or
                      exclusion of an AN. NOTE: Hearing loss associated with AN can improve spontane-
                        ously or respond to corticosteroid therapy, which is why it is important to obtain an MRI
                        to rule out the presence of an AN in asymmetric hearing loss.

                    If the patient is unable to have an MRI, the following studies can be done as a sec-
                      ondary option:
                       Auditory brainstem response (ABR) to check the transmission of sound along
                         both nerves of hearing. If the test is not equal bilaterally, further workup with an
                         MRI is preferred, although a CT scan can be considered if the patient is unable to
                         have an MRI.
                       CT of the temporal bones with contrast with attention to the CPA provides consis-
                         tent identification of CPA tumors that are larger than 1.5 cm or that have at least a
                         5-mm CPA component.

                    Serial audiograms: Since ANs are slow-growing tumors, if the patient is unable to
                      do any imaging studies to directly visualize the vestibular nerve (CN VIII), serial
                      audiograms over a long period of time can help aid in the diagnosis of an AN by
                      looking for a slow decline in hearing loss.

Management

                    There are three primary options for managing an AN:
                       Surgical removal
                       Radiosurgery
                       Observation with serial imaging studies
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  199

                    MRIs have led to the diagnosis of small and minimally symptomatic tumors.
                      Watchful waiting with observation of tumor size by repeated MRIs have been
                      commonplace.
                       Follow-up protocol recommendation: First followup in 6 months. If no growth
                         detected via MRI, a further check up at 1-year intervals unless symptomatic

                    If the patient is having symptoms as a result of the AN, complete surgical excision
                      with the goal to preserve facial nerve function and preserve hearing is the preferred
                      method of treatment.

                    Radiosurgery is high precision radiation from multiple directions targeted at the
                      intracranial lesion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Al Sanosi, A., Fagan, P., & Biggs, N. (2006). Conservative management of acoustic neuroma. Skull Base,
                   16(2), 95-100. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1502035/.

            Alexander, T. H., Weisman, M. H., Derebery, J. M., Espeland, M. A., Gantz, B. J., Gulya, A. J., . . . Harris,
                   J. P. (2009). Safety of high-dose corticosteroids for the treatment of autoimmune inner ear disease.
                   Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of the American Otological Society, American Neurotology
                   Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology, 30(4), 443-448.

            American Adacemy of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Foundation. (1995). Committee on Hearing
                   and Equilibrium guidelines for the diagnosis and evaluation of therapy in Meniere's disease. Oto-
                   laryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 113, 181-185.

            Angelaki, D. E., & Cullen, K. E. (2008). Vestibular system: The many facets of a multimodal sense.
                   Annual Review of Neuroscience, 31, 125-150.

            Bailey, B. J., & Johnson, J. T. (2001). Head and neck surgery--otolaryngology (4th ed., Vol. 2, p. 120). Phila-
                   delphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

            Bhattacharyya, N., Baugh, R., Orvidas, L., Barrs, D., Bronston, L. J., Cass, S., . . . Haidari, J. (2008).
                   Clinical practice guideline: Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngology Head and Neck
                   Surgery, 139(5), S47-S81. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
                   S019459980801348X.

            Chi, F. L., Ren, D. D., & Dai, C. F. (2010). Variety of audiologic manifestations in patients with superior
                   semicircular canal dehiscence. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of the American Otologi-
                   cal Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology, 31(1),
                   2-10.

            Fitzgerald, D. C. (2001). Perilymphatic fistula and Meniere's disease. Clinical series and literature
                   review. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 110(5 Pt 1), 430-436.

            Halker, R. B., Barrs, D. M., Wellik, K. E., Wingerchuk, D. M., & Demaerschalk, B. M. (2008). Establish-
                   ing a diagnosis of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo through the dix-hallpike and side-lying
                   maneuvers: A critically appraised topic. Neurologist, 14(3), 201-204.

            Han, B. I., Song, H. S., & Kim, J. S. (2011). Vestibular rehabilitation therapy: Review of indications,
                   mechanisms, and key exercises. Journal of Clinical Neurology (Seoul, Korea), 7(4), 184-196.

            Hanes, D. A., & McCollum, G. (2006). Cognitive-vestibular interactions: A review of patient difficulties
                   and possible mechanisms. Journal of Vestibular Research: Equilibrium and Orientation, 16(3), 75-91.

            Hillier, S. L., & McDonnell, M. (2011). Vestibular rehabilitation for unilateral peripheral vestibular dys-
                   function. Cochrane Database System Review, 16(2), CD005397. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.
                   nih.gov/pubmed/21328277.

            Konnur, M. K. (2000). Vertigo and vestibular rehabilitation. Journal of Postgraduate Medicine, 46(3),
                   222-223.

            Minor, L. B. (2005). Clinical manifestations of superior semicircular canal dehiscence. Laryngoscope,
                   115(10), 1717-1727.

            Nikolopoulos, T. P., Fortnum, H., O'Donoghue, G., & Baguley, D. (2010). Acoustic neuroma growth:
                   A systematic review of the evidence. Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of the American
                   Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology,
                   31(3), 478-485.
200  8. INNER EAR CONDITIONS

            Pfammatter, A., Darrouzet, V., Grtner, M., Somers, T., Van Dinther, J., Trabalzini, F., et al. (2010). A supe-
                   rior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome multicenter study: Is there an association between
                   size and symptoms? Otology and Neurotology: Official Publication of the American Otological Society,
                   American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology, 31(3), 447-454.

            Pietkiewicz, P., Pepas, R., Sulkowski, W. J., Zielinska-Blizniewska, H., & Olszewski, J. (2012). Elect-
                   ronystagmography versus videonystagmography in diagnosis of vertigo. International Journal of
                   Occupational Medicine and Environmental Health, 25(1), 59-65.

            Rosowski, J. (2012). Peripheral anatomy and physiology--outer and middle ear. In K. L. Tremblay & R.
                   F. Burkard (Eds), Translational perspectives in auditory neurosciences. San Diego, CA: Plural.

            Ruckenstein, M. J. (2004). Autoimmune inner ear disease. Current Opinion in Otolaryngology and Head
                   and Neck Surgery, 12(5), 426-430.

            Ryan, A. F., Keithley, E. M., & Harris, J. P. (2001). Autoimmune inner ear disorders. Current Opinion in
                   Neurology, 14(1), 35-40.

            Sellimoglu, E. (2007). Aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 13(1),
                   119-126.

            Shumway-Cook, A., & Woollacott, M. H. (2001). Motor control: Theory and practical applications. Philadel-
                   phia, PA: Lippincott Williams, & Wilkins.

            Smouha, E. E., Yoo, M., Mohr, K., & Davis, R. P. (2005). Conservative management of acoustic neuroma:
                   A meta-analysis and proposed treatment algorithm. Laryngoscope, 115(3), 450-454.

            Staab, J. P. (2011). Behavioral aspects of vestibular rehabilitation. NeuroRehabilitation, 29(2), 179-183.
            Stangerup, S. E., Tos, M., Thomsen, J., & Caye-Thomasen, P. (2010). True incidence of vestibular schwan-

                   noma? Neurosurgery, 67(5), 1335-1340; discussion 1340.
            Syed, I., & Aldren, C. (2012). Meniere's disease: An evidence based approach to assessment and man-

                   agement. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 66(2), 166-170.
            Thompson, T. L., & Amedee, R. (2009). Vertigo: A review of common peripheral and central vestibular

                   disorders. Ochsner Journal, 9(1), 20-26.
            Viirre, E., Purcell, I., & Baloh, R. W. (2005). The Dix-Hallpike test and the canalith repositioning maneu-

                   ver. Laryngoscope, 115(1), 184-187.
            von Brevern, M., Seelig, T., Radtke, A., Tiel-Wilck, K., Neuhauser, H., & Lempert, T. (2006). Short-term

                   efficacy of Epley's manoeuvre: A double-blind randomised trial. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery,
                   and Psychiatry, 77(8), 980-982.
            Wilson, V. J., Boyle, R., Fukushima, K., Rose, P. K., Shinoda, Y., Sugiuchi, Y., & Uchino, Y. (1995). The
                   vestibulocollic reflex. Journal of Vestibular Research: Equilibrium and Orientation, 5(3), 147-170.
            Woodworth, B. A., Gillespie, M. B., & Lambert, P. R. (2004). The canalith repositioning procedure for
                   benign positional vertigo: A meta-analysis. Laryngoscope, 114(7), 1143-1146.
            Yorgason, J. G., Fayad, J. N., & Kalinec, F. (2006). Understanding drug ototoxicity: Molecular insights for
                   prevention and clinical management. Expert Opinion on Drug Safety, 5(3), 383-399.
            Yuen, H. W., Eikelboom, R. H., & Atlas, M. D. (2009). Auditory manifestations of superior semicircu-
                   lar canal dehiscence. Otology and neurotology: Official Publication of the American Otological Society,
                   American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology, 30(3), 280-285.
