9 Evaluation and Management
               of Olfactory Disorders

Figure 9.1:  Smell is known as olfaction. The cranial nerve (CN) primarily responsible for the
Olfaction.   sense of smell is the olfactory nerve (CN I). Olfactory nerve dysfunction can signifi-
             cantly affect a patient's quality of life. Smell disorders can range from a decrease or
             total loss of function to a distortion of smell. Taste and smell are closely related, as
             the sense of smell helps to differentiate the flavor of foods and beverages. Dysfunc-
             tion in one sense (taste or smell) is often perceived as an abnormality associated with
             the other. There is a safety factor that is disrupted as well when the olfactory nerve
             is impaired. A person may not be able to smell smoke, pollutants, or environmental
             hazards.

MEDICAL TERMS RELATED TO OLFACTORY DYSFUNCTION

                    Hyposmia: Decreased sense of smell
                    Anosmia: Absence of smell sensation
                    Ageusia: Inability to taste
                    Hypogeusia: Decreased ability to taste
                    Dysgeusia: Distorted ability to taste
                    Dysosmia: Distortion of smell sensation

                       Cacosmia: Sensation of bad or foul smell
                       Parosmia: Sensation of smell in the absence of appropriate stimulus
                       Phantosmia: Perception of an odor when no olfactory stimulus is present

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF OLFACTORY DISORDERS

                   The anatomy and physiology of the olfactory system is very complex. This chapter
                   focuses on the basic understanding of the system, suggests potential associated causes
                   for the dysfunction, and provides a guide for identifying and managing patients with
                   olfactory disorders.

                          Olfactory epithelium covers the superior nasal concha and superior part of the
                   nasal septum. In order to successfully identify a given odor, a person usually has to
                   sniff or create negative pressure to pull the entering air currents up into the olfactory
                   area, because it is located in the superior portion of the nasal cavity. The olfactory epi-
                   thelium contains olfactory neuron receptors. As the air current travels between the sep-
                   tum and the turbinates, it comes in contact with the olfactory receptors in the mucosal
                   surface. NOTE: Olfactory receptor cells are the only neurons in the nervous system that
                     regenerate in usually a 4- to 8-week time period.
                                                             Olfactory      Olfactory                                            202  9. OLFACTORY DISORDERS
                                                                tract          bulb

                               Olfactory bulb       Rout of   Olfactory                                       Cribiform plate
                 Olfactory tract                inhaled air  epithelium                                       of ethmoid bone
       Olfactory
      epithelium                                                         B                                      Filaments of
                                                                                                                olfactory nerve
                                         Nasal
                                       conchae                                                              Lamina propria
                                                                                                            connective tissue
    A                                                                                                       Axon
FIGURE 9.1 Olfaction.
                                                                                                            Olfactory gland
                                                                                                            Basal cell

                                                                                                            Olfactory
                                                                                                            sensory neuron
                                                                                                            Supporting
                                                                                                            epithelial cell
                                                                                                            Dendrite

                                                                                                            Olfactory cilia
                                                                                                       Mucus

                                                                                Route of inhaled air
                                                                            containing odor molecules
                                     DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF OLFACTORY DISORDERS  203

       The information received in the neuron receptors sends impulses via the olfac-
tory nerve to the olfactory bulb. Each olfactory bulb is located at the base of the frontal
lobe overlying the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone. NOTE: The cribriform plate is
part of the ethmoid bone that separates the brain from the nasal cavity.

       The olfactory bulb transmits the smell information to the central nervous system
(CNS), and through a complex interconnected system, the information is interpreted.
The ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V) are responsible
for the perception of the overtones of odorants (i.e., warmth, coolness, etc.).

       Disorders of the olfactory system can be disrupted by one of three mechanisms:
(a) nasal obstruction that prevents the odor from reaching the olfactory epithelium,
(b) damage or disruption to the olfactory nerve itself, and (b) a pathological process
affecting any or all of the olfactory pathways. The main objective when evaluating a
person with a disruption in the olfactory system is to distinguish if there is an intra-
nasal obstruction causing the problem versus a neurogenic cause (impairment of the
olfactory nerve or pathological process involving the olfactory pathways). In some
cases, both blockage of airflow to the receptors and impairment or pathological process
involving the olfactory system can occur simultaneously.

       Disorders that can affect the olfactory nerve (CN I) can arise as a result of a vari-
ety of reasons. The most common causes of olfactory dysfunction include nasal and
paranasal sinus disorders followed by respiratory tract infections, head trauma, and
idiopathic conditions.

Causes of Obstruction or        Causes That Can Damage        Pathological Processes
Inflammation Leading to         or Disrupt the Olfactory      Affecting the Olfactory
Olfactory Dysfunction           Nerve Leading to              Nerve Leading to
(This list is not               Olfactory Dysfunction         Olfactory Dysfunction
exhaustive.)                    (This list is not             (This list is not
                                exhaustive.)                  exhaustive.)
 Viral or bacterial upper
   respiratory infection (URI)   Viral infection               Aging: The number
                                 Head injury: May be             of olfactory neurons
 Allergic rhinitis                                               steadily decreases
 Vasomotor rhinitis                the result of damage          with age
 Bacterial or fungal               to the olfactory nerve
                                   as it enters the skull at   Autoimmunity
   sinusitis                       the cribriform plate of     Parkinson's disease
 Rhinitis medicamentosa            the ethmoid bone            Alzheimer's disease
 Polyps                          Toxic substances              Multiple sclerosis
 Intranasal neoplasms              or exposure to              Diabetes mellitus
                                   environmental               Sjogren's syndrome
   (inverting papilloma,           chemicals                   Wegener's
   hemangioma, esthesion-        Medications: Intranasal
   euroblastoma, etc.)             zinc gluconate use, for       granulomatosis
 Intracranial tumors               example                     Epilepsy
   or lesions (olfactory         Radiation and/or              Psychiatric disorders
   groove meningioma,              chemotherapy                Vitamin deficiency
   frontal lobe gliomas,         Surgery (septoplasty,
   Foster Kennedy                  rhinoplasty,                  states: Niacin, vitamin
   syndrome, squamous cell         turbinectomy,                 A, vitamin B12, zinc
   carcinoma, etc.)                endoscopic sinus            Tumors
 Foreign body                      surgery)
 Nasal septal deformity          Smoking
 Choanal atresia
 Laryngectomy or
   tracheotomy patients
204  9. OLFACTORY DISORDERS

CONDUCTIVE OLFACTORY DISORDERS

                   Conductive olfactory disorders involve the obstruction of nasal passages. Essentially,
                   it is any process that causes sufficient obstruction in the nose preventing odorant mol-
                   ecules from reaching the olfactory epithelium. The most common causes of conductive
                   olfactory loss include upper respiratory infection (URI) or nasal and sinus disease.
                   Patients with laryngectomies or tracheotomies can experience olfactory dysfunction
                   due to a reduction in or absent of nasal airflow.

                          Patients who develop anosmia or hyposmia related to conductive olfactory
                   disorders can have permanent damage and/or an overall reduction in the number
                   of olfactory receptors. The olfactory receptor cells may or may not regenerate once
                   the conductive cause is removed. However, olfactory dysfunction due to an obstruc-
                   tion caused by polyps, neoplasms, mucosal swelling, or septal deviation is generally
                   reversible one the obstruction is removed.

                          Olfactory neuroblastoma (or esthesioneuroblastoma) is a rare form of malignant
                   tumor that involves the cribriform plate and can impact the sense of smell. It is believed
                   that these tumors start in the olfactory nerve.

Management of Conductive Olfactory Disorders

                   Conductive disorders are mostly amenable to treatment. Aggressive treatment in
                   olfactory dysfunction caused by a conductive disorder provides a good chance of
                   improvement.

                          If there is a question whether the loss is due to a conductive cause, a trial of
                   systemic steroids may help to verify if the olfactory loss is indeed conductive. The
                   patient may see temporary improvement in olfactory function. Other common treat-
                   ment options include allergy management, antibiotics, and saline irrigation, topical
                   and systemic nasal steroids.

                          Surgical therapy is indicated for those with obvious intranasal lesions that may be
                   causing obstruction. Although surgical removal of these lesions can sometimes restore
                   olfactory function, it is not guaranteed. Currently, aside from the possible therapeutic
                   potential of systemic steroids, there is no effective treatment for the most common
                   causes of olfactory loss.

SENSORINEURAL OLFACTORY DYSFUNCTION

                   Sensory olfactory dysfunction results from damage to the olfactory epithelium. Any
                   process (including pathological processes) that directly affects and impairs either the
                   olfactory epithelium or the central olfactory pathways leads to sensorineural olfactory
                   dysfunction. With head trauma or damage to the cribriform plate, the degree of olfac-
                   tory loss is generally associated with the severity of the trauma. Head trauma to the
                   frontal region most frequently causes olfactory loss. Age-related olfactory loss is called
                   presbyosmia. No effective treatment exists for presbyosmia.

Management of Sensorineural Olfactory Disorders

                   Management of sensorineural olfactory disorders depends entirely on the accurate
                   diagnosis of the cause, if identified. Unfortunately, identifying the exact cause is very
                                                   EVALUATING A PATIENT WITH AN OLFACTORY DISORDER  205

                   difficult and, if the cause is identified, often there is no successful treatment. If the
                   pathological process or cause is identified, it is recommended that the condition be
                   monitored and managed appropriately. Fortunately, spontaneous recovery of olfactory
                   dysfunction often occurs.

                          Exposure to environmental chemicals or toxic substances should be eliminated.
                   Exposure to toxins such as cigarette smoke causes metaplasia of the olfactory epithe-
                   lium. The degree of olfactory damage depends on the actual toxicity of the agent and
                   the length and frequency of exposure. Recovery can occur with removal of the offend-
                   ing agent; however, no treatment exists once the damage has taken place.

                          There are hundreds of medications with the potential for olfactory dysfunction.
                   The most well known medication related to olfactory disorders is over-the-counter
                   zinc gluconatenasal sprays, which have been implicated as a cause of smell loss. In
                   2009, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warned consumers to stop using zinc-
                   containing intranasal products. Oral zinc products are not affected by this warning. It
                   is difficult to establish a direct relationship between drug exposure and an olfactory
                   disorder and it is often not easy to determine with any certainty the causative role of
                   the drug in the development of the smell disorder. However, any medication suspi-
                   cious for causing olfactory dysfunction should be discontinued, as olfactory loss may
                   be reversible once the particular treatment has been stopped.

ETIOLOGY OF SYSTEMIC DISEASES IN RELATION
TO OLFACTORY DYSFUNCTION

                   Olfactory disturbances have been documented in numerous general pathologies and
                   systemic diseases. The actual etiology is often difficult to determine. A number of
                   endocrine disorders such as Addison's disease, Turner's syndrome, Cushing's syn-
                   drome, hypothyroidism, and so on have been associated with olfactory dysfunction.
                   Just as with most systemic disease processes, the mechanisms responsible for olfactory
                   dysfunction are poorly understood.

                          With neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease,
                   olfactory dysfunction is a cardinal feature and in some causes, may be the first present-
                   ing complaint. Persons with multiple sclerosis can have olfactory dysfunction propor-
                   tional to their disease process and can wax and wane during periods of exacerbation
                   and remission. If a vitamin or nutritional deficiency is identified, it should be corrected
                   and in some cases, when the deficiency resolves, the olfactory function improves.

EVALUATING A PATIENT WITH AN OLFACTORY DISORDER

History

         A detailed history is the best screening tool for olfactory dysfunction. Since there are
         numerous causes, it is imperative to obtain a detailed history that includes (but is not
         limited to) the following:

          Onset (acute vs. gradual) and duration
          Antecedent events
          Medication history
          History of trauma or head injury (specifically fracture of the cribriform plate)
          History of allergies, sinus disease, recent URI symptoms
206  9. OLFACTORY DISORDERS

                    Associated symptoms
                    Previous surgery
                    Occupational history
                    Systemic disease processes
                    History of radiation or chemotherapy
                    Exposure to toxic substances
                    Whether there is an association with taste disturbance

                          Determine if the smell function is diminished or completely absent and whether
                   the dysfunction is for all odorants or only a few. Smoking history should be deter-
                   mined.

Physical Examination

                   A complete otolaryngological examination is necessary.

                    Evaluate intranasal anatomy and the olfactory cleft with a nasal endoscopy for:
                       Nasal polyps or mass or lesions
                       Allergy (suggested if the mucous membranes are pale as a result of edema)
                       Inflammation
                       Infection
                       Adhesion of the nasal turbinates to the septum
                       Septal deviation (can decrease airflow to the olfactory epithelium)
                       Obstruction of any kind

                    Neurological examination evaluating:
                       Cranial nerves
                       Cerebellar function, memory impairment, and motor findings

Imaging

           A normal endoscopic examination does not rule out an obstructive etiology. Therefore,
           olfactory dysfunction of idiopathic etiology warrants CT imaging of the nasal cavity,
           paranasal sinuses, and anterior skull base.

                  An MRI of the brain should be performed in all patients in whom olfactory dys-
           function cannot be explained. MRI is the technique of choice for assessing the olfactory
           bulbs, olfactory tracts, and intracranial causes of dysfunction.

Laboratory Tests

                   Laboratory tests may be helpful in ruling out coexisting medical conditions such
                   as nutritional deficiency, diabetes mellitus, thyroid disorders, liver or kidney
                   disease.

Education

           In cases when the smell dysfunction cannot be corrected, the patient should be coun-
           seled on adapting strategies for dealing with fire protection, natural gas leaks, food
           spoilage, and so on.
                                                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY  207

BIBLIOGRAPHY

            Alexander, T. H., & Davidson, T. M. (2006). Intranasal zinc and anosmia: The zinc-induced anosmia
                   syndrome. Laryngoscope, 116(2), 217-220.

            Bradley, W. G. (2004). Neurology in clinical practice: Principles of diagnosis and management (Chapter 20:
                   Disturbances of taste and smell). New York: Taylor & Francis.

            Bromley, S. M. (2000). Smell and taste disorders: A primary care approach. American Family Physician,
                   61(2), 427-436. Retrieved from http://www.aafp.org/afp/2000/0115/p427.html.

            Gaines, A. D. (2010). Anosmia and hyposmia. Allergy and Asthma Proceedings: The Official Journal of
                   Regional and State Allergy Societies, 31(3), 185-189.

            Holbrook, E. H., & Leopold, D. A. (2006). An updated review of clinical olfaction. Current Opinion in
                   Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, 14(1), 23-28.

            Jafek, B. W., Linschoten, M. R., & Murrow, B. W. (2004). Anosmia after intranasal zinc gluconate use.
                   American Journal of Rhinology, 18(3), 137-141.

            Kern, R. C., Quinn, B., Rosseau, G., & Farbman, A. I. (2000). Post-traumatic olfactory dysfunction.
                   Laryngoscope, 110(12), 2106-2109.

            Litvack, J. R., Fong, K., Mace, J., James, K. E., & Smith, T. L. (2008). Predictors of olfactory dysfunction
                   in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. Laryngoscope, 118(12), 2225-2230.

            Mann, N. M., & Lafreniere, D. (2004). Anosmia and nasal sinus disease. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North
                   America, 37(2), 289-300, vi.

            Nordin, S., & Brämerson, A. (2008). Complaints of olfactory disorders: Epidemiology, assessment and
                   clinical implications. Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 8(1), 10-15.

            Seiden, A. M., & Duncan, H. J. (2001). The diagnosis of a conductive olfactory loss. Laryngoscope, 111(1),
                   9-14.
