Quick
Reference

for

Otolaryngology

   Guide for APRNs, PAs, and
   Other Health Care Practitioners

                              Kim Scott

                                                                Consultants

                                     Richard F. Debo
                                         Alan S. Keyes

                                  David W. Leonard
Quick Reference for

OTOLARYNGOLOGY

Guide for APRNs, PAs, and
Other Health Care Practitioners
                                   ABOUT THE CONSULTANTS

Richard F. Debo, MD, FACS, earned his medical degree from the Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, in 1984. He completed his intern-
ship and residency in Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery at Walter Reed Army
Medical Center in 1989. He has also received subspecialty training in Head and Neck
Surgical Oncology at the University of Virginia in 1993. His military career included ser-
vice as the Chief of Otolaryngology at Ft. Campbell, Kentucky, during which time he was
deployed for the first Persian Gulf War as the chief of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck
Surgery with the 86th Evacuation Hospital. He completed his military career as an attend-
ing in Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Oncology at Madigan Army Medical Center,
teaching residents and providing care for patients with head and neck cancer and thyroid
problems. Dr. Debo's academic appointments have included clinical instructor of surgery
at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, clinical assistant professor
at the University of Washington Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Sur-
gery, and as assistant professor of Clinical Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery at the
Eastern Virginia Medical School Department of Otolaryngology. He is also adjunct clinical
faculty at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia. Dr. Debo is also a board-certified
fellow of the American Academy of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery and he is a
fellow of the American College of Surgeons. He is a fellow of the American Academy of
Otolaryngic Allergy. His interests also include allergic rhinitis, and general and pediatric
otolaryngology.

Alan S. Keyes, MD, FACS, is board certified in otolaryngology and an associate of the
American Academy of Otolaryngic Allergy. Dr. Keyes received his undergraduate educa-
tion at the University of Washington and his medical degree at the Medical College of
Virginia. He served in the Navy for 10 years as an otolaryngologist including the role of
Department Head at the Naval Hospital in Charleston, South Carolina. Dr. Keyes is cur-
rently an assistant professor of otolaryngology at the Eastern Virginia Medical School.

David W. Leonard, MD, FACS, earned his medical degree from the Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences (USUHS) in Bethesda, Maryland, after receiving his
bachelor's degree in chemistry from the New College of Sarasota, Florida. He continued
his training as a surgical intern and completed his residency in Otolaryngology Head and
Neck Surgery at the National Naval Medical Center (NNMC), Bethesda, Maryland, in
1996. He remained as an attending physician, teaching residents in otolaryngology from
1996 to 2002 and treating many high-ranking members of the executive and legislative
branches of government. During his tour at NNMC, he held numerous positions, includ-
ing Assistant Residency Director, and Assistant Professor of Surgery (USUHS). Intimately
involved with research, he authored 10 journal articles. He was concurrently assigned to
the USNS Comfort hospital ship as the sole Otolaryngologist from April 1998 to Febru-
ary 2002 and also completed the Navy War College's Command and Staff Program. Dr.
Leonard also served at the Naval Hospital Jacksonville, Florida, as the Otolaryngology
Department Head, chairman of the Credentials Subcommittee, vice-chairman Executive
Committee of the Medical Staff, and director Surgical Services. He retired as a U.S. Navy
Captain with over 26 years of service, and joined Eastern Virginia Ear, Nose, and Throat
Specialists in 2010. Dr. Leonard is board certified by the American Board of Otolaryngol-
ogy, is a Fellow of the American Academy of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery,
Fellow of the American College of Surgeons, and is a member of the American Academy
of Otolaryngic Allergy.
                           ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Kim Scott, FNP, AE-C, CORLN, is a family nurse practitioner, board certified as an
asthma educator and an otorhinolaryngology nurse. Kim has experience working as
a registered nurse in the Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit and General Intensive
Care Unit at Norfolk General Hospital in Beaufort, South Carolina, before becoming
a nurse practitioner. She received her Bachelor's of Nursing degree at Virginia Com-
monwealth University, Medical College of Virginia, 2001. She received her master's
degree as a family nurse practitioner at the Medical University of South Carolina, in
2004. Kim specialized in allergy, asthma, and sinus disease, working for Baz Allergy,
Asthma & Sinus Center in Fresno, California, before joining Eastern Virginia Ear,
Nose & Throat Specialists in October 2008. She is a member of the American Acad-
emy of Otolaryngology, the American Academy of Otolaryngic Allergy, and the
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. She is also adjunct clinical
faculty at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia.
