          Preface

Health care providers encounter patients with ear, nose, and throat disorders on a daily
basis. These are some of the main reasons why patients seek medical attention. Quick Refer-
ence for Otolaryngology: Guide for APRNs, PAs, and Other Health Care Practitioners is a compre-
hensive, easy-to-read guide formatted for quick reference on any ENT topic. It showcases
the pertinent need-to-know information for how to treat and manage most ENTdisorders.
This guide is written from an advanced practice perspective, supported by the collabora-
tion of three practicing otolaryngology physicians. Together, we have simplified each ENT
topic, presenting what is necessary for the practicing health care professional to know.

       While there are many textbooks written on ENT disorders, many are rather lengthy
or too basic to meet the needs of the primary care provider. Quick Reference for Otolaryngol-
ogy eliminates the confusion and simplifies each ENT topic by incorporating easy-to-follow
tables, charts, diagrams, artwork, diagnostic explanations, therapy/treatments, and pro-
cedure protocols. The quick review format enables easy access to needed information and
provides a useful aid for written boards and certification review.

       Specific need-to-know information for each topic is bolded so that it stands out and
can't be missed. Each topic addresses the latest guidelines and incorporates suggested
medications and treatment protocols. Additionally, the book provides important guidance
for differential diagnosis, when the primary care provider should refer for specialty care,
and an invaluable overview of surgical management for specific conditions. Commonly
ordered tests in ENT are included as the last chapter in the book.

       Some additional unique offerings include:

      Procedure Protocols used in clinical settings
      Staging Criteria for the more common cancer diagnoses
      Videos that capture:

         Nasal endoscopy
         Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy
         Left vocal cord paralysis (two patient examples)
         Stroboscopy: Normal vocal cord function
         Stroboscopy: Bilateral ball-valving vocal cord polyps

As a family nurse practitioner myself, I felt the need for a quick guide on ENT disorders
and believed there was certain pertinent information that an advanced practice provider
needed to know to be successful in treating patients on a daily basis. This book will be use-
ful on many levels by a wide variety of health care professionals. Its depth and scope of
clinical content and guidelines provides that much-needed clinical reference for successful
primary care practice.

                                                                                                            Kim Scott

Videos can be found at www.springerpub.com/scott-otolaryngology-videos
An Image Bank can be found at www.springerpub.com/scott-otolaryngology-image-bank
