Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

March

April

May

June

June 1–7

Ruth; 1 Samuel 1–7

June 8–14

1 Samuel 8–10; 13; 15–16

June 15–21

1 Samuel 17–18; 24–26; 2 Samuel 5–7

June 22–28

2 Samuel 11–12; 1 Kings 3; 6–9; 11

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


June 22–28. “Hear Thou in Heaven Their Prayer”: 2 Samuel 11–12; 1 Kings 3; 6–9; 11








Solomon dedicating the temple
Solomon Dedicates the Temple at Jerusalem, by James Tissot and others

June 22–28: “Hear Thou in Heaven Their Prayer”

2 Samuel 11–12; 1 Kings 3; 6–9; 11
Saul, David, and Solomon, the first three kings of Israel, all started out with so much promise. Humble, courageous, and wise, they each found favor with the Lord—at least at first. Sadly, each king also gave in to human weaknesses and temptation. They put their own desires before the Lord’s. And as we’ve seen over and over in the scriptures—and in our own lives—that led to tragedy.

But something important happened during the reign of Solomon that provided some hope for stability in the lives of the covenant people. Solomon built a temple. It was to be a more permanent house of the Lord than the tabernacle had been. And it would represent a more permanent presence of the Lord among His people. Solomon knew that the people would continue to face weakness and trials of various kinds. In dedicating the new holy house, Solomon pleaded with the Lord, “If they … return unto thee with all their heart, … then hear thou their prayer” (1 Kings 8:47–48). That’s part of what temple covenants do for us—they create a connection to God. They secure for us the promise that through our repentance and His mercy, He can “dwell among [us]” and never forsake us (1 Kings 6:13).

For an overview of the book of 1 Kings, see “Kings, books of” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
2 Samuel 11; 12:1–14

seminary iconThe Lord can help me make good choices when I am tempted to sin.
Sometimes we look at people who seem strong in their faith, and we assume that they are unaffected by temptation. David’s tragic choices described in 2 Samuel 11 clearly show that this isn’t the case. Consider what lessons you can learn from his experiences. Questions like these might help you study 2 Samuel 11–12:

What choices did David make that led him down an increasingly sinful path? What righteous choices could he have made instead? (See also the video “To Look Upon,” Gospel Library.)



4:15
To Look Upon

Using videos. Videos can help you visualize accounts from the scriptures and consider how they apply to you. Consider how you can use them to enhance teaching and learning. For example, while watching “To Look Upon” (Gospel Library), consider pausing the video at various points to ponder or discuss some of the questions suggested in this activity.

How is the adversary trying to lead you down sinful paths? What choices could you make now to stay spiritually safe?

Note David’s reaction to Nathan’s story in 2 Samuel 12:1–6. What does his reaction suggest about how David viewed himself? What has the Lord done to help you see yourself more accurately?

How would you summarize the events of 2 Samuel 11–12 in a one-sentence warning?

Reading about David’s bad choices could lead you to learn about the dangers of pornography and sexual sin. A good resource for this is For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices, especially the sections titled “What to do in the moment” and “Your body is sacred” (pages 21–28). Maybe you could look in that resource for counsel that would have helped David make better choices. Or you could read “Jesus Christ will help you” (pages 6–9), looking for something that would have helped David return to the Lord.

Consider singing a hymn like “I Need Thee Every Hour” (Hymns, no. 98) and pondering how the Savior has strengthened you when you’ve faced temptation.

See also 2 Nephi 28:20–24; Ulisses Soares, “Seek Christ in Every Thought,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2020, 82–85; “Taking Charge of Technology,” Gospel Library; “Watch Your Step” (video), Gospel Library.



2:36
Watch Your Step

1 Kings 3:1–15

The gift of discernment helps me distinguish between right and wrong.
If the Lord said to you, “Ask what I shall give thee” (1 Kings 3:5), what would you ask for? What impresses you about Solomon’s request? Ponder why “an understanding heart” to “discern between good and bad” (verse 9) is a valuable gift. What can you do to seek this gift?

See also Moroni 7:12–19.

1 Kings 6–8; 9:1–9

Through covenants made in the Lord’s house, the Lord dwells with me.
In 1 Kings 6–7 you’ll find a detailed description of the sacred house that Solomon built for the Lord. The details may not seem as important to you as they were to the ancient Israelites. But reading these chapters might give you a sense for how important it was to them to have a house of the Lord. Why is it important to you?

You might ponder what the different parts of Solomon’s temple might symbolize. For example, consider what the cherubim, trees, and flowers in 1 Kings 6:35 might represent. (See also Genesis 3:24.)

Chapter 8 records Solomon’s prayer upon completing the temple (see verses 22–61). Consider making a list of the blessings Solomon asked for. What impresses you about these blessings? (Note also the Lord’s promises in 2 Kings 6:11–13; 9:1–9.) If you’ve been to the Lord’s house, think about your experiences worshipping there. How has keeping temple covenants helped you access the Lord’s blessings?

See also Doctrine and Covenants 109; Henry B. Eyring, “I Love to See the Temple,” Liahona, May 2021, 28–31.

Barranquilla Colombia Temple
Barranquilla Colombia Temple

1 Kings 8:61; 11:1–11

“His heart was not perfect with the Lord.”
What does it mean to “let your heart … be perfect with the Lord”? (1 Kings 8:61). Is that different from our actions being perfect? How so? Read 1 Kings 11:1–11, and notice what the Lord said about Solomon’s heart. You might ponder whether there are influences in your life that could turn your heart away from the Lord and toward “other gods.”

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
2 Samuel 11

The Lord can help me when I am tempted.
“King David” in Old Testament Stories, 117–20, can help you tell your children the story in 2 Samuel 11. You might ask your children to identify the wrong choices David made and suggest good choices he could have made instead. What are some things we can do when we are being tempted that can help us make the right choice?



2:11
King David

Reading about David’s tragic sins might be a good opportunity to discuss the dangers of pornography. The video “What Should I Do When I See Pornography?” (Gospel Library) has helpful guidance. Help your children make a plan about what they will do when they encounter pornography.



5:46
What should I do when I see pornography?

1 Kings 8:22–61

Making covenants in the Lord’s house—and keeping them—helps me walk in His ways.
As you and your children learn about the dedication of the temple in 1 Kings 8, you could look at the pictures of temples in this week’s outline. Let your children talk about details they see in the pictures. You might emphasize verses 57–58. What does it mean to “walk in all [the Lord’s] ways”? (1 Kings 8:58). Maybe your children could take a step for each answer they give.

Tell your children how keeping the covenants you make in the temple helps you walk in the Lord’s ways. You might tell them what these covenants are (see General Handbook, 27.2, Gospel Library). You could also sing a song together like “I Love to See the Temple” (Children’s Songbook, 95).

Solomon’s temple
Illustration of Solomon’s temple, by Sam Lawlor

1 Kings 11:1–11

I can put the Lord first in my life.
Reading about how Solomon’s wives influenced him could lead to a conversation about examples of “other gods”—or things that people worship or love instead of the Lord. How do we show that we love Him more than anything else in our lives?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Solomon’s temple
Dedication of the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem, by William Hole

Primary activity page: Making covenants in the Lord’s house helps me walk in His ways
Open PDF
Feedback
