December 14–20. “I Have Loved You, Saith the Lord”: Malachi








a statue of Jesus in front of a starry sky
December 14–20: “I Have Loved You, Saith the Lord”

Malachi
“I have loved you,” the Lord told His people through the prophet Malachi. But the Israelites, who had suffered generations of affliction and captivity, asked, “Wherein hast thou loved us?” (Malachi 1:2). After all Israel had been through, they may have wondered whether their history is really a story of God’s love for His covenant people. In some ways, it’s easier to see it as a story of human weakness and rebellion. Yet through it all, God never stopped reaching out in love. When the sons of Jacob mistreated their brother Joseph, the Lord still saved them from famine (see Genesis 45:4–8). When Israel murmured in the wilderness, He fed them with manna (see Exodus 16:1–4). Even when Israel turned to other gods and were scattered, God promised that if they repented, He would gather and redeem them “with great mercies” (see Isaiah 54:7). Truly, the Old Testament is a story of God’s patient, enduring love. And this story continues today. Jesus Christ, “the Sun of Righteousness,” as Malachi called Him, has come “with healing in his wings” (Malachi 4:2). He is the greatest evidence of God’s love for ancient Israel and for all of us.

For more information about the book of Malachi, see “Malachi” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Malachi 1–4

“Return unto me, and I will return unto you.”
In Malachi’s day, the Israelites had already rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem, but as a people they still needed to rebuild their relationship with the Lord. As you study Malachi, look for questions that the Lord asked the Israelites or that they asked Him. Consider asking yourself similar questions (some examples are suggested below) to help you evaluate your relationship with the Lord and draw closer to Him.

How have I felt the Lord’s love for me? (see Malachi 1:2).

Do my offerings to the Lord truly honor Him? (see Malachi 1:6–11)

In what ways do I need to “return” to the Lord? (see Malachi 3:7).

Am I robbing God in any way? (see Malachi 3:8–11).

How does my attitude during difficult times reflect my feelings toward the Lord? (see Malachi 3:13–15; see also 2:17).

Malachi 1:6–14

The Lord asks for “a pure offering.”
As you read about the offerings described in Malachi 1, what do you notice about the sacrifices the priests were offering? What do these sacrifices suggest about the priests’ feelings toward the Lord? (see Malachi 1:13). Consider making a list of offerings, or sacrifices, that you make to the Lord. For each item on the list, ponder what might make it a “polluted” offering or a “pure” offering (Malachi 1:7, 11).

Malachi 3:8–12

seminary iconThe Lord opens the windows of heaven as I show my faith by paying tithing.
Imagine you have a friend who just found out that you pay tithing. “Why do you do that?” your friend asks. Think about this as you read Malachi 3:8–12. What do you find there that could help answer your friend’s question? What else would you want your friend to understand about tithing? For more help, you could search Elder Neil L. Andersen’s message “Tithing: Opening the Windows of Heaven” (Liahona, Nov. 2023, 32–35), looking for answers to questions like these:

Why does the Lord want us to pay tithing?

What might keep someone from paying tithing, and how can we overcome those obstacles?

How does paying tithing strengthen our faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ?

You could also share with your friend how the Lord has blessed you when you pay tithing. You can find ideas in the section titled “Lesson Number 1—Significant but Subtle Blessings” in Elder David A. Bednar’s message “The Windows of Heaven” (Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2013, 17–18). What kind of people do we become by paying tithing?

What do you think the phrase “open you the windows of heaven” (verse 10) might mean? Maybe you could look out a window and think about the purposes of windows. Why is “windows of heaven” a good way to describe how the Lord blesses us when we pay tithing?

Jesus appearing to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple
Vision in the Kirtland Temple, by Gary Smith

Malachi 4:5–6

“I will send you Elijah the prophet.”
When Moroni quoted Malachi 4:5–6 to Joseph Smith, he did so “with a little variation from the way it reads” in the Bible (see Joseph Smith—History 1:36–39). What does Moroni’s variation add to your understanding of this prophecy? In particular, ponder questions like these:

Who are “the fathers”? (see Deuteronomy 29:13). What promises have been made to them? (see Abraham 2:9–11). How do you help fulfill these promises?

What experiences have helped you turn your heart to your ancestors? Why is that so important to Heavenly Father’s plan?

To learn more about the coming of Elijah and how this prophecy is being fulfilled today, see Doctrine and Covenants 110:13–16 and D. Todd Christofferson, “The Sealing Power” (Liahona, Nov. 2023, 19–22). Why are you grateful that Elijah has come?

See also Gerrit W. Gong, “We Each Have a Story,” Liahona, May 2022, 43–46; “Turn Your Hearts,” Hymns, no. 291; “The Sealing Power” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org.



3:38
The Sealing Power

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Malachi 1:2

The Lord loves me.
How would you and your children answer the question in Malachi 1:2—“Wherein hast [the Lord] loved us?” Share with each other reasons you know He loves you. Maybe your children could draw pictures that remind them of His love.

Engage children in gospel discussions. If you are teaching younger children, you may need to think of creative ways to involve them in gospel discussions. For example, your children could pass around a ball; when they are holding the ball, they could share one reason they know Jesus loves them.

parents and a young boy looking out a window
Malachi 3:8–12

The Lord will bless me as I pay tithing.
How will you help your children learn about tithing? You could ask them to count 10 small objects, such as the coins on this week’s activity page. Then they could separate one of the objects from the rest—this is how much we give to the Lord as tithing. According to Malachi 3:8–12, why does the Lord want us to pay tithing? (see also “Malachi the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories, 171–72; “First Things First!” [video], Gospel Library).



0:58
Malachi the Prophet



1:18
First Things First!

As you read Malachi 3:10 together, you could invite your children to stand by a window when you read the phrase “windows of heaven.” Or you could pour water into a cup until it overflows to illustrate the phrase “there shall not be room enough to receive it.” Tell the children about the blessings God has given you as you pay tithing. Your children could draw pictures representing these blessings and hang them on or near a window in your home.

Malachi 4:5–6

Elijah came to turn our hearts to our families.
In Malachi 4:5–6, your children could look for answers to the following questions about Malachi’s prophecy: Who did the Lord promise to send? When did He say this person would come? What did the Lord say that this person would do? Why would this person need to come? Where was this prophecy fulfilled? (see Doctrine and Covenants 110:13–16).

To find out how the promise in Malachi 4:5 was fulfilled, you can also review “Joseph and Oliver Receive Priesthood Keys” in Doctrine and Covenants Stories, 26–30. A song like “The Hearts of the Children” (Children’s Songbook, 92) can help your children learn why it was so important that Elijah came. You could also visit FamilySearch.org/discovery, the FamilySearch Tree app, or the My Family booklet for activities that can help you and your children turn your hearts to your ancestors.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

a woman waving a white handkerchief
Mourning’s Hosanna, by Rose Datoc Dall. A woman named Mourning stands in the spirit world, surrounded by her ancestors. She celebrates their deliverance from spiritual captivity.

Primary activity page: The Lord blesses me as I pay tithing
Open PDF
Feedback

