April 20–26. “All That the Lord Hath Spoken We Will Do”: Exodus 19–20; 24; 31–34








Moses carrying the Ten Commandments tablets
Moses and the Tablets, by Jerry Harston (detail)

April 20–26: “All That the Lord Hath Spoken We Will Do”

Exodus 19–20; 24; 31–34
Although the children of Israel had murmured and wavered in the past, when Moses read the law at the foot of Mount Sinai, they made this covenant: “All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient” (Exodus 24:7). God then called Moses onto the mountain, telling him to build a tabernacle so “that I may dwell among them” (Exodus 25:8).

But while Moses was at the top of the mountain learning how the Israelites could have God’s presence among them, the Israelites were at the bottom of the mountain making a golden idol to worship instead. Soon after promising to “have no other gods,” they “turned aside quickly” from their promise (Exodus 20:3; 32:8; see also Exodus 24:3). It was a surprising turn, but we know from experience that faith and commitment can sometimes be overcome by impatience, fear, or doubt. As we seek the Lord’s presence in our lives, it is encouraging to know the Lord did not give up on ancient Israel and He will not give up on us and the people we love—for He is “merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth” (Exodus 34:6).

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Exodus 19:3–6

The Lord’s covenant people are a treasure to Him.
President Russell M. Nelson taught: “In the Old Testament, the Hebrew term from which peculiar was translated is segullah, which means ‘valued property,’ or ‘treasure.’ … For us to be identified by servants of the Lord as his peculiar people is a compliment of the highest order” (“Children of the Covenant,” Ensign, May 1995, 34). How do President Nelson’s words affect the way you understand Exodus 19:3–6? How has the Lord shown you that He treasures you?

Exodus 19:10–11, 17

Sacred experiences require preparation.
The Lord told Moses that the children of Israel needed to be prepared before they could “meet with God” (Exodus 19:10–11, 17) and keep a covenant with Him (see Exodus 19:5). How do you prepare for spiritual experiences, including the sacrament and temple ordinances? How can you help others prepare? What do you learn about preparation from Luke 6:12–13; Enos 1:2–6; Alma 17:2–3?

Mount Sinai, Egypt
This mountain in Egypt is traditionally believed to be Mount Sinai.

Exodus 20:1–17

seminary iconObedience to God’s commandments brings blessings.
While the Israelites were gathered at the base of Mount Sinai, they heard the voice of God give the Ten Commandments (see Deuteronomy 4:12–13). These, of course, aren’t God’s only commandments—there are many others in the scriptures. So as you read Exodus 20:1–17, ask yourself why God emphasized these ten in particular. Here’s a sample table you could use as you ponder the importance of the Ten Commandments in your life:

Commandment

In other words, the Lord is asking me to …

Blessings that come from living this commandment

How does keeping these ten commandments help you keep the two great commandments Jesus gave in Matthew 22:34–40?

What are things that you may be tempted to put before God? What blessings have you seen from putting God first?

How would you respond to someone who says the Ten Commandments were given a long time ago and do not apply today? What examples from your life would you share as part of your response? How might the hymn “How Gentle God’s Commands” (Hymns, no. 125) affect the way you explain God’s commandments to others?

How has the Lord fulfilled the promise in Exodus 20:6 in your life?

See also “The Great Commandment—Love the Lord,” in Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 37–45; Dallin H. Oaks, “No Other Gods,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2013, 72–75; Topics and Questions, “Commandments,” Gospel Library.

Exodus 24:1–11

Making covenants shows my willingness to obey God’s law.
As you read Exodus 24:3–8, consider the covenants you have made with God. While Israel’s covenant included rituals that are different from what God requires today, you may notice some similarities. For example, verses 4, 5, and 8 mention an altar, animal sacrifices, and blood. What could these things represent, and how do they relate to your covenants?

Exodus 32–34

Sin is turning away from God; repentance is turning toward Him and away from evil.
Try to put yourself in the Israelites’ place—you’re in the wilderness, Moses has been gone for 40 days, and a confrontation with the Canaanites over the promised land is in your future (see Exodus 32:1–8). Why do you think the Israelites wanted a golden idol? What inspires you about Moses’s plea to the Lord in Exodus 33:11–17?

While the Israelites’ sin was serious, this story also includes a message of God’s mercy and forgiveness. What does Exodus 34:1–10 teach you about the Savior? (see Exodus 32:30–32; Mosiah 14:4–8; 15:9; Doctrine and Covenants 45:3–5).

Exodus 31:13–16

The Sabbath is a sign.
President Russell M. Nelson explained: “In my much younger years, I studied the work of others who had compiled lists of things to do and things not to do on the Sabbath. It wasn’t until later that I learned from the scriptures that my conduct and my attitude on the Sabbath constituted a sign between me and my Heavenly Father [see Exodus 31:13; Ezekiel 20:12, 20]. With that understanding, I no longer needed lists of dos and don’ts. When I had to make a decision whether or not an activity was appropriate for the Sabbath, I simply asked myself, ‘What sign do I want to give to God?’ That question made my choices about the Sabbath day crystal clear” (“The Sabbath Is a Delight,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2015, 130). Ponder what sign you want to give God with your observance of the Sabbath.

Exodus 34:1–4

What was the difference between the two sets of stone tables Moses made?
When Moses came down from the mountain, he brought the law written on stone tables. After finding that the Israelites had broken their covenant, Moses broke the tables (see Exodus 31:18; 32:19). Later, God commanded Moses to make another set of stone tables and take them back to the mountain (see Exodus 34:1–4). The Joseph Smith Translation of Exodus 34:1–2 (in the Bible appendix) clarifies that the first set of stone tables included the ordinances of God’s “holy order,” or the Melchizedek Priesthood. The second set included “the law of a carnal commandment.” This was a lesser law administered by the “lesser priesthood” (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:17–27), which was meant to prepare the Israelites for the higher law and higher priesthood so they could enter into God’s presence.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Exodus 20:3–17

God gives me commandments because He wants me to be happy.
How can you make learning about the Ten Commandments fun for your children? As you read Exodus 20:3–17 together, let your children help you find or draw a picture to represent each of the Ten Commandments. Then your children could take turns choosing a picture and talking about how they can live that commandment. Share with each other how living that commandment brings you happiness.

You could also sing a song like “Keep the Commandments” (Children’s Songbook, 146–47). Help your children find words in the song that teach them why God wants us to keep His commandments.

When children share spiritual experiences, their testimony grows. The questions you ask can encourage your children to share how they feel about the Savior and how living the gospel has blessed them (see Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 32). When they do this, they are bearing testimony. Consider how you can do this as you discuss the blessings that come from living the Ten Commandments.

Exodus 20:12

The Lord wants me to honor my parents.
Help your children learn the phrase “Honour thy father and thy mother” (Exodus 20:12). You may want to explain that to “honor” someone can mean to show respect for them or to bring them happiness. What did Jesus do to honor His mortal mother and His Heavenly Father? (see Luke 2:48–51; John 19:26–27). Perhaps your children could take turns acting out things they can do to honor their parents, while the other children guess what they are doing.

Exodus 31:13, 16–17

Honoring the Sabbath is a sign of my love for the Lord.
Your children might enjoy looking at examples of signs—such as road signs or signs on a building. What are the purposes of signs? Your children could then find the word “sign” in Exodus 31:13, 16–17. What did the Lord say is a sign between us and Him? Share with each other some of the ways you and your family try to show your love for the Lord on the Sabbath.

Moses holding the Ten Commandments
Illustration of Moses holding the Ten Commandments, by Sam Lawlor (detail)

Exodus 32:1–8, 19–24; 34:6–7

I will not “turn aside” from God’s ways.
Consider using “Moses on Mount Sinai” (in Old Testament Stories, 77–82) to help your children learn the story in Exodus 32:1–8, 19–24. Why was it wrong for the Israelites to worship a statue instead of God?



2:55
Moses on Mount Sinai

It might be fun to create a path on the floor (or find one near your home) to illustrate these words from Exodus 32:8: “They have turned aside quickly out of the way.” While walking on the path, your children could talk about temptations we face to turn away from God. What helps us remain on God’s path—and return to it if we have strayed? (see Exodus 34:6–7).

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Moses casting down the Ten Commandments
Worship of the Calf, by W. C. Simmonds

Primary activity page: God gives me commandments because he wants me to be happy
Open PDF
Feedback

