June 29–July 5. “If the Lord Be God, Follow Him”: 1 Kings 12–13; 17–22








Elijah in front of a burning altar
Elijah Contends against the Priests of Baal, by Jerry Harston

June 29–July 5: “If the Lord Be God, Follow Him”

1 Kings 12–13; 17–22
The house of Israel was in disarray. The kingdom had divided, with ten tribes forming the Northern Kingdom of Israel and two tribes forming the Southern Kingdom of Judah. But worse than their separation from each other was both kingdoms’ separation from their covenants. Wicked kings led the people away from the Lord, and many people wavered in their faith.

In this setting, the Lord called Elijah to be a prophet. His life shows that a person can have great faith in the Lord even in bad circumstances. Sometimes the Lord responds to such faith with impressive, public miracles, like fire falling from heaven. But He also works quiet, private miracles, like feeding a faithful widow and her son. And most often the Lord’s miracles are so individual that they are known only to one person—for example, when the Lord reveals Himself to you through “a still small voice” (1 Kings 19:12).

For more about Elijah, see “Elijah” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
1 Kings 12:1–20

Christlike leaders serve the people they lead.
How would you describe the mistake King Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, made in 1 Kings 12:1–14? What Christlike attributes could have helped Rehoboam save his kingdom? (see verse 7; Matthew 20:25–28; Mosiah 2:10–21). How can you use these attributes as a leader—whether in a Church calling or as a leader of your own life?

1 Kings 17:8–16; 19:19–21

seminary iconAn invitation to sacrifice is an opportunity to exercise my faith in Jesus Christ.
The prophet Elijah asked a widow to give him food and water before feeding herself and her starving son. Why would he do that? Elijah’s request could be seen as a blessing for this small family. They needed the Lord’s blessings, and sacrifice brings blessings—including the blessing of stronger faith.

As you read 1 Kings 17:8–16, imagine you were this widow. What impresses you about her? You could also make a list of choices that require faith in Jesus Christ (for examples, see For the Strength of Youth: A Guide to Making Choices [2022]). What do you learn from this widow about exercising faith?

How are Elisha’s actions in 1 Kings 19:19–21 similar to the widow’s actions?

Think about sacrifices you’ve made to follow the Savior. What does 1 Kings 17:8–16; 19:19–21 teach you about these sacrifices? How does your knowledge of the Savior help you when He asks you to make sacrifices? How has He blessed you?

See also Matthew 4:18–22; 6:25–33; Luke 4:24–26; “Elijah and the Widow of Zarephath” (video), Gospel Library; “When Faith Endures,” Hymns, no. 128.



10:13
Elijah and the Widow of Zarephath

1 Kings 18

“If the Lord be God, follow him.”
The Israelites might have felt they had good reasons to worship Baal, who was known as the god of storms and rain. After three years of drought, they desperately needed rain. And worshipping Baal was socially accepted and promoted by the king and queen. As you read 1 Kings 18, think about why someone in our day might be indecisive about following the Lord. In this chapter, what do you think the Lord was trying to teach about Himself? What experiences have helped you commit to following the Savior?

See also D. Todd Christofferson, “Choice and Commitment” (worldwide devotional for young adults, Jan. 12, 2020), Gospel Library.

Elijah on Mount Horeb
Illustration of Elijah, by Wilson Ong

1 Kings 19:1–18

The Lord often speaks in quiet, simple ways.
Sadly, the miracle on Mount Carmel didn’t make Elijah’s mission any easier. In fact, his life was in danger, and he had to hide in a cave in the wilderness. There, struggling with loneliness and discouragement, he had an experience with the Lord that was very different from the experience on Mount Carmel. What does Elijah’s experience in 1 Kings 19:1–18 teach you about how the Lord communicates with you in your times of need?

Ponder times when you feel the Lord has spoken to you. How would you describe the way He communicates with you? Why are the words “still” and “small” good ways to describe the voice of the Spirit? What other words do you find in Helaman 5:30; Doctrine and Covenants 6:22–23; 11:12–14? What do you need to do to receive the Lord’s guidance more often?

See also Psalm 46:10.

Use multiple senses to enhance learning. We all learn about the world through our five senses. Using those senses can also enhance gospel learning. For example, think of images or sounds you could use to illustrate the words “still” and “small” as you learn or teach about the Lord’s voice in 1 Kings 19.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
1 Kings 17

The Lord blesses me as I have faith in Him.
To help your children learn the stories of faith in 1 Kings 17, you could show them pictures or objects to illustrate the stories, such as birds, bread, or a boy. As you tell your children these stories, invite them to find the picture or object that goes with each story. “Elijah the Prophet” (in Old Testament Stories, 121–24) can help you tell these stories. What does each story teach us about showing faith in Jesus Christ?



1:58
Elijah the Prophet

Help your children think of ways they can show their faith in Jesus Christ. Sing with them a song about faith, such as “I Have Faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ” (Gospel Library), and share with each other what you learn about faith from the song.

Elijah, a widow, and her son
Illustration of Elijah and the healing of the widow’s son, by Charles Edmund Brock

1 Kings 17:8–16

When the Lord asks me to sacrifice, I can obey in faith.
Perhaps your children could draw a picture of what the Lord asked the widow to give Elijah (see 1 Kings 17:12–13) and what the widow received in return (see 1 Kings 17:15–16). (See also this week’s activity page.) They could also look for pictures of other people who gave up something they wanted for something better. Invite your children to find pictures in the Gospel Art Book or Come, Follow Me. What does the Lord ask us to sacrifice? How does He bless us?

1 Kings 18:17–39

I can choose to follow Jesus Christ.
As you read 1 Kings 18:17–39 together, your children could pick a verse and draw a picture of what it describes. They could use their pictures to tell the story in their own words. (See also “Elijah and the Priests of Baal,” in Old Testament Stories, 125–28.)



2:17
Elijah and the Priests of Baal

Help your children think of situations when they might need to decide whether or not to follow Jesus Christ. Maybe they could draw pictures of themselves making the right choice. Share with each other why you choose to follow Jesus.

1 Kings 19:9–12

The Lord speaks to me through the still, small voice of the Holy Ghost.
As you summarize 1 Kings 19:9–12, invite your children to do actions to represent the strong wind, the earthquake, and the fire. Then invite them to sit still as you say together, in a quiet voice, “after the fire a still small voice” (verse 12). (See also “The Lord Speaks to Elijah,” in Old Testament Stories, 129–31.) Tell your children about times when you have experienced the still, small voice of the Holy Ghost.



1:48
The Lord Speaks to Elijah

Quietly sing a song about the Spirit, such as “The Still Small Voice” (Children’s Songbook, 106–7). What can distract us from recognizing the Spirit? What can help us hear Him?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

the widow of Zarephath and her son
Widow of Zarephath, by Rose Datoc Dall

Primary activity page: When the Lord asks me to sacrifice, I can obey in faith
Open PDF
Feedback

