Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

Reading the Old Testament

December 29–January 4

Introduction to the Old Testament

January 5–11

Moses 1; Abraham 3

January 12–18

Genesis 1–2; Moses 2–3; Abraham 4–5

January 19–25

Genesis 3–4; Moses 4–5

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


January 19–25. The Fall of Adam and Eve: Genesis 3–4; Moses 4–5








Adam and Eve
Adam and Eve, by Douglas M. Fryer

January 19–25: The Fall of Adam and Eve

Genesis 3–4; Moses 4–5
At first, the story of the Fall of Adam and Eve might seem like a tragedy. Adam and Eve were cast out of the beautiful Garden of Eden. They were sent into a world of pain, sorrow, and death (see Genesis 3:16–19). And they were separated from their Heavenly Father. But the truths restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith in the book of Moses give us a unique perspective on the Fall.

Yes, the Garden of Eden was beautiful. But Adam and Eve needed more than beautiful surroundings. They needed—and we all need—an opportunity to grow. Leaving the Garden of Eden was the necessary first step toward returning to God and eventually becoming like Him. That meant facing opposition, making choices, making mistakes, learning to repent, and trusting the Savior, whose Atonement makes possible progression and “the joy of our redemption” (Moses 5:11). So when you read about the Fall of Adam and Eve, focus not on the seeming tragedy but on the possibilities—not on the paradise Adam and Eve lost but on the glory their choice allows us to receive.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Genesis 3; Moses 4

The Fall was a necessary part of God’s plan.
It’s true that Adam and Eve’s choice led to many of the difficulties we experience in mortality. But that doesn’t mean we regret their choice. As you read Genesis 3 and Moses 4, you might ask yourself, why was the Fall important to God’s plan?

According to Moses 5:9–12, how did Adam and Eve feel about the Fall? How can you apply their words to your experiences in this fallen world? What else do you learn from 2 Nephi 2:19–25?

See also Mosiah 3:19; Alma 12:21–37; and Doctrine and Covenants 29:39–43.

Eve holding an apple
Leaving Eden, by Annie Henrie Nader

Genesis 3:1–7; Moses 4:22–31; 5:4–15

Jesus Christ offers hope and redemption.
Adam and Eve’s story is one of hope and redemption through Jesus Christ. To see why, you might start by searching for the results of the Fall in Genesis 3:1–7; Moses 4:22–31 and marking or listing what you find. How do these results affect you? Then you could search Moses 5:4–15, looking for God’s plan to redeem us from these effects. Why were Adam and Eve “glad” after the angel visited them? What do you learn from them about Heavenly Father’s plan?

See also “Because of Him” (video), Gospel Library.



2:44
Because of Him

Genesis 3:16; Moses 4:22

What does it mean that Adam was to “rule over” Eve?
This passage of scripture has sometimes been misunderstood to mean that a husband is justified in treating his wife unkindly. In our day, the Lord’s prophets have taught that a husband and wife should see each other as equal partners in fulfilling their divine responsibilities in the family (see “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” [Gospel Library]). Elder Dale G. Renlund and Sister Ruth Lybbert Renlund explained that a righteous husband “will seek to minister; he will acknowledge error and seek forgiveness; he will be quick to offer praise; he will be considerate of family members’ preferences; he will feel the great weight of responsibility to provide ‘the necessities of life and protection’ for his family; he will treat his wife with the utmost respect and deference. … He will bless his family” (The Melchizedek Priesthood: Understanding the Doctrine, Living the Principles [2018], 23).

Moses 4:1–4

seminary iconI need agency and opposition to grow.
Elder Dale G. Renlund taught, “Our Heavenly Father’s goal in parenting is not to have His children do what is right; it is to have His children choose to do what is right and ultimately become like Him” (“Choose You This Day,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2018, 104). Why is it so important in Heavenly Father’s plan that we choose to do what is right?

As you read Moses 4:1–4, look for what Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ did to protect your right to choose—your agency. How can you access their protecting power? For ideas, consider studying the section “Make inspired choices” in For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices (4–5).

Consider also reading what Lehi taught about agency in 2 Nephi 2:11–20, 25–30. Why is opposition necessary for agency? How can you show your appreciation to Jesus Christ for making you “free to choose”? (2 Nephi 2:27).

See also Dallin H. Oaks, “Opposition in All Things,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2016, 114–17; Topics and Questions, “Agency,” Gospel Library; “Choose the Right,” Hymns, no. 239.

Increase participation. Many learning activities can be done as an individual, family, or class; in small groups; or in pairs. Use a variety of methods to allow people to participate who might not otherwise have a chance. For this activity, you could invite one person or group to read Moses 4 and the For the Strength of Youth guide while another group studies the verses in 2 Nephi 2. They could then teach each other what they learned in their respective section.

Moses 4:4–12; 5:13–33

Satan seeks “to deceive and to blind” me.
As you read Moses 4:4–12; 5:13–33, consider listing ways that Satan tried to tempt Adam and Eve and their children. How does he attempt these same things today? How does Heavenly Father help you resist Satan’s deceptions?

Moses 4:13–16, 27

“I, the Lord God … clothed them.”
After partaking of the forbidden fruit, Adam and Eve tried to cover their own nakedness. Later, the Lord offered to clothe them. As you read Moses 4:13–16, 27, consider the following:

Ponder what nakedness and clothing can represent in the scriptures (see, for example, Revelation 7:9, 13–15; 2 Nephi 9:14; Doctrine and Covenants 109:22–26, 76). What do you learn from Adam and Eve’s experience with nakedness and clothing?

If you have been endowed in the temple, consider what Adam and Eve might say to you about the significance of your temple garment and what it represents.

See also “Sacred Temple Clothing” (video), Gospel Library.



4:12
Sacred Temple Clothing

Moses 5:4–9, 16–26

God will accept my sacrifices if I offer them with a willing and obedient heart.
As you study Moses 5:4–9, 16–26, consider the attitudes of Adam and Eve and their sons Cain and Abel toward sacrifice. Why did the Lord accept Abel’s sacrifice but not Cain’s?

What does the Lord ask you to sacrifice? Is there anything in these verses that shapes the way you think about those sacrifices?

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Genesis 3; Moses 4; 5:8–15

Jesus Christ saves us from the Fall.
To help your children better understand the Fall of Adam and Eve, you could copy the pictures from “Adam and Eve” (in Old Testament Stories, 13–16) and cut them out. Then you could work together to put the pictures in order as you discuss the experiences of Adam and Eve. As you do, talk about why it was important, in Heavenly Father’s plan, for Adam and Eve to leave the Garden of Eden.

Your children can feel gratitude for the Atonement of Jesus Christ as they understand how He overcomes the effects of the Fall. As you read together Moses 4:25; 6:48; Romans 5:12; 2 Nephi 2:22–23, help your children find ways to complete this sentence: “Because of the Fall, I …” Then, as you read together Moses 5:8–11, 14–15; 6:59; Alma 11:42, they could complete this sentence: “Because of Jesus Christ, I …” Share with each other your gratitude for Jesus Christ.

Moses 4:1–4

I can choose the right.
Consider a simple object lesson to introduce the principle of agency: invite your children to color this week’s activity page, but give them only one color to use. Why would it be better to have choices? You could then read together Moses 4:1–4 and talk about why God wants us to be able to choose between right and wrong. How do Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ help us make good choices?

Help your children think of and draw pictures of good choices they can make to follow Jesus Christ. Or you could sing together a song about making good choices, such as “Choose the Right Way” (Children’s Songbook, 160–61). You might tell each other about a time when you made a good choice and talk about how you felt afterward.

Adam and Eve
The Fall, by Robert T. Barrett

Moses 5:4, 8

I can pray to Heavenly Father.
When Adam and Eve had to leave the Garden of Eden, they couldn’t be with Heavenly Father anymore. Read Moses 5:4, 8 with your children, and help them find what Adam and Eve did to feel near to Him and hear Him. What are some things we can say to Heavenly Father in our prayers?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Adam and Eve with a sacrificial lamb on an altar
In Similitude of the Sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, by Mike Malm (see Moses 5:5–9)

Primary activity page: The Fall of Adam and Eve
Open PDF
Feedback
