Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

Reading the Old Testament

December 29–January 4

Introduction to the Old Testament

January 5–11

Moses 1; Abraham 3

January 12–18

Genesis 1–2; Moses 2–3; Abraham 4–5

January 19–25

Genesis 3–4; Moses 4–5

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


December 29–January 4. The First Testament of Jesus Christ: Introduction to the Old Testament








Jesus standing on a hill
December 29–January 4: The First Testament of Jesus Christ

Introduction to the Old Testament
When you consider studying the Old Testament this year, how do you feel? Eager? Uncertain? Afraid? All of these emotions are understandable. The Old Testament is one of the oldest collections of writings in the world, and this can make it both exciting and intimidating. These writings come from an ancient culture that can seem foreign and sometimes strange or even uncomfortable. And yet in these writings we see people having experiences that seem familiar. We recognize gospel themes that witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ and His gospel. Yes, people like Abraham, Sarah, Hannah, and Daniel lived lives that, in some ways, were very different from ours. But they also experienced family joy and family discord, moments of faith and moments of uncertainty, and successes and failures—like all of us do. More important, they exercised faith, repented, made covenants, had spiritual experiences, and never gave up on the promise of a Savior. As we learn how God moved in their lives, we also see Him in ours, and we say with the psalmist: “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. … Therefore thy servant loveth it” (Psalm 119:105, 140).

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and Church
seminary iconThe Old Testament testifies of Jesus Christ.
One way to find rich spiritual nourishment in the Old Testament is to look for the Bread of Life, Jesus Christ (see John 6:48). For example, how do you see the Savior in the following?

Manna (Exodus 16:4, 11–15; John 6:35)

The sacrificial lamb (Exodus 12:3–5; John 1:29)

The brass serpent (Numbers 21:4–10; John 3:14)

Jonah (Jonah 1:4–17; Matthew 12:38–41)

What do these examples teach about Him? What other references to Jesus Christ in the Old Testament are you already familiar with?

In his message “Jesus Christ Is the Treasure,” Elder Dale G. Renlund encouraged us to “remember and always focus on Jesus Christ” (Liahona, Nov. 2023, 98). Consider reading his message, looking for things you can do to find Jesus Christ not only in the Old Testament but also in your life.

See also “Types or Symbols of Christ” in Guide to the Scriptures, “Jesus Christ,” Gospel Library; “Seek the Lord Early,” Children’s Songbook, 108.

Look for symbols that testify of Jesus Christ. The Lord taught Adam, “All things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me” (Moses 6:63). Whether you are studying or teaching, focusing on Jesus Christ can help you find meaning in the scriptures and increase your love for and faith in Him. (See Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 7.)

Jesus Christ is Jehovah in the Old Testament.
President Dallin H. Oaks taught: “The Father introduced His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, as our Savior and Redeemer and gave us the command to ‘hear Him.’ From this direction we conclude that the scriptural records of words spoken by ‘God’ or the ‘Lord’ are almost always the words of Jehovah, our risen Lord, Jesus Christ” (“The Teachings of Jesus Christ,” Liahona, May 2023, 102).



14:7
The Teachings of Jesus Christ

When the leaders of the Jews challenged Jesus about His identity, He declared, “Before Abraham was, I am.” These words shocked the people who heard Jesus, and they were ready to stone Him (see John 8:58–59). Consider reading Exodus 3:13–15; 6:3–5 to see why some Jews were so upset at what Jesus said.

Why is it significant to you to know that Jesus Christ is Jehovah?

The Lord restored many “plain and precious things” through Joseph Smith.
In a vision, the Lord showed Nephi the coming forth of the Bible, explaining that “many plain and precious things” would be taken from it. Consider reading 1 Nephi 13:21–29, 38–42, looking for how the Lord planned to “make known the plain and precious things.” According to 2 Nephi 3:12, how do the Bible and Book of Mormon work together?

As you study the Old Testament this year, you will also study some of the “other books” Nephi foresaw. These include:

The book of Moses, part of Joseph Smith’s translation of the Bible. It restores truths and accounts not found in the current text of Genesis 1–6.

The book of Abraham, which was revealed to Joseph Smith as he examined ancient Egyptian papyri (see Topics and Questions, “Book of Abraham,” Gospel Library).

Various passages from the Joseph Smith Translation, some of which appear in the footnotes, the appendix of the Bible, and the Guide to the Scriptures.

Here are some examples of Old Testament accounts restored through Joseph Smith: Enoch’s city of Zion (Moses 7:18–19), Abraham’s vision of the council in heaven (Abraham 3:22–28), and the ministry of Melchizedek (Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 14:25–40). Why are these accounts “plain and precious” to you?

angel appearing to Adam and Eve
Adam and Eve Offering Sacrifices, by Keith Larson (detail)

The Old Testament helps me understand my covenant relationship with God.
The Old Testament is the story of God seeking to make us His “peculiar treasure” by covenant (Exodus 19:5). For that reason, a good way to prepare to read the Old Testament is to learn about covenants—specifically the everlasting covenant God offered to ancient prophets like Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their posterity. And a great way to learn about covenants is to study President Russell M. Nelson’s message “The Everlasting Covenant” (Liahona, October 2022, 4–11).

As you read, ask yourself: Why are covenants important to me? What “special kind of love and mercy” do I receive from God as I keep my covenants with Him? As you read the Old Testament this year, be watching for things God wants to teach you about your covenant relationship with Him.

See also Jeremiah 31:31–34.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
I can learn of Jesus Christ in the Old Testament.
The words and culture of the Old Testament may be difficult for children to understand, but you can help them see Jesus Christ in symbols and stories. Perhaps you and your children could look at the image below, The Prophet Isaiah Foretells Christ’s Birth. Let your children point out details they see. Draw their attention, in particular, to the baby Jesus. Then you could read with them what Isaiah wrote about the Savior’s birth in Isaiah 7:14; 9:6. Share with your children how you feel about looking for the Savior in the Old Testament this year.

Isaiah writing on scroll about Christ’s birth
Isaiah Writes of Christ’s Birth (The Prophet Isaiah Foretells Christ’s Birth), by Harry Anderson

You and your children could also read Psalm 23 or Isaiah 53:3–9 and find words that remind you of Jesus Christ. What do these words teach us about His life and Atonement?

Heavenly Father wants to make covenants with me.
Covenants are a major theme in the Old Testament. To introduce this theme to your children, you could talk with them about promises they make and keep with family or friends and why keeping these promises is important. You could then look at a picture of a baptism and talk about the promise, or covenant, we make with God when we are baptized (see Mosiah 18:10, 13). You could also show a picture of the temple and share your feelings about the covenants we make there.

This week’s activity page could help your children be excited to make and keep covenants with Heavenly Father. You could also sing a song about making covenants, like “When I Am Baptized” (Children’s Songbook, 103).

Jesus Christ is Jehovah in the Old Testament.
Do your children know anyone who goes by different names in different settings? Perhaps a parent or teacher is addressed differently at work, at home, and at church. Talk about those names; then read Exodus 6:3 together and invite your children to find the names Jesus Christ was known by before He was born (see also the Joseph Smith Translation in footnote c).

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

people kneeling at the feet of Christ
Come unto Jesus, by Michael Malm

Primary activity page: Heavenly Father wants to make covenants with me
Open PDF
Feedback
