June 8–14. “The Lord Looketh on the Heart”: 1 Samuel 8–10; 13; 15–16








Jesus holding a staff
Beside Still Waters, by Simon Dewey

June 8–14: “The Lord Looketh on the Heart”

1 Samuel 8–10; 13; 15–16
Saul was a keeper of donkeys. Though tall and handsome, he was “little in [his] own sight” and self-conscious about his family heritage (see 1 Samuel 9:2–3, 21; 15:17). On the day he was to be presented before Israel as their king, he didn’t show up; he was so nervous he “hid himself” (1 Samuel 10:21–22). Looking at Saul, you might not have guessed that he would lead the Israelites to victory over their enemies—or that he would later become prideful and rebel against the Lord.

David was a keeper of sheep. He wasn’t as physically impressive as his seven older brothers. On the day Samuel came to choose a new king for Israel, it didn’t seem worthwhile to include David among the possible candidates, so he was left out in the fields with the sheep. Looking at David, you might not have guessed that he would have the faith and courage to defeat a giant and become Israel’s most successful king.

But the Lord sees past our labels, our physical appearance, our insecurities. He looks, instead, “on the heart” (1 Samuel 16:7). And even when our heart isn’t quite right, if we’re willing, He will give us “another heart” (1 Samuel 10:9).

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
1 Samuel 8

Jesus Christ is my King.
1 Samuel 8 tells of an event that would forever change the destiny of the Israelites. For protection against their enemies, the Israelites wanted what their neighbors had—a king to rule over them. As you read about their request and the Lord’s response, think about who you look to for safety and guidance. Consider what it means to let the Lord “reign over [you]” (1 Samuel 8:7).

Over the coming weeks, you will read about a number of kings called to lead Israel. As you learn about them, consider the following questions:

How were the Lord’s warnings fulfilled in 1 Samuel 8:10–18?

How were the children of Israel affected by their choice to have an earthly king?

How is Jesus Christ different from earthly kings? Consider what worldly influences you may need to remove from your life to let Christ be your King.

See also “Rejoice, the Lord Is King!,” Hymns, no. 66.

1 Samuel 9–10; 16:1–13

God calls people by prophecy to serve in His kingdom.
Read about how God chose Israel’s kings in 1 Samuel 9–10 and 16 (see especially 9:15–17; 10:1–12; 16:1–13). Look for passages that help you understand what it means to “be called of God, by prophecy” in the Lord’s Church today (Articles of Faith 1:5). You might consider putting yourself in the place of the leader extending the calling (Samuel), the person being called (Saul and David), and the people they are called to serve (the Israelites). What do you learn from their words and actions in these chapters?

Samuel anointing Saul
Illustration of Samuel anointing Saul, by P. Mann, © Lifeway Collection/licensed from goodsalt.com

1 Samuel 13:5–14; 15

“To obey is better than sacrifice.”
Considering how timid Saul seemed in 1 Samuel 10, it’s surprising to read about his “rebellion” and “stubbornness” after he became king (1 Samuel 15:23). Why do you think this happened? In 1 Samuel 13:5–14, what attitudes and behaviors do you see that led to his downfall?

In 1 Samuel 15, you’ll read about a commandment from the Lord that Saul didn’t obey because he thought he had a good reason. To learn from Saul’s poor choices, look at verse 22 and replace the words “sacrifice” and “fat of rams” with things that seem good but are not as important as hearing and obeying the Lord. How have you been blessed as you’ve put the Lord’s will first in your life?

1 Samuel 16:6–12

seminary icon“The Lord looketh on the heart.”
Have you ever made a decision based on “the outward appearance” of something or someone, only to find out that you were wrong? Maybe you ate something that wasn’t as good as it looked. Or maybe you judged someone unfairly.

When Samuel was looking for a new king of Israel, the Lord taught him a better way. Read about it in 1 Samuel 16:6–7, and consider making a list of ways people judge others “on the outward appearance.” You can find some examples in Elder Christophe G. Giraud-Carrier’s message “We Are His Children” (Liahona, Nov. 2023, 114–16). What does it mean to look “on the heart,” as the Lord does? (1 Samuel 16:7). You can find examples of this, too, in Elder Giraud-Carrier’s message. Maybe you can think of other times when the Savior looked past a person’s outward appearance. (See, for instance, Mark 12:41–44; Luke 5:1–11; 19:1–9; John 4:5–30; Moses 6:31–36.) What do you learn from these examples?

How can you follow the Savior’s example in the way you see others—and yourself? How might doing so affect your interactions with others? Consider telling someone about the goodness you see in their heart.

See also Ulisses Soares, “Brothers and Sisters in Christ,” Liahona, Nov. 2023, 70–73.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
1 Samuel 8

Jesus Christ is my King.
As you read 1 Samuel 8 with your children, help them find reasons Samuel told the Israelites that having a king was a bad idea. Why is it better to have Jesus Christ as our king? Maybe you could make a paper crown together and take turns wearing it and sharing something we can do to show that we want Jesus to be our King. (See also Jeremiah 23:5; Doctrine and Covenants 45:59.)

1 Samuel 8:6; 9:15–17; 10:1–24; 16:1–13

People who serve in the Church are called by God.
The accounts of God choosing Saul and David to be kings can help your children understand how people are called to serve in the Church today by revelation. To teach them these stories, you could write down events from the stories on strips of paper, and your children could put them in the correct order as you read the scripture passages together (see also “Young David” in Old Testament Stories, 110–11). Then you could talk about times when God blessed you with spiritual power to fulfill an assignment or calling (see 1 Samuel 10:9–10).



1:16
Young David

This might also be a good time to teach your children the fifth article of faith. Tell them how you received your calling in the Church. How do you know that you were called of God?

Samuel anointing David to be king
The Prophet Samuel Anoints David to Be King of Israel in Bethlehem, by Balage Balogh

1 Samuel 16:1–13

The Lord looks on the heart.
An object lesson could help your children understand the principle in 1 Samuel 16:7. For example, you could show them some food or a book with a wrapper or cover that doesn’t match its true contents. What do 1 Samuel 16:7 and this object lesson suggest about how we should view ourselves and other people? Sing a song that emphasizes this principle, such as “Love One Another” (Children’s Songbook, 136).

Use object lessons. When your children have something to see and touch related to a gospel principle, they’re more likely to remember it. For instance, as you read 1 Samuel 16:7 with them, you could let them help you find examples of optical illusions to illustrate the point that we should try to see as the Lord does—by looking “on the heart”—rather than judgments based on “the outward appearance.”

You and your children could share experiences in which you learned why you should “look on the heart,” not just “the outward appearance” (verse 7). You might also take turns telling each other about the good qualities you see in each other’s hearts.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Samuel speaking to Saul
Samuel Instructing Saul, by Ted Henninger

Primary activity page: The Lord looks on the heart
Open PDF
Feedback

