Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

October 26–November 1

Jeremiah 31–33; 36–38; Lamentations 1; 3

November 2–8

Ezekiel 1–3; 33–34; 36–37; 47

November 9–15

Daniel 1–7

November 16–22

Hosea 1–6; 10–14; Joel

November 23–29

Amos; Obadiah; Jonah

December

Appendixes


November 2–8. “A New Spirit Will I Put within You”: Ezekiel 1–3; 33–34; 36–37; 47








a watchman on a tower
November 2–8: “A New Spirit Will I Put within You”

Ezekiel 1–3; 33–34; 36–37; 47
Ezekiel was a prophet in exile. Along with other Israelites, he had been captured and sent to Babylon. In Jerusalem, Ezekiel would have been a priest serving in the temple. In Babylon, he was among “them of the captivity,” and he “sat where they sat” (Ezekiel 3:15), hundreds of miles from the beloved house of God and with little hope of returning. Then one day Ezekiel had a vision. He saw “the glory of the Lord” (Ezekiel 1:28)—not back in the temple at Jerusalem but there in Babylon among the exiles. The wickedness in Jerusalem, he learned, had become so severe that God’s presence was no longer there (see Ezekiel 8–11; 33:21).

And yet there’s something hopeful about Ezekiel’s message. Despite how far the covenant people had fallen, God had not totally abandoned them. If they would “hear the word of the Lord” (Ezekiel 37:4), what was once dead could be revived. Their “stony heart” could be replaced with “a new heart” (Ezekiel 36:26). And in the future, the Lord would establish a new temple and a new Jerusalem, “and the name of the city from that day shall be, The Lord is there” (Ezekiel 48:35).

For an overview of the book of Ezekiel, see “Ezekiel” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Ezekiel 3; 34

The Lord invites me to feed His sheep.
In Ezekiel 3 and 34, the Lord refers to leaders of His people as watchmen and shepherds. As you read these chapters, consider what these titles suggest about what it means to be a leader.

Who are the “sheep” the Lord wants you to feed? What do you find in Ezekiel 34 that could help someone preparing to serve a mission, raising children, or fulfilling a ministering assignment? How can you follow the Savior’s example as our shepherd? (see verses 11–31).

You might also ponder the symbolism you find in this chapter. What might the “good pasture” and “good fold” represent in verse 14? What’s the difference between a sheep who is “lost” and one who is “driven away”? (verse 16). What other symbols do you find?

See also John 21:15–17; Gerrit W. Gong, “Ministering,” Liahona, May 2023, 16–19.

Ezekiel 33:10–19

The Lord wants to forgive.
“If our … sins be upon us,” the captive Israelites wondered, “how should we then live?” (Ezekiel 33:10). In response, the Lord taught them about repentance and forgiveness. These questions might help you ponder what He taught:

What do you think it means to “trust to [your] own righteousness”? (see Ezekiel 33:12–13).

What would you say to someone who feels that the people described in Ezekiel 33:12–19 are not being treated fairly? (see also Matthew 21:28–31; Luke 18:9–14).

What do you find in these verses that helps you understand what it means to repent? What additional insights do you find in Ezekiel 36:26–27 and Alma 7:14–16?

Ezekiel 37

seminary iconThe Lord is gathering His people and giving them new life.
The gathering of Israel is portrayed in Ezekiel 37 through two symbols. As you read about the first one—dead bones being restored to life (see verses 1–14)—ponder what it suggests to you about gathering Israel on both sides of the veil (see also Ezekiel 36:24–30). Consider questions like these:

What is the Lord trying to accomplish through the gathering of Israel?

How is He accomplishing it?

You could ask yourself these same questions as you read about the second symbol, in verses 15–28. This symbol involves two sticks, which many scholars interpret as wooden writing boards joined by a hinge. The stick of Judah can represent the Bible (since much of the Bible was written by Judah’s descendants), and the stick of Joseph can represent the Book of Mormon (since Lehi’s family were descendants of Joseph of Egypt). With that in mind, what do these verses teach you about the role of the scriptures in the gathering of Israel?

Think about how the Bible and Book of Mormon have worked together in your life—in particular, to help you come to Christ. What passages have been especially meaningful to you?

See also 2 Nephi 3:11–13; 29:14; “Israel, Israel, God Is Calling,” Hymns, no. 7; Topics and Questions, “Bible,” “Book of Mormon,” Gospel Library; “The Book of Mormon Gathers Scattered Israel” (video), Gospel Library.



1:31
The Book of Mormon Gathers Scattered Israel

the Dead Sea surrounded by desert
In a vision, Ezekiel saw a river flow from the temple and heal the Dead Sea.

Ezekiel 47:1–12

I can find spiritual healing in the house of the Lord.
As you read Ezekiel 47:1–12, it might help to know that the Dead Sea is so salty that fish and plants can’t live in it. What impresses you about the waters described in verses 1–12? (see also Revelation 22:1). What might these waters symbolize? What could the trees described in verse 12 represent?

What does Elder Dale G. Renlund’s message “Family History and Temple Work: Sealing and Healing” add to your understanding? (see Ensign or Liahona, May 2018, 47–48). Ponder how you have found spiritual life and healing because of the temple.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Ezekiel 3:17; 33:1–5

Prophets are like watchmen who warn us of danger.
Young children might enjoy doing actions that go with Ezekiel 3:17. For example, they could point to their eyes, ears, and mouth when you read the words “watchman,” “hear,” and “mouth.” They might also like going on a hike—outdoors or just around the room. As they walk, warn them about things on the trail, like rivers to jump over, branches to duck under, or animals to avoid (real or pretend). This could lead to a conversation about how the Lord’s prophet warns us of dangers we cannot see.

Here’s another way to illustrate Ezekiel 3:17; 33:1–5. One of your children could pretend to be a “watchman” by looking out a window and telling everyone else what is happening outside. You could also watch the video “Watchman on the Tower” (ChurchofJesusChrist.org). How is our living prophet like a watchman for us?



4:17
Watchman on the Tower

Ezekiel holding two scrolls
The Prophet Ezekiel, by Lyle Beddes

Ezekiel 37:15–23

The Bible and the Book of Mormon help “gather” us to Jesus Christ.
After reading Ezekiel 37:15–23 together, you and your children could find two sticks and write on one For Judah (Bible) and on the other For Joseph (Book of Mormon). You could then share stories or scriptures from the Bible and Book of Mormon that help you feel closer to the Savior and become “[His] people” (verse 23). Why is it good to have both of these two books of scripture?

Don’t try to cover everything. You may not be able to explore every truth in Ezekiel with your children. Prayerfully consider what they need to understand, and seek spiritual guidance to determine what to focus on. (See Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 17.)

Ezekiel 47:1–12

Our hearts and families can find healing in the house of the Lord.
Ezekiel 47 describes Ezekiel’s vision of water flowing from the temple and healing the Dead Sea—a sea so salty that fish and plants cannot live in it. Maybe your children could each draw one or two objects from the vision, like a temple, a river, a desert, the Dead Sea, a multitude of fish, or a fruitful tree. Then, as you read verses 1–12 together, they could share their drawing when that object is mentioned. What blessings came from the river in this vision? Help the children see how these blessings are like the blessings the Savior offers those who keep temple covenants. The video “And the River Will Grow” (Gospel Library) can help.



3:43
And the River Will Grow

You could also sing together a song that describes temple blessings, such as “Families Can Be Together Forever” (Children’s Songbook, 188). What does this song teach about how the Lord blesses us in His holy house?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

a river flowing from the Jerusalem temple
“Behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house. … And every thing shall live whither the river cometh” (Ezekiel 47:1, 9). Image licensed by goodsalt.com

Primary activity page: Book of Mormon and the Bible “gather” us to Jesus Christ
Open PDF
Feedback
