Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

October 26–November 1

Jeremiah 31–33; 36–38; Lamentations 1; 3

November 2–8

Ezekiel 1–3; 33–34; 36–37; 47

November 9–15

Daniel 1–7

November 16–22

Hosea 1–6; 10–14; Joel

November 23–29

Amos; Obadiah; Jonah

December

Appendixes


November 9–15. “There Is No Other God That Can Deliver”: Daniel 1–7








Nebuchadnezzar listening intently to Daniel
Daniel Interprets Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream, by Grant Romney Clawson

November 9–15: “There Is No Other God That Can Deliver”

Daniel 1–7
Most likely no one will threaten to throw you into a fiery furnace or a den of lions because of your faith in Jesus Christ. But none of us get through this life without a trial of faith. So we can all benefit from the examples of people like Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who were taken captive as young men by the mighty Babylonian Empire (see 2 Kings 24:10–16). Surrounded by an unfamiliar culture with different values, they faced great temptations to abandon their beliefs and righteous traditions. Yet they remained true to their covenants. How did they do it? By doing those small and simple things God asks of all of us—praying, fasting, choosing good friends, trusting in Him, and being a light to others. Like Joseph in Egypt and Esther in Persia, Daniel and his friends in Babylon kept their faith in God, and God worked miracles that still inspire believers to this day.

For an overview of the book of Daniel, see “Daniel” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Daniel 1; 3; 6

seminary iconI can trust in the Lord when my faith is tried.
In a sense, we all live in Babylon. We often face temptations to compromise our standards and turn away from faith in Christ. As you read Daniel 1, 3, and 6, note the ways in which Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were pressured to do things they knew were wrong. How did they respond to these situations? (see Daniel 1:10–13; 3:15–18; 6:10). What were the results of their faith? What do you learn from these experiences that can help you trust in the Lord when you face opposition? Also consider the following questions:

When have you felt pressured to do something you knew was wrong? How has the Lord blessed you for keeping His commandments?

What if your faith doesn’t lead to the miracles you seek? (for an example, see Alma 14:8–13). Based on what you read in Daniel 3:13–18, how do you think Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego would have answered this question? How can their example affect how you approach your trials?

How can your righteous choices lead others to greater faith in the Lord? (see Daniel 2:47; 3:28–29). Ponder the effects that your choices may be having on others.

See also Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “Be Not Afraid, Only Believe,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2015, 76–79.

Try to involve everyone. The Savior “inviteth … all to come unto him and partake of his goodness” (2 Nephi 26:33). If you are teaching your family or a class, ponder ways you can give everyone an opportunity to participate in some way. For example, you could give each person a passage of scripture, a section of a conference message, or a verse from a hymn to ponder and comment on. Don’t pressure anyone to participate, but give them opportunities.

Shadrach, Meshach, Abed-nego, and a fourth figure in a furnace
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the Fiery Furnace, by William Maughan

Daniel 2

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the kingdom of God on earth.
Through revelation, Daniel saw that Nebuchadnezzar’s dream foretold future worldly kingdoms, as well as the future kingdom of God, which “shall never be destroyed” (Daniel 2:44). “The Church is that prophesied latter-day kingdom,” Elder D. Todd Christofferson taught, “not created by man but set up by the God of heaven and rolling forth as a stone ‘cut out of the mountain without hands’ to fill the earth” (“Why the Church,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2015, 111). Think about God’s latter-day kingdom as you read the descriptions of the stone in Daniel 2:34–35, 44–45. What is your role in helping this prophecy come to pass?

See also “Hark, All Ye Nations!,” Hymns, no. 264; “God Gave Them Knowledge” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org.



13:49
God Gave Them Knowledge

Daniel 2:1–30

Receiving revelation requires spiritual preparation.
As you review Daniel 2:1–15, consider how you would feel if you found yourself in Daniel’s position. What did Daniel do? (see Daniel 2:16–18). What can you learn from Daniel 1:17 about how God prepared Daniel? What can you learn from Daniel’s words and actions after he received the Lord’s help? (see Daniel 2:19–30).

Daniel 7:13–14

Jesus Christ is the Son of the Eternal Father.
During the Savior’s earthly ministry, many Jews considered the title “Son of man” from Daniel 7:13 to refer to the coming Messiah. What do you learn about the Messiah from Daniel 7:13–14? (see also Moses 6:57).

The Savior often referred to himself as “the Son of man.” Consider reviewing some examples: Matthew 25:31; Mark 9:31; 10:45. What is He teaching about Himself in these verses? In Mark 14:61–64, Jesus used this title on the last day of His mortal life. Note the reaction from the people who heard His declaration. How does Daniel’s prophecy about the Son of Man affect your feelings about what happened to Him in Mark 15?

Just as Jesus was hated for declaring that He was “the Son of man,” you might also face persecution for declaring the truth. Compare the prophecy in Daniel 7:13–14 with the promises in Doctrine and Covenants 121:29, 46.

See also Doctrine and Covenants 49:6; Guide to the Scriptures, “Son of Man,” Gospel Library.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Daniel 1; 3; 6

Jesus will help me do what is right even when it’s hard.
To help your children learn from the inspiring stories in the book of Daniel, you could find pictures of the events in Daniel 1, 3, and 6 (see this week’s activity page or the Gospel Art Book, nos. 23, 25, 26). Then you could place the pictures face down and invite a child to turn one over and talk about the story it represents. (For help, see “Daniel and His Friends,” “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego,” and “Daniel and the Lions’ Den” in Old Testament Stories, 154–56, 160–62, 163–65.)



1:39
Daniel and His Friends



1:39
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego



1:45
Daniel and the Lions’ Den

Help your children think of situations when they might be pressured to make a wrong choice, like Daniel and his friends were in Daniel 1, 3, and 6. Share with each other how you have been blessed for making the right choice even when it was hard. You could also sing together a song related to this topic, such as “Choose the Right” (Hymns, no. 239).

young men refusing to eat meat
Trusting the Wisdom of the Word

Daniel 1:1–17

Heavenly Father wants me to take care of my body.
Reading the story about Daniel and his friends refusing the king’s meat and wine may inspire a conversation about the law of health Heavenly Father has given us today (see Doctrine and Covenants 89). Maybe you could look for the blessings Daniel and his friends received and compare them to the blessings promised in the Word of Wisdom (see Daniel 1:15–17 and Doctrine and Covenants 89:18–21).

Daniel 2

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the kingdom of God on earth.
As you read Daniel 2:31–35, 44–45 with your children, you could invite them to draw a picture of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. Help them understand the stone in the dream represents The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. What do we learn about the Church from this dream? Your children could name some things Heavenly Father did to set up His Church in the latter days. If they need help, you could show pictures of events from the Restoration of the Church (see Gospel Art Book, nos. 90–95).

Daniel 6

Heavenly Father wants me to pray often.
Why was praying to Heavenly Father so important to Daniel? Perhaps you and your children could talk about that question as you read Daniel 6 together. Then you could tell each other why praying is important to you. Your children might enjoy drawing pictures of themselves praying in various situations. They could use their drawings to teach each other that we can pray to Heavenly Father no matter where we are or what we need.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Daniel standing before a group of lions
Daniel in the Lions’ Den, by Briton Rivière

Primary activity page: God will bless me as I choose to follow Jesus Christ
Open PDF
Feedback
