Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

January 26–February 1

Genesis 5; Moses 6

February 2–8

Moses 7

February 9–15

Genesis 6–11; Moses 8

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

The Covenant

February 16–22

Genesis 12–17; Abraham 1–2

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


February 2–8. “The Lord Called His People Zion”: Moses 7








Enoch having a vision about Jesus Christ
Enoch Sees the Meridian of Time, by Jennifer Paget

February 2–8: “The Lord Called His People Zion”

Moses 7
Throughout history, people have tried to achieve what Enoch and his people accomplished: building an ideal society where there is no poverty or violence. As God’s people, we share this desire. We call it building Zion, and it includes—in addition to caring for people in need and promoting peace—making covenants, dwelling together in righteousness, and becoming one with each other and with Jesus Christ, “the King of Zion” (Moses 7:53). If the world, your community, or your family isn’t quite what you want it to be, it’s helpful to ask, How did Enoch and his people do it? How did they become “of one heart and one mind” (Moses 7:18) despite the contention around them? Among the many details Moses 7 gives us about Zion, a particularly valuable one for Latter-day Saints might be this: Zion is not just a city—it is a condition of the heart and spirit. Zion, as the Lord has taught, is “the pure in heart” (Doctrine and Covenants 97:21). So perhaps the best way to build Zion is to start in our own hearts and homes.

study icon
Ideas for Learning and Home and at Church
Moses 7:16–21, 27, 53, 62–69

seminary iconI can help build Zion.
When the Prophet Joseph Smith first learned about Enoch and his City of Holiness, he was inspired. He “knew the day had come when the Lord would again establish Zion on the earth” (Saints, 1:108–9), and he started a lifelong quest to build Zion. Reading Moses 7 can inspire you to continue that effort today.

You might start by exploring the questions “What is Zion?” and “How is it different from the rest of the world?” Consider listing answers that come to you as you study Moses 7, in particular verses 16–21, 27, 53, 62–69.

Your answers to these questions might make it clear that we still have a lot of work to do to build Zion. So how do we do it? It might help to think about times when you felt you were “of one heart and one mind” with someone (Moses 7:18). Maybe it was in a ward, family, or group at work or school. What did people do to create righteous unity?

Here are some other resources that you could explore to find ideas and inspiration. Pick one or more to study, and then write down what you feel inspired to do to build Zion:

Philippians 2:1–4; 4 Nephi 1:15–18; Doctrine and Covenants 97:21; 105:5.

Ulisses Soares, “Brothers and Sisters in Christ,” Liahona, Nov. 2023, 70–73.

D. Todd Christofferson, “One in Christ,” Liahona, May 2023, 77–80.

“We Come Together and Unite as One” (video), Gospel Library.



6:21
We Come Together & Unite As One

Friends comforting each other in group class
God wants His people to be “of one heart and one mind” (Moses 7:18).

Moses 7:53

Jesus Christ is “the King of Zion.”
What does it mean to you to have Jesus Christ as your King? Note the other titles of Jesus Christ in this verse. What do they teach you about Him? What do you think it means to come “in at the gate and [climb] up by [Him]”?

See also “Come, O Thou King of Kings,” Hymns, no. 59.

Moses 7:28–69

God weeps—and rejoices—for His children.
Some people see God as a distant being who isn’t emotionally affected by what happens to us. Enoch gained a different view of God in the vision recorded in Moses 7. What did he learn about God—and what do you learn—in verses 28–40? Why do you think Enoch was surprised to see God weep? Why is it important to you to know that He does?

As the vision continued, Enoch wept too. But God also shared with him reasons to rejoice. Look for them in Moses 7:41–69. What do you learn from Enoch’s vision that can help you “lift up your heart, and be glad,” despite the “bitterness” in your life (verse 44)?

See also Jeffrey R. Holland, “The Grandeur of God,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2003, 70–73.

Moses 7:59–67

Jesus Christ will come again in the last days.
Enoch’s vision, especially what’s recorded in Moses 7:59–67, is one of history’s first prophecies of the Savior’s Second Coming. What impresses you about the way these verses describe the last days? For example, consider how you feel the prophecies from verse 62 are being fulfilled. What do these phrases teach you about God’s work in the latter days?

See also Henry B. Eyring, “Sisters in Zion,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2020, 67–69.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Moses 7:18–21, 62–63, 68–69

God wants us to be “of one heart and one mind.”
To help your children learn about Enoch and Zion, you could use “Enoch the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories (19–21) or the second verse of “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11). Then you could ask your children to help you retell the story in their own words. The pictures of Enoch in this outline might help.

Here’s one way to help your children understand what it means to be of “one heart and one mind” (Moses 7:18): Make a paper heart and cut it into pieces, enough for each child to have one. Let them write their name on their piece and work together to put the heart together. As they do, you might talk about things you love about each child.

mother hugging daughter
Help your children count how many times the word “Zion” appears in Moses 7:18–21, 62–63, 68–69. Each time they find the word, help them discover what the verse says about Zion (see also Guide to the Scriptures, “Zion,” Gospel Library). How can we be more like the people described in these verses?

Encourage personal scripture study. Whether you’re teaching your family at home or a class on Sunday, one of the best ways you can help others build lasting faith in Jesus Christ is to help them establish a habit of seeking personal experiences with the scriptures. Share the experiences you’re having with the scriptures, and encourage family or class members to share their experiences. When we hear about how reading the scriptures is blessing others, we are often inspired to seek these same blessings from the Lord. (See Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 25.)

Moses 7:32–33

Heavenly Father wants me to choose to follow Him.
To introduce Moses 7:32–33 to your children, you might talk to them about a choice they had to make recently. Then you could read the verses together to find out what Heavenly Father wants us to choose. What choices can we make to show that we choose Him? Perhaps your children could take turns acting out one of these choices while the others guess what the action represents.

Moses 7:59–67

Jesus will come back to earth.
In Moses 7:59, Enoch asks the Lord a question. Invite your children to find it, and then ask them to find the answer in verse 60. You might also talk with them about a time when they were expecting someone to return home. Ask them how they felt and what they did to get ready. How can we get ready for Jesus to return?

Consider showing pictures of times when the Savior appeared to people (such as Gospel Art Book, nos. 60, 82, 83, and 84). What are the people doing in the pictures? How might the people have felt when they met Jesus? You could also sing a song about the Savior’s Second Coming, such as “When He Comes Again” (Children’s Songbook, 82–83), and ask the children what they think it will be like when Jesus comes again. Let the children share how they feel about seeing Jesus when He comes again.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Enoch and people from the city of Zion being translated
City of Zion Translated, by Del Parson

Primary activity page: God wants us to love each other
Open PDF
Feedback
