July 27–August 2. “I Am Doing a Great Work”: Ezra 1; 3–7; Nehemiah 2; 4–6; 8








the walls of Jerusalem being rebuilt
I Have a Great Work to Do, by Tyson Snow

July 27–August 2: “I Am Doing a Great Work”

Ezra 1; 3–7; Nehemiah 2; 4–6; 8
The Jewish people had been captives in Babylonia for about 70 years. They had lost Jerusalem and the temple, and many had forgotten their commitment to God’s law. But God had not forgotten them. In fact, He had declared through His prophet, “I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return” (Jeremiah 29:10). True to this prophecy, the Lord made a way for His people to return—both to Jerusalem and, more importantly, to their covenants. And He raised up servants who accomplished “a great work” (Nehemiah 6:3): A governor named Zerubbabel oversaw the rebuilding of the house of the Lord. Ezra, a priest and scribe, helped the people turn their hearts back to the Lord’s law. And Nehemiah led the rebuilding of the protective walls around Jerusalem. They met opposition, but they also got help from unexpected sources. Their experiences can inform and inspire ours because we too are doing a great work. And like theirs, our work has much to do with the house of the Lord, the law of the Lord, and the spiritual protection we find in Him.

For an overview of the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, see “Ezra” and “Nehemiah” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Ezra 1

The Lord inspires people to accomplish His purposes.
After Persia conquered Babylonia, the Lord inspired the Persian king, Cyrus, to send a group of Jews to Jerusalem to rebuild the temple. As you read Ezra 1, note what Cyrus did to support the Jews in this important work. How do you see the Lord working through men and women around you, including people who are not members of His Church? What does this suggest to you about the Lord and His work?

See also Isaiah 44:24–28.

Ezra 3:8–13; 6:16–22

The house of the Lord is a place of joy.
When the Babylonians invaded Jerusalem, they plundered the temple and burned it to the ground (see 2 Kings 25:1–10; 2 Chronicles 36:17–19). How do you think you might have felt if you had been one of the Jews who witnessed this? (see Psalm 137). Notice how the Jews felt, decades later, when they were allowed to return and rebuild the temple (see Ezra 3:8–13; 6:16–22). That might prompt you to ponder your own feelings about the Lord and His house. Why is the building of a temple a reason to celebrate?

priests outside the temple of Zerubbabel
The temple of Zerubbabel; illustration by Sam Lawlor

Ezra 4–7; Nehemiah 2; 4; 6

seminary iconGod has an important work for me to do.
The Lord’s work rarely goes unopposed. This was true of the efforts led by Zerubbabel and Nehemiah. Here’s a simple approach that can help you learn from these stories and consider how you can do the Lord’s work despite opposition:

God’s work for Zerubbabel (Ezra 4:3):

Create a Note
God’s work for Nehemiah (Nehemiah 2:17–18):

Create a Note
God’s work for me:

Create a Note
Opposition Zerubbabel faced (Ezra 4:4–24):

Create a Note
Opposition Nehemiah faced (Nehemiah 2:19; 4:1–3, 7–8; 6:1–13):

Create a Note
Opposition I face:

Create a Note
How Zerubbabel responded (Ezra 5:1–2):

Create a Note
How Nehemiah responded (Nehemiah 2:20; 4:6, 9; 6:3–15):

Create a Note
How I can respond:

Create a Note
For help comparing Nehemiah’s experience to your life, you might study President Dieter F. Uchtdorf’s message “We Are Doing a Great Work and Cannot Come Down” (Ensign or Liahona, May 2009, 59–62), especially the last two sections. As you think about the work God has given you, you might study the “Young Women Theme” or the “Aaronic Priesthood Quorum Theme” (Gospel Library). Or you could look in a hymn like “As Sisters in Zion” (Hymns, no. 309) or “Ye Elders of Israel” (Hymns, no. 319).

What do you think it means to have “a mind to work” in the service of the Savior? (Nehemiah 4:6). What might it mean to have “the good hand of … God upon [you]” as you do His work? (Nehemiah 2:8; see also Nehemiah 2:18; Ezra 7:6, 9, 27–28). How have you seen His hand in your efforts to serve Him?

Nehemiah 8

I am blessed when I study the scriptures.
For generations in captivity, the Jews had limited access to “the book of the law of Moses” (Nehemiah 8:1). In Nehemiah 8, Ezra read the law to the people. What do you find in this chapter that shows how Ezra and his people felt about God and His word? (see especially verses 1–12). What in your life shows how you feel about God and His word?

See also Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Ezra Taft Benson (2014), 115–24.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Ezra 3:8–13; 6:16–22

The house of the Lord is a place of joy.
To teach your children about the joy the Jews felt when their temple was rebuilt, you could show them a picture like the one below. Talk about why these people might be happy to be at the house of the Lord. You could also tell your children why the temple is a place of joy for you. How has the temple helped you feel closer to Heavenly Father and the Savior?

As you read Ezra 3:10–13 with your children, help them find words that show how the Jews felt when the temple was being rebuilt. When you get to the end of verse 13, maybe you could shout for joy together. Help your children think of reasons to be joyful that the Lord has given us temples. How can we show that joy?

Consider singing a song about the temple with your children, such as the second verse of “Welcome Home” (Gospel Library). After each line, you could pause to ask a child to share something he or she loves about the temple. You might also look at pictures of temples while you sing.

a smiling family walking near a temple
Nehemiah 2:17–20; 6:1–9

The Lord will help me do His “great work.”
Share with your children the story of Nehemiah (see Nehemiah 2:17–20; 6:1–9; or “Nehemiah” in Old Testament Stories, 173–74). As you read Nehemiah 2:20, you and your children could “arise” and pretend to help build the walls of Jerusalem. Or your children might enjoy building a wall with blocks or other objects. As they do, you could help them think of important things Heavenly Father wants us to do.



1:38
Nehemiah

As you read Nehemiah 6:9, invite your children to raise their hands when they hear you say “strengthen my hands.” Tell the children about a time when you felt God strengthen your hands to do His work.

Nehemiah 8:1–12

The scriptures are a blessing.
Read aloud some phrases from Nehemiah 8:2–3, 5–6, 8–9, 12 that describe what the people did when they heard Ezra read the scriptures. As you read, your children could act out these phrases. Then you could share with each other how you feel when you read or hear the scriptures.

As you read together Nehemiah 8:8, you could ask your children what helps them understand the scriptures. Show them how to use scripture study aids like the Guide to the Scriptures and Topics and Questions (Gospel Library). Invite your children to share something they have learned about the Savior from the scriptures.

Look for eternal truth in the scriptures. “The scriptures … are filled with gospel truths, but sometimes it takes conscious effort to find them. As you are learning together from the scriptures, stop and ask those you teach what gospel truths they notice. Help them see how these truths relate to Heavenly Father’s plan of salvation. Sometimes eternal truths are stated in the scriptures, and sometimes they are illustrated in the stories and lives of the people we read about. It can also be helpful to explore together the historical background of the verses you are reading, as well as the meaning of the verses and how they apply to us today” (Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 22).

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Ezra reading a scroll
Ezra at the Water Gate, © Providence Collection/licensed from goodsalt.com

Primary activity page: The scriptures are a blessing
Open PDF
Feedback

