June 1–7. “My Heart Rejoiceth in the Lord”: Ruth; 1 Samuel 1–7








Ruth and Naomi traveling together
Whither Thou Goest, by Sandy Freckleton Gagon

June 1–7: “My Heart Rejoiceth in the Lord”

Ruth; 1 Samuel 1–7
Sometimes we imagine that our lives should follow a clear path from beginning to end. The shortest distance between two points is a straight line, after all. And yet life is often full of delays and detours that take us in unexpected directions.

Ruth and Hannah surely understood this. Ruth was not an Israelite, but she married one, and when her husband died, she had a choice to make. Would she return to her family and her old, familiar life, or would she embrace the Israelite faith and a new home with her mother-in-law? (see Ruth 1:4–18). Hannah’s plan for her life was to bear children, but she could not, and that left her “in bitterness of soul” (see 1 Samuel 1:1–10). As you read about Ruth and Hannah, consider the faith they must have had to travel their unexpected paths. Then think about your own journey. It’s different from Ruth’s and Hannah’s—and anyone else’s. But throughout the trials and surprises between here and your eternal destination, you can learn to say with Hannah, “My heart rejoiceth in the Lord” (1 Samuel 2:1).

See also the Bible Dictionary for an overview of the books of Ruth and 1 Samuel.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Ruth

Jesus Christ can turn tragedy into triumph.
Life is hard for a widow in any era. But when Ruth’s husband died, her situation was especially hard. In Israelite culture at the time, a woman without a husband or sons had no right to property and very few ways to earn a living. As you read Ruth’s story, notice how the Lord turned tragedy into great blessings. What do you notice about Ruth that might have helped her? How did Boaz redeem Ruth from her desperate situation? (see Ruth 4:4–10). How were both Ruth and Boaz like Jesus Christ?

See also “Be Still, My Soul,” Hymns, no. 124.

Ruth; 1 Samuel 1

I can trust that God will guide and help me regardless of my situation.
Perhaps you have suffered a great loss, as Ruth and Naomi did (see Ruth 1:1–5). Or maybe, like Hannah, you long for blessings you have not yet received (see 1 Samuel 1:1–10). How did these women show their faith in God? What do you learn from their examples?

Of course, not everyone who prays for a child receives one, and not everyone whose spouse dies remarries. But everyone who turns to the Savior receives His help and guidance. Consider how you have “come to trust” the Lord (Ruth 2:12) during your difficult times.

See also Amy A. Wright, “Abide the Day in Christ,” Liahona, Nov. 2023, 9–11.

Hannah and her child
For This Child I Prayed, by Elspeth Young

1 Samuel 2; 4–7

To receive the Lord’s help, I need to trust Him and obey His commandments.
When their enemies attacked, the Israelites apparently thought that simply possessing the ark of the covenant would protect them. As you read 1 Samuel 4–6, think about why that didn’t work. (Note also the unrighteous actions of Eli’s sons, who served as priests in the tabernacle, in 1 Samuel 2:12–25.) What do you think the Lord was trying to teach His people? What do you learn from what happened to the Philistines after capturing the ark? (see chapters 5–6). What do you learn from Israel’s efforts to regain the Lord’s protection in 1 Samuel 7?

You might be inspired by reading Hannah’s poem of praise in 1 Samuel 2:1–10. What do you find in her words that could have helped Eli’s sons and the rest of the Israelites?

1 Samuel 3

seminary iconI can hear and obey the voice of the Lord.
At times, you may feel like Samuel, who heard the voice of the Lord but did not recognize it. Like all of us, Samuel had to learn how to recognize the Lord’s voice. As you study 1 Samuel 3, what do you learn from this young boy about hearing and obeying the Lord’s voice? You might also search these additional scriptures and make a list of guidelines that can help a person recognize the Lord’s voice: 1 Kings 19:11–12; Luke 24:15–32; 3 Nephi 11:3–7; Doctrine and Covenants 6:22–23; 8:2–3; 9:7–9.

Other times, you may feel that the heavens are shut and that God does not want to communicate with you. President Russell M. Nelson said, “Does God really want to speak to you? Yes!” (“Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2018, 93–96). As you study President Nelson’s message, what do you find that inspires you to hear and obey the voice of the Lord? What does President Nelson invite you to do, and what blessings does he promise? You can also find invitations and promised blessings about revelation in “Walk in God’s light” (For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices, 16–20). Consider choosing one thing you can do to “increase your spiritual capacity to receive revelation.”

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Ruth

I can show love and kindness to people around me.
As you share with your children the story of Ruth (you could use “Ruth and Naomi” in Old Testament Stories, 100–103), invite them to raise their hands every time they hear an act of kindness in the story. They could also share how they feel when others are kind to them, or when they are kind to others. How has the Savior been kind to us? How can we follow His example? (see “Kindness Begins with Me,” Children’s Songbook, 145).



2:0
Ruth and Naomi

Ruth; 1 Samuel 1

I can have faith in the Lord.
The stories of Ruth and Hannah can inspire your children to stay faithful during hard times. Consider helping them create a simple chart with the headings Trials, Actions, Blessings. Then you could read together Ruth 1:3–5, 8, 16; 2:1–3, 8–12; 4:13–17; 1 Samuel 1:1–18 and write under the headings what they find in these verses. How did Ruth and Hannah show their faith in the Lord? You or your children could then share examples of how the Lord has blessed you during hard times.

1 Samuel 1:1–18

Heavenly Father hears and answers my prayers.
To learn about Hannah, your children could read 1 Samuel 1:1–18 or “Hannah” in Old Testament Stories (104–5) or watch “Hannah’s Faith” (video, Gospel Library). It might be fun to toss a ball to a child and invite them to tell part of the story before passing the ball to someone else. What do we learn about prayer from Hannah’s example?



1:15
Hannah



3:9
Hannah's Faith

Samuel and Eli
Samuel Tells Eli the Truth, by Robert T. Barrett

1 Samuel 3:1–10

I can hear and obey the Lord’s voice.
Perhaps a simple role-play could help your children learn from Samuel’s experience with revelation. One child could pretend to be Samuel, and another could pretend to be Eli as you read 1 Samuel 3:1–10 (see also “Samuel the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories, 106–9, or the video “Samuel and Eli,” Gospel Library). What do we learn from Samuel about how to hear the voice of the Lord? How do we show that we are willing to hear when the Lord speaks to us?



2:10
Samuel the Prophet



1:58
Samuel and Eli

Ask your children how they would explain to someone how the Lord speaks to them. You could help them look for answers in Doctrine and Covenants 6:22–23; 8:2–3; 9:7–9.

Help your children learn to recognize the Spirit. It’s not easy to discern between our own feelings and the Holy Ghost. Everyone struggles with this from time to time. Take every opportunity you can to help your children recognize when they are feeling the influence of the Spirit. For example, as you read 1 Samuel 3:1–10 and the suggested verses in the Doctrine and Covenants, you could share experiences in which the Lord has taught you in your mind and heart.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Samuel waking up in bed
Boy Samuel Called by the Lord, by Harry Anderson

Primary activity page: Heavenly Father hears and answers my prayers
Open PDF
Feedback

