May 25–31. “The Lord Raised Up a Deliverer”: Judges 2–4; 6–8; 13–16








Deborah the Prophetess
“I Will Surely Go with Thee”—Deborah the Prophetess, by Des Leavitt

May 25–31: “The Lord Raised Up a Deliverer”

Judges 2–4; 6–8; 13–16
We all know what it’s like to sin, feel bad about it, and then repent and resolve to change our ways. But too often we forget our earlier resolve, and, when temptation comes, we find ourselves committing the same sin. This pattern appears frequently in the book of Judges. Influenced by the beliefs and worship practices of the Canaanites—whom they were supposed to drive out of the land—the Israelites broke their covenants with the Lord and turned away from worshipping Him. As a result, they lost His protection and fell into captivity. And yet each time this happened, the Lord gave His covenant people the chance to repent and raised up a deliverer, a military leader called a “judge.” Not all of the judges in the book of Judges were righteous, but some of them exercised great faith in delivering the children of Israel and restoring them to their covenant relationship with the Lord. These stories remind us that no matter what has led us away from Jesus Christ, He is the Redeemer of Israel and is always willing to deliver us and welcome us back as we return to Him.

For an overview of the book of Judges, see “Judges, book of” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Judges 2:1–19; 3:5–12

The Lord forgives as often as I repent.
The book of Judges can be both a warning and an encouragement. Look for this warning and encouragement as you read Judges 2:1–19; 3:5–12. How do you feel the warning and encouragement apply to you?

For example, if Judges 2:19 were about you and your temptations rather than about the ancient Israelites, what might it say? If Judges 3:9 were about what the Lord had done to deliver you, what might it say?

Consider reading the question and answer on page 9 of For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices. How do you feel this applies to the Israelites’ experience in the book of Judges? What does this teach you about Jesus Christ?

Judges 4:1–15

seminary iconI can inspire others to have faith in the Lord.
Sometimes the faith of one person can inspire faith in many others. In Judges 4, that one person was Deborah. Read about her in Judges 4:1–15, and note the influence she had on people around her. Here are some questions to help you consider how her experience might apply to your life:

How would you describe the conditions the Israelites were in at the time? (see verses 1–3). What similarities do you see to conditions today—in individuals and society?

What words or actions of Deborah show you that she had faith in the Lord? How did her faith influence others? What else impresses you about her?

What do you think Deborah meant by her question in verse 14: “Is not the Lord gone out before thee?” How does the Lord “go out before” you? (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:87–88).

young women walking together
Ponder how your faith in Jesus Christ could bless others the way Deborah’s faith blessed Barak and the other Israelites. To help you think about this, you might study Elder Neil L. Andersen’s message “We Talk of Christ” (Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2020, 88–91). Search the message for (1) reasons to speak more openly about the Savior and (2) ways to do it.

Then you might make a list of things you know about Jesus Christ—from the scriptures, from words of living prophets, and from your personal experience. Who needs to know this? How will you share it?

See also Matthew 5:14–16; 1 Peter 3:15; “Each Life That Touches Ours for Good,” Hymns, no. 293.

Invite sharing. If you are a teacher—at home or at church—“give learners opportunities to share with each other what they are learning about the Savior and His gospel. Doing this will help them internalize the truths they are taught and express them” (Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 26). For example, when studying Judges 4 together, you could give each learner something specific to look for in the chapter and then invite them to share with each other what they find.

Judges 6–8

The Lord can work miracles when I trust in His ways.
As you read Judges 6–8, make note of instances where the Lord asked Gideon to believe something that might have seemed unlikely. Has He ever asked something similar of you?

What do you feel the Lord is trying to teach you with this account? How have you seen the Lord do His work in ways that seemed unlikely?

Judges 13–16

God strengthens me as I am faithful to my covenants.
Samson lost both his physical strength and his spiritual strength because he violated his covenants with God, including those that applied specifically to Nazarites (for information about the Nazarites, see Numbers 6:1–6; Judges 13:7). As you read about Samson in Judges 13–16, note verses that show that the Lord was with Samson, as well as verses showing that Samson was not fully committed to the Lord.

You might also ponder the covenants you have made with the Lord. How have these covenants brought His power into your life? What do you learn from Samson’s experiences that inspires you to stay true to your covenants with God?

Sister Ann M. Dibb taught: “Samson was born with great potential. His mother was promised, ‘He shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines’ [Judges 13:5]. But as Samson grew, he looked more to the world’s temptations than to God’s direction. He made choices because they ‘pleaseth [him] well’ [Judges 14:3] rather than because those choices were right. Repeatedly, the scriptures use the phrase ‘and he went down’ [Judges 14:7] as they tell of Samson’s journeys, actions, and choices. Instead of arising and shining forth to fulfill his great potential, Samson was overcome by the world, lost his God-given power, and died a tragic, early death” (“Arise and Shine Forth,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2012, 118).

See also Dallin H. Oaks, “Covenants and Responsibilities,” Liahona, May 2024, 93–96; Ulisses Soares, “Covenant Confidence through Jesus Christ,” Liahona, May 2024, 17–21.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Because this Sunday is the first Sunday of the month, Primary teachers are encouraged to use learning activities in “Appendix B: Preparing Children for a Lifetime on God’s Covenant Path.”

Judges 3:7–9, 12–15

Jesus Christ is my Deliverer.
Judges 3 describes a pattern that teaches about the Savior’s power to deliver us from sin. To help your children identify this pattern, you could write down these phrases: “did evil,” “cried unto the Lord,” and “raised up a deliverer.” Then your children could look for these phrases in Judges 3:7–9 and Judges 3:12–15. What do we learn about the Lord from this pattern?

To emphasize that Jesus Christ is our Deliverer, you could gather several pictures of people, including a picture of Jesus, and place them face down. Let your children take turns flipping over the pictures. When they find the picture of Jesus, sing a song about Him, such as “He Sent His Son” (Children’s Songbook, 34–35), and tell your children about how He has delivered you.

Judges 4:1–15

I can inspire others to have faith in the Lord.
You can use “Deborah the Prophetess” in Old Testament Stories, 92–95, to tell your children the story in Judges 4. Share with each other what you admire about Deborah. How did her faith in the Lord bless the people around her? What can we do to help others have more faith in Jesus Christ?



2:9
Deborah the Prophetess

Judges 7:1–21

The Lord can use small things to do great work.
Use Judges 7:4–7, this week’s activity page, or “The Army of Gideon” in Old Testament Stories, 96–99, to teach your children about how the Lord made Israel’s army smaller. Why did the Lord want Gideon’s army to be so small? (see Judges 7:2).



2:37
The Army of Gideon

Your children could draw pictures of a sword, shield, trumpet, lamp, and pitcher and talk about which of these objects they would want in a battle. Then they could read Judges 7:16 to learn what the Lord told Gideon’s army to use. As you read about the battle in Judges 7:19–21, share with each other what you learn about the Lord from this story.

Samson pushing down the pillars of the temple
Samson Puts Down the Pillars, by James Tissot and others

Judges 13:5

Keeping covenants gives me strength.
Samson’s covenants with the Lord gave him physical strength, just as our covenants give us spiritual strength. Your children might enjoy doing some physical exercises and discussing how those exercises can help make our bodies strong. How does keeping our covenants make our spirits strong? (see Mosiah 18:8–10; Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, 79).

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

members of Gideon’s army blowing their horns
Gideon’s Army, by Daniel A. Lewis

Primary activity page: The Lord can use small things to do great work
Open PDF
Feedback

