January 26–February 1. “Teach These Things Freely unto Your Children”: Genesis 5; Moses 6








Adam and Eve
Better Than Paradise, by Kendal Ray Johnson

January 26–February 1: “Teach These Things Freely unto Your Children”

Genesis 5; Moses 6
Most of Genesis 5 is a list of the generations between Adam and Eve and Noah. We read a lot of names, but we don’t learn much about them. Then we read this intriguing but unexplained line: “And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him” (Genesis 5:24). Surely there’s a story behind that verse! But without further explanation, the list of generations resumes.

Thankfully, Moses 6 reveals the details of Enoch’s story—and it’s quite a story. We learn of Enoch’s humility, his insecurities, the potential God saw in him, and the great work he performed as God’s prophet. We also get a clearer picture of the family of Adam and Eve as it progressed through the generations. We read of Satan’s “great dominion” but also of parents who taught children “the ways of God” (Moses 6:15, 21). Especially precious is what we learn about the doctrine these parents taught: faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost (see Moses 6:50–52). That doctrine, like the priesthood that accompanies it, “was in the beginning [and] shall be in the end of the world also” (Moses 6:7).

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Moses 6:26–36

Sin limits my ability to see, feel, and hear the things of God.
As you study Moses 6:26–36, what do you learn about the effects of sin? How have you seen these effects? What attributes did Enoch have that helped him overcome these effects? How did God bless him as a result?

Moses 6:26–47

seminary icon God calls me to do His work despite my weaknesses.
If you ever feel overwhelmed with what the Lord has called you to do, you aren’t alone. Even Enoch felt that way when the Lord called him to be a prophet. As you read Moses 6:26–36, look for why Enoch felt overwhelmed and what the Lord said to give him courage.

In verses 37–47, you could look for ways the Lord supported Enoch and empowered him to do His work (see also Moses 7:13). You might compare Enoch’s experience with that of other prophets who felt inadequate, such as Moses (see Exodus 4:10–16), Jeremiah (see Jeremiah 1:4–10), Nephi (see 2 Nephi 33:1–4), and Moroni (see Ether 12:23–29). What do you feel God wants you to learn from these scriptures about the work He has given you to do?

Enoch praying
A Seer Hath the Lord Raised Up (Moses 6:36), by Eva Timothy

Many modern-day apostles and prophets have expressed feelings similar to Enoch’s when they described how it felt to receive their calls. For example, see the testimony of Elder Ulisses Soares in “Prophets Speak by the Power of the Holy Spirit” (Liahona, May 2018, 98–99).

What can you learn from these prophets and apostles about your feelings of inadequacy? When have you felt the Savior help you when He asked you to do hard things? Consider writing down a few experiences in your future when you will need to rely on the Savior’s help. How can you approach these events with faith in Jesus Christ?

See also David A. Bednar, “Abide in Me, and I in You; Therefore Walk with Me,” Liahona, May 2023, 123–25; “I’ll Go Where You Want Me to Go,” Hymns, no. 270.

Moses 6:48–68

The gospel of Jesus Christ was taught from the beginning.
Because we have the book of Moses, we know that God has been teaching His children how to find redemption ever since Adam and Eve. As you study Moses 6:48–68, search for what we must know and do to be redeemed. Notice Adam’s question in verse 53. Have you ever wondered that? What do you learn from the Lord’s answer in verses 53–65? You might think of these verses as the Lord’s message at Adam’s baptismal service. What do you learn about baptism from His message? Why do you think He compared baptism to being “born again”? (verse 59). What can you do to continue to be “born again” throughout your life?

Look for symbols. In the scriptures, objects or events can often represent or symbolize spiritual truths, especially truths about the Savior (see Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 7). These symbols can enrich your understanding of Him and His doctrine. For instance, what do you learn from the symbols of hearts and ears in Moses 6:27, eyes and clay in Moses 6:35, or water in Moses 6:59–60?

Moses 6:51–62

“Teach these things freely unto your children.”
After teaching Adam truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ, in Moses 6:51–63, the Lord told Adam to teach them to future generations. Consider making a list of these truths. (It might help to divide the passage into smaller groups of verses, such as verses 51–52, 53–57, 58–60, 61–63). Why are these truths valuable to today’s rising generation? What else can you learn from the Lord’s instructions to parents in Mosiah 4:14–15 and Doctrine and Covenants 68:25–28; 93:40–50?

Reading about the “book of remembrance” that Adam and Eve’s family kept may inspire you or your family to make your own book of remembrance. What do you feel the Lord would want you to include? Consider saving information from your book of remembrance on FamilySearch.org.

See also Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “Jesus Christ Is the Strength of Parents,” Liahona, May 2023, 55–59; “Parenting: Touching the Hearts of Our Youth,” “But Why?” (videos), Gospel Library.



3:2
Parenting: Touching the Hearts of Our Youth



1:1
But Why?

family reading scriptures together
For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Moses 6:26–34

God can help me do hard things.
When Enoch was called to preach the gospel, he worried that he would fail. But God helped him. Read together this story in Moses 6:26–34 (see also “Enoch the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories, 19–21). Why did Enoch feel that he couldn’t preach the gospel? (see Moses 6:31). How did God help Enoch? (see Moses 6:32–34; 7:13).

Your children might enjoy sharing or acting out other examples of when God helped people do difficult things—for example, Noah, David, Ammon, or Samuel the Lamanite (see Gospel Art Book, nos. 7, 19, 78, 81). You could also share an experience of your own and let your children talk about how God helps them do hard things.

Moses 6:50–62

Faith in Christ, repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost prepare me to return to God.
God taught Adam what we need to do to return to Him—have faith in Jesus Christ, repent, be baptized, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Help your children find these principles in Moses 6:52, 57. Then you could help them write a short talk about one of the principles. Each talk could include a scripture from Moses 6, an experience, and a testimony. Let them share their talks with each other.

You could also display pictures that represent the first principles of the gospel (see the fourth article of faith). Place them in a line leading to a picture of Jesus Christ. As you read Moses 6:52, your children could stand next to the correct picture when they hear the words the picture represents.

Your children might enjoy singing songs that teach the principles in Moses 6:52, such as “Faith,” “When I Am Baptized,” and “The Holy Ghost” (Children’s Songbook, 96–97, 103, 105). Help them find these principles in Moses 6:52.

Moses 6:57–58

Heavenly Father wants parents to teach their children.
To encourage your children to support their parents in their role as gospel teachers, consider asking a child to read Moses 6:58 and identify the commandment God gave to parents. Then you could show a picture of Adam and Eve teaching their children (like the one at the end of this outline) and let your children talk about what they see in the picture. Your children could draw pictures of their families reading the scriptures together, praying together, or playing together.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Adam and Eve teaching their children under a tree
Adam and Eve Teaching Their Children, by Del Parson

Primary activity page: The gospel teaches me how to return to Heavenly Father
Open PDF
Feedback

