Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

March

April

May

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

The Tabernacle and Sacrifice

April 27–May 3

Exodus 35–40; Leviticus 1; 4; 16; 19

May 4–10

Numbers 11–14; 20–24; 27

May 11–17

Deuteronomy 6–8; 15; 18; 29–30; 34

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

The Historical Books in the Old Testament

May 18–24

Joshua 1–8; 23–24

May 25–31

Judges 2–4; 6–8; 13–16

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


May 18–24. “Be Strong and of a Good Courage”: Joshua 1–8; 23–24








Moses blessing Joshua
Moses Ordaining Joshua, by Darrell Thomas (detail)

May 18–24: “Be Strong and of a Good Courage”

Joshua 1–8; 23–24
It had taken several generations, but the Lord’s promise was about to be fulfilled: the children of Israel were finally going to inherit the promised land. But in their way stood the Jordan River, the walls of Jericho, and a mighty people who had rejected the Lord (see 1 Nephi 17:35). And they would have to face all of that without their beloved leader Moses. The situation may have made some Israelites feel weak and fearful, but the Lord said, “Be strong and of a good courage.” What reason did they have to be courageous? It wasn’t because of their own strength—or even Moses’s or Joshua’s—but because “the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest” (Joshua 1:9). When we have our own rivers to cross and walls to bring down, wonderful things can happen in our lives because “the Lord will do wonders among [us]” (Joshua 3:5).

For an overview of the book of Joshua, see “Joshua, book of” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Joshua 1:1–9

God will be with me as I strive to be faithful to Him.
Imagine what it might have been like for Joshua to be called to replace Moses. Notice what the Lord said in Joshua 1:1–9 to encourage him. Think about the difficult challenges you face; what in these verses gives you courage?

The name Joshua (Yehoshua or Yeshua in Hebrew) means “Jehovah saves.” And the name Jesus comes from Yeshua. So as you read about Joshua, consider his role in leading the children of Israel across the Jordan River and into the promised land. How was his mission similar to what Christ does for us?

Joshua 1:8

seminary iconThe word of God can make my way prosperous.
As He encouraged Joshua, the Lord gave counsel in Joshua 1:8 about the scriptures, or “the word of the law.” Considering Joshua’s heavy responsibility, why might this counsel have been especially helpful?

When the Lord invites us to read the scriptures, He often uses words that go beyond just reading. He also promises great blessings. The table below can help you discover these invitations and promised blessings:

Invitation

Promised blessings

Joshua 1:8

Meditate day and night


1 Nephi 15:23–24



2 Nephi 32:3



Mosiah 1:7


Prosper in the land

Helaman 3:29–30



Doctrine and Covenants 84:85



Russell M. Nelson, “Hear Him,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2020, last paragraph on page 89



How has the Lord fulfilled these promises in your life? Now may be a good time to evaluate your scripture study habits. What’s going well? What do you feel inspired to do to have more meaningful experiences with the word of God?

See also “As I Search the Holy Scriptures,” Hymns, no. 277.

Joshua 2

Both faith and works are necessary for salvation.
New Testament Christians saw Rahab as an example of the power of both faith and works (see Hebrews 11:31; James 2:25). As you read Joshua 2, consider the role of Rahab’s faith and works in saving herself, her family, and the Israelite spies. What does this teach you about how your faith in Christ and your works can influence yourself and others?

Rahab looking out a window
Rahab at her window. Waiting for the Promise, by Elspeth Young (detail)

Joshua 3–4

With faith in Jesus Christ, I can experience God’s “wonders.”
The Lord worked wonders among His people as He led them into the promised land, and He can do the same for you. Here are some questions to guide your study of Joshua 3–4:

Why do you think the Israelites needed to sanctify themselves before they crossed the Jordan River? (see Joshua 3:5).

Note that the river parted only after “the feet of the priests … were dipped in the brim of the water” (Joshua 3:13, 15). Why is that significant?

Several other significant events happened at the Jordan River—see 2 Kings 2:6–15; 5:1–14; and Mark 1:9–11. What connections do you see between these events?

How has the Lord done “wonders” in your life? (Joshua 3:5). How can you experience—or recognize—those wonders more often? (for example, see Joshua 3:17).

Joshua 6–8

Obedience invites God’s power into my life.
Joshua 6–8 deals with battles over the lands of Jericho and Ai. As you read these chapters, consider how you battle temptation (for example, see Joshua 7:10–13). What do you learn about how God can help you and what you need to do to access His power? For example, what impresses you about the Lord’s instructions for taking Jericho? (see Joshua 6:1–5). Perhaps the account in Joshua 7 will inspire you to determine if “there is an accursed thing” in your life that you need to remove (Joshua 7:13).

Joshua 23–24

“Choose you this day whom ye will serve.”
Joshua’s final teachings to the Israelites in Joshua 23–24 include important warnings, counsel, and promised blessings. Perhaps you could make a list of what you find. Considering everything the Israelites had been through, why do you think Joshua chose to tell them these things at the end of his life? What do you find that inspires you to “cleave unto the Lord”? (Joshua 23:8).

See also Dale G. Renlund, “Choose You This Day,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2018, 104–6.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Joshua 1–4; 6

“Be strong and of a good courage.”
Here is one way to help your children “be strong and of a good courage” (Joshua 1:6) through Jesus Christ. Invite them to find a phrase that is repeated in Joshua 1:6, 9, and 18, and write it down or memorize it. Help your children think of situations where they might need this message, just as Joshua did. You could also review together some of the stories in Joshua 1–4; 6 (see also “Joshua the Prophet” and “Rahab and the Spies” in Old Testament Stories, 85–91). How did the people in these stories show courage and strength in the Lord?



2:59
Joshua the Prophet



1:39
Rahab and the Spies

Joshua 1:8

Studying the scriptures brings me blessings.
Reading Joshua 1:8 could inspire your children to read the scriptures on their own. Help them find words in this verse that teach them how and why we should read the scriptures. They could look for the same thing in 1 Nephi 15:23–24; 2 Nephi 31:20; 32:3; Jacob 4:6; Helaman 3:29–30. You could also help them make and carry out a plan to read the scriptures.

Joshua 3–4

I must be baptized to enter the kingdom of heaven.
You might use the story of the Israelites crossing the Jordan River as a symbol of baptism—giving up our old life in the wilderness and starting a new one in a covenant relationship with God. So as you read together Joshua 3–4 (or “Joshua the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories, 85–89), you could also look at a picture of Jesus being baptized and explain that Jesus was baptized in the same river the Israelites crossed. You could then sing a song such as “Baptism” (Children’s Songbook, 100–101). Share with each other how being baptized is like starting a new life in Jesus Christ’s kingdom.



2:59
Joshua the Prophet

composite image showing Jesus being baptized and a young man being baptized
Joshua 24:15

I can choose to serve Jesus Christ.
What could you do to help your children learn to choose to follow Jesus Christ, as Joshua invited the Israelites to do? You might invite them to:

Memorize a short phrase from Joshua 24:15. Try to make it fun for your children. The number of words they memorize may depend on their age.

Find stories about people who chose to serve Jesus Christ. They could look in the Friend magazine, the Gospel Art Book, or Old Testament Stories and other scripture stories books.

Role-play situations in which they can choose to follow and serve the Savior.

Use a variety of activities. “All children are different, and as they develop, their needs will change. Varying your teaching methods will help you meet their diverse needs” (Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 31).

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

placeholder
First Steps of Faith into the Jordan, by Trent Gudmundsen

Primary activity page: I must be baptized to enter the kingdom of heaven
Open PDF
Feedback
