February 23–March 1. “Is Any Thing Too Hard for the Lord?”: Genesis 18–23








Sarah holding baby Isaac
Sarah and Isaac, by Scott Snow

February 23–March 1: “Is Any Thing Too Hard for the Lord?”

Genesis 18–23
Abraham and Sarah’s life, filled with events both heartbreaking and heartwarming, is evidence of a truth Abraham learned in a vision—that we are on earth to be proven, “to see if [we] will do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command” (Abraham 3:25). Would Abraham and Sarah prove faithful? Would they continue to have faith in God’s promise of a large posterity, even when they were still childless in their old age? And once Isaac was born, would their faith endure the unthinkable—a command to sacrifice the very son through whom God had promised to fulfill that covenant?

Abraham and Sarah trusted God, and He trusted them (see Genesis 15:6; Romans 4:3). In Genesis 18–23, we find stories from the lives of Abraham, Sarah, and others that can prompt us to think about our own willingness to believe God’s promises, to flee wickedness and never look back, and to trust God regardless of the sacrifice. In proving us, God also improves us.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Genesis 18:9–14; 21:1–7

The Lord fulfills His promises in His own time.
The Lord has made glorious promises to the faithful, but sometimes the circumstances of our lives can cause us to wonder how these promises can possibly be fulfilled. Abraham and Sarah may have felt that way. What do you learn from their experiences? It may be helpful to begin your study by reviewing what the Lord had promised in Genesis 17:4, 15–22. How did Abraham and Sarah react? (see Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 17:23 [in Genesis 17:17, footnote b]; Genesis 18:9–12). How did the Lord respond to help them have greater faith in His promises? (see Genesis 18:14).

What do you find in these verses that builds your faith? What other experiences—in your life or someone else’s—have strengthened your faith that the Lord will fulfill His promises in His own time and way? You might also ponder how you can sustain your faith when promised blessings are not received in this life. What counsel do you find in Hebrews 11:8–13 and President Russell M. Nelson’s message “Christ Is Risen; Faith in Him Will Move Mountains”? (Liahona, May 2021, 101–4).

See also Doctrine and Covenants 88:68.

Genesis 19:12–29

The Lord commands me to flee wickedness and not look back.
What lessons do you learn about fleeing wickedness as you read about Lot and his family? For example, what impresses you about what the angels said and did to help Lot and his family escape destruction? (see Genesis 19:12–17). How does the Lord help you and your family flee or find protection from evil influences in the world? Think about situations where you may be tempted to “[look] back” (verse 26) when you ought to be looking forward with faith in the Savior. What does Luke 9:62 add to your understanding of this concept?

See also Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 19:9–15 (in the Bible appendix).

Genesis 19:26

What did Lot’s wife do wrong?
Elder Jeffrey R. Holland taught:

“Apparently, what was wrong with Lot’s wife was that she wasn’t just looking back; in her heart she wanted to go back. It would appear that even before she was past the city limits, she was already missing what Sodom and Gomorrah had offered her. …

“It is possible that Lot’s wife looked back with resentment toward the Lord for what He was asking her to leave behind. … So it isn’t just that she looked back; she looked back longingly. In short, her attachment to the past outweighed her confidence in the future. That, apparently, was at least part of her sin.

“… I plead with you not to dwell on days now gone nor to yearn vainly for yesterdays, however good those yesterdays may have been. The past is to be learned from but not lived in. We look back to claim the embers from glowing experiences but not the ashes. And when we have learned what we need to learn and have brought with us the best that we have experienced, then we look ahead and remember that faith is always pointed toward the future. …

“… Dwelling on past lives, including past mistakes, is just not right! It is not the gospel of Jesus Christ. …

“To all [people] of every generation, I call out, ‘Remember Lot’s wife’ [Luke 17:32]. Faith is for the future. Faith builds on the past but never longs to stay there. Faith trusts that God has great things in store for each of us and that Christ truly is the ‘high priest of good things to come’ (Hebrews 9:11)” (“The Best Is Yet to Be,” Ensign, Jan. 2010, 24, 26–27).

Abraham looking toward the heavens with a knife in his hand and Isaac laying on the altar
Abraham and Isaac, by Harold Copping

Genesis 22:1–19

seminary iconAbraham’s willingness to sacrifice Isaac is a similitude of God and His Son.
Although we don’t know all the reasons God commanded Abraham to offer Isaac as a sacrifice, we do know it was a test of his faith in God. We also know it was “a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son” (Jacob 4:5). As you read Genesis 22:1–19, you could look for symbols or similarities between Abraham’s offering of Isaac and the Father’s offering of His Son, Jesus Christ. Consider writing what you find in a chart like this:

Abraham and Isaac

Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ

Isaac was the only begotten son of Abraham and Sarah (Genesis 22:2; see also Hebrews 11:17)

Jesus is the Only Begotten of the Father (John 3:16)

Isaac was to be offered in place of a lamb (Genesis 22:7–9)

Jesus Christ is the Lamb of God (John 1:29)

What symbols or similarities to the Savior’s atoning sacrifice do you find most meaningful? Consider singing or reading the lyrics of a hymn that shows Heavenly Father’s love for us, such as “God Loved Us, So He Sent His Son,” Hymns, no. 187. You might also record your feelings about Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ and Their sacrifice for you.

If you want to study more about the sacrifice of our Savior, consider reading President Jeffrey R. Holland’s message “Behold the Lamb of God” (Ensign or Liahona, May 2019, 44–46). Why is a lamb such a powerful symbol of the Son of God? What did President Holland teach that increases your reverence for Heavenly Father’s gift?

See also “Akedah (The Binding)” (video), Gospel Library.



12:57
Akedah (The Binding)

Use visuals to teach. To add variety in teaching and learning, you might use one or more of the pictures in this outline as you study the stories in Genesis 18–23. For example, you and your family or class could note details in the pictures of Abraham and Isaac. Talk about why these details are important to the story, and find these details in the scriptures. How do they highlight the story’s symbolism of the sacrifice of the Son of God?

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Genesis 17:15–21; 18:14; 21:1–7

I can trust God to keep His promises.
To learn about Abraham and Sarah’s trust in God’s promises, you and your children could talk about a time when they had to wait for something they really wanted. You could then look at the picture of Sarah and Isaac at the beginning of this outline and talk about the promise God made to her and Abraham (see also “Abraham and Sarah,” in Old Testament Stories, 28–31). Help your children think of things that God has promised us if we are faithful. Encourage them to be patient and trust that God will keep His promises.



2:20
Abraham and Sarah

To help your children learn the important truth in Genesis 18:14, you could write each word from the first sentence of that verse on separate pieces of paper. Then mix the papers up, and invite your children to put the words in the correct order. You and your children could then read Genesis 17:15–21; 21:1–7 to find an example of something the Lord did that seemed impossible. Share with your children your faith that the Lord will fulfill His promises, even if they seem impossible or take a long time.

Genesis 19:15–26

I can flee wickedness.
Ask your children about situations in which someone might invite them to do something they know isn’t right. How would we “flee” these situations? Summarize Genesis 19:15–26 by explaining that Lot’s family lived in a very wicked city and angels warned them to leave. As you and your children read together verses 15–17, 26, ask them what it might mean for us today to “escape” evil and “look not behind” (verse 17).

man and women fleeing Sodom and Gomorrah
Sodom, by Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld

Genesis 22:1–14

Abraham obeyed the Lord.
Using pictures of Abraham and Isaac and of the Crucifixion (see Gospel Art Book, nos. 9, 57) can help your children compare the story in Genesis 22 with the Savior’s sacrifice (see Matthew 27:26–37). What can we learn about Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ from the accounts of Abraham and Isaac and of the Crucifixion? (See also “Abraham and Isaac,” in Old Testament Stories, 34–37.)



2:0
Abraham and Isaac

Can you think of a simple game to play with your children that requires them to follow directions? Maybe the directions could lead to a hidden picture of the Savior. The game could prompt a conversation about things Heavenly Father has commanded us to do so we can live with Him and Jesus Christ again. Consider singing a song such as “Keep the Commandments” (Children’s Songbook, 146–47). This week’s activity page could help as well.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Abraham looking at Isaac carrying a load of wood
Abraham and Isaac, by Jeff Ward

Primary activity page: Abraham obeyed the Lord
Open PDF
Feedback

