November 23–29. “Seek the Lord, and Ye Shall Live”: Amos; Obadiah; Jonah








Jonah washed upon the seashore
Jonah on the Beach at Nineveh, by Daniel Lewis

November 23–29: “Seek the Lord, and Ye Shall Live”

Amos; Obadiah; Jonah
Jonah was on a ship headed for Tarshish. There’s nothing wrong with sailing to Tarshish, except that it is far away from Nineveh, where Jonah was supposed to go to deliver God’s message. When the ship encountered a great storm, Jonah knew it was because of his disobedience. At Jonah’s insistence, his fellow mariners cast him into the depths of the sea to stop the storm. It looked like the end of Jonah and his ministry. But the Lord hadn’t given up on Jonah—just as He hadn’t given up on the people of Nineveh, on the house of Israel, or on any of us.

So He keeps sending prophets—like Jonah, Amos, Obadiah, and our prophets today—with the message that if we repent, we will not be cast off forever. Of all the “secrets” God reveals (see Amos 3:7), this one is among the most precious: that because of Jesus Christ, it’s not too late to change. He still wants to help us live up to the covenants we made with Him, and He’s willing to offer us another chance.

For more about these books, see “Amos,” “Obadiah,” and “Jonah” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Amos 3:1–8; 7:10–15

seminary iconThe Lord reveals truth through His prophets.
In Amos 3:3–6, the prophet Amos presented examples of conclusions we can draw from signs we hear or see: when a lion roars, it must have captured prey; if a bird is caught in a trap, there must have been bait there. In verses 7–8, Amos applied this logic to prophets. What conclusions can we draw when a prophet prophesies? What else do you learn about prophets from Amos 7:10–15?

What has the Lord revealed to you through His prophets?

Elder Ulisses Soares said that “having prophets is a sign of God’s love” (“Prophets Speak by the Power of the Holy Spirit,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2018, 99). Consider how you would complete this sentence: “I know God loves me, because He sends prophets who …” Here are some scriptures that can help: Deuteronomy 18:18; Ezekiel 3:16–17; Ephesians 4:11–14; 1 Nephi 22:2; Doctrine and Covenants 21:4–6; 84:36–38; 107:91–92.

What would you say to someone who feels prophets are not needed today?

See also Topics and Questions, “Prophets,” Gospel Library.

Amos 4–5

“Seek the Lord, and ye shall live.”
According to Amos 4:6–13, what had the Lord hoped would happen after the Israelites experienced trials? (see also Helaman 12:3). While your trials may not have been sent by God, how have they given you opportunities to turn to Him?

As you read Amos 5:4, 14–15, ponder how the Lord has been gracious to you. How has seeking Him brought you life?

Amos 8:11–12

The word of the Lord can satisfy spiritual hunger and thirst.
As you read Amos 8:11–12, think about why famine is a good comparison for living without God’s word (see also John 6:26–35; 2 Nephi 9:50–51; 32:3; Enos 1:4–8). How do you know when you are spiritually hungry?

These verses could also apply to the Great Apostasy (see Topics and Questions, “Apostasy,” Gospel Library). How has that spiritual “famine” affected God’s children? How has the Restoration satisfied your spiritual hunger?

See also “The Great Apostasy” (video), Gospel Library.



16:36
The Great Apostasy

Obadiah 1:21

Who are the “saviours … on mount Zion”?
Referring to Obadiah 1:21, President Gordon B. Hinckley explained that we become saviors on Mount Zion when we receive ordinances for the dead in the temple (see “Closing Remarks,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2004, 105). How is doing that work similar—if only in a small way—to what the Savior did for us? How has doing this work helped you feel closer to the Savior?

See also “Holy Temples on Mount Zion,” Hymns, no. 289.

a group of youth outside a temple
Jonah 1–4

The Lord is merciful to all who turn to Him.
Nineveh was an enemy of Israel known for its violence and cruelty. To Jonah, it seemed unrealistic that they were ready to repent. It might be interesting to compare Jonah’s attitude (see Jonah 1; 3–4) to the feelings of Alma and the sons of Mosiah (see Mosiah 28:1–5; Alma 17:23–25). What do you learn from Jonah 3 that inspires you to share the gospel even with people who may not seem ready to change?

As you read Jonah, look for examples of the Lord’s mercy. Why do you feel Jonah was “displeased” and “very angry” (Jonah 4:1) when the Lord extended mercy to the people of Nineveh? What do you feel the Lord was trying to teach him in chapter 4? Ponder how you have experienced His mercy in your life. What do you learn from Jonah that can help you be more merciful?

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Because this Sunday is the fifth Sunday of the month, Primary teachers are encouraged to use learning activities in “Appendix B: Preparing Children for a Lifetime on God’s Covenant Path.”

Amos 3:7

Prophets are messengers of Jesus Christ.
To help your children understand Amos 3:7, you could whisper a simple message to one of them and ask them to share the message with the other children. How is the messenger in this activity like a prophet? Why does the Lord give us prophets?

To learn more about what prophets do, you and your children could review recent messages from the current President of the Church. You could also sing a song like “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11). Share with each other why you choose to follow God’s prophet.

Help children memorize scriptures. Elder Richard G. Scott shared: “To memorize a scripture is to forge a new friendship. It is like discovering a new individual who can help in time of need, give inspiration and comfort, and be a source of motivation for needed change” (“The Power of Scripture,” Ensign, Nov. 2011, 6). To help your children memorize all or part of Amos 3:7, you could write it down and repeat it together. Then you could erase or cover a few words at a time until your children can repeat the entire verse from memory.

Amos 8:11–12

The Restoration of the gospel ended the famine of apostasy.
Invite your children to pretend to be hungry as you read Amos 8:11–12. What does it feel like when we are hungry for God’s word? Maybe your children could pretend to eat as you share with each other some of your favorite scriptures.

You could use Guide to the Scriptures, “Apostasy” (Gospel Library), or “After the New Testament” (in New Testament Stories, 167–70) to help your children understand the “famine” that came from the Great Apostasy and how it ended with the Restoration. Share with each other reasons you are grateful that the Lord restored His gospel in our day.



2:52
After the New Testament

Jonah 1–3

The Lord will help me obey Him, even when it’s hard.
To help your children learn the story of Jonah, you could review “Jonah the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories; see also this week’s activity page). You could then ask:

What happened when Jonah didn’t obey the Lord? (see Jonah 1:4–17).

What did Jonah do to repent? (see Jonah 1:10–12; 2:1–4, 9; 3:1–4).

What happened when Jonah did obey? (see Jonah 3:5).



2:30
Jonah the Prophet

Your children might enjoy retelling the story of Jonah or acting it out. Share with each other some experiences when the Lord wanted you to do something that was hard for you. How did He help you obey Him?

Jonah 1–4

The Lord is merciful to all who turn to Him.
Maybe your children could pretend they are interviewing Jonah about his experience. What questions would they ask him? Encourage them to ask questions to find out what Jonah learned about the Lord. What might Jonah say, for example, about the Lord’s mercy? (see, for example, Jonah 2:7–10; 3:10; 4:2).

Jesus reaching toward a man being lowered through the roof
Christ and the Palsied Man, by J. Kirk Richards

Help your children think of examples when the Savior showed mercy to others, such as Mark 2:3–12; Luke 23:33–34; and John 8:1–11. You and your children could search for pictures of these examples. What opportunities do we have to be merciful to others?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Jonah being cast from a boat into the sea, where the shadow of a large fish is barely visible
Jonah and the Whale, by Kevin Carden

Primary activity page: The Lord will help me obey Him, even when it’s hard
Open PDF
Feedback

