Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

Reading the Old Testament

December 29–January 4

Introduction to the Old Testament

January 5–11

Moses 1; Abraham 3

January 12–18

Genesis 1–2; Moses 2–3; Abraham 4–5

January 19–25

Genesis 3–4; Moses 4–5

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


January 5–11. “This Is My Work and My Glory”: Moses 1; Abraham 3








stars and nebula in outer space
January 5–11: “This Is My Work and My Glory”

Moses 1; Abraham 3
The Bible begins with the words “in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth” (Genesis 1:1). But what was there before this “beginning”? And why did God create all of this? Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord has shed light on these questions.

For example, He gave us the record of a vision in which Abraham saw our existence as spirits “before the world was” (see Abraham 3:22–28). The Lord also gave us an inspired translation or revision of the first six chapters of Genesis, called the book of Moses—which doesn’t begin with “in the beginning.” Instead, it begins with an experience Moses had that provides some context for the Creation story. Together, these latter-day scriptures are a good place to start our study of the Old Testament because they address some fundamental questions that can frame our reading: Who is God? Who are we? What is God’s work, and what is our place in it? The opening chapters of Genesis could be seen as the Lord’s response to Moses’s request: “Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens” (Moses 1:36).

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Moses 1

seminary iconAs a child of God, I have a divine destiny.
“If the Lord were speaking to you directly,” President Russell M. Nelson taught, “the first thing He would make sure you understand is your true identity” (“Choices for Eternity” [worldwide devotional for young adults, May 2022], Gospel Library). It follows that Satan would try to confuse you on that same point. Look for this pattern in God’s message to Moses in Moses 1:4, 6 and in Satan’s messages in Moses 1:12. What do you learn from these verses about the differences between God and Satan?

President Nelson also taught, “The way you think about who you really are affects almost every decision you will ever make” (“Choices for Eternity”). Consider making a list of choices you make because your identity as a child of God comes before other labels.

What additional verses or phrases in Moses 1 help you understand your divine worth? You might also read more of President Nelson’s message in the section of “Choices for Eternity” titled “First: Know the truth about who you are.” What do you feel inspired to do to make your identity as a child of God your most important identifier?

See also “I Am a Child of God,” Hymns (1985), no. 301; “Our True Identity” (video), Gospel Library; Topics and Questions, “Children of God,” Gospel Library.



3:39
Our True Identity

mother, father, and baby smiling
Moses 1:12–26

With the Lord’s help, I can resist Satan.
As Moses 1 clearly shows, powerful spiritual experiences do not mean we’ll never be tempted again. In fact, one of Satan’s tactics is to tempt us to doubt these experiences. As you read Moses’s response to Satan in verses 12–26, what do you learn that can help you stay true to the testimony you have received? What was it that finally helped Moses overcome Satan?

Another lesson from Moses’s experience is that Satan tempts us with counterfeits of God’s truth and power. Think of some fake versions of things, such as an artificial plant or a baby doll. How can you tell they’re fake? Then consider the counterfeits Satan uses today to tempt you. What do you learn from Moses 1:13–18 about how to recognize and reject his counterfeits? How can the Lord help you? (see Moses 1:24–26).

See also Matthew 4:1–11; Gary E. Stevenson, “Deceive Me Not,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2019, 93–96; “I Am a Son of God” (video), Gospel Library.



6:31
I Am a Son of God

Learning at home can be planned but also spontaneous. “Teaching opportunities in the family frequently occur in informal, everyday moments—while eating a meal, doing chores, playing games, [or] traveling” (Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 31). For example, in addition to reading about how Moses resisted Satan in Moses 1, you might spend a few moments at dinnertime talking as a family about how you resisted the influence of the adversary.

Moses 1:27–39; Abraham 3

God’s work and glory is to help me gain eternal life.
After seeing a vision of God’s creations, Moses said to the Lord: “Tell me … why these things are so” (Moses 1:30). What impresses you about the Lord’s response in Moses 1:31–39? What’s the difference between immortality and eternal life? (see Topics and Questions, “Eternal Life,” Gospel Library). How does Jesus Christ help bring to pass both? Abraham also had a vision, recorded in Abraham 3. What do you find in verses 24–26 that could help answer Moses’s request?

Abraham 3:22–28

I lived as a spirit before I was born on earth.
We know very little about our premortal life. But much of what we do know comes from Abraham’s vision in Abraham 3:22–28. As you read these verses, make a list of truths you find—including truths about yourself and about Jesus Christ. Why are these truths valuable to you? What difference do they make in your life?

See also Topics and Questions, “Premortal Life,” Gospel Library.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Moses 1:1–4, 6, 12

I am a child of God.
After you read together God’s message to Moses in Moses 1:4, consider letting your children look at their reflection in a mirror and giving themselves a similar message: “I am a child of God.” Then they could give the same message to each other: “You are a child of God.” You might even find pictures of a variety of people and invite your children to point to each one and say, “This is a child of God.” Share with each other why you are glad to know you are children of God. How does this knowledge change the way you treat yourselves and others?

You and your children could compare God’s message to Moses in Moses 1:4 with Satan’s message in verse 12. How can you help your children distinguish between God’s messages to them and Satan’s?

Jehovah appearing to Moses
Moses Sees Jehovah, by Joseph Brickey (detail)

Moses 1:6, 39

Heavenly Father has a work for me to do.
As you read Moses 1:6 with your children, you might talk to them about the “work” God had for Moses. Consider using the Gospel Art Book, nos. 13–16, or Old Testament Stories, pages 64–84, to help your children see what Moses accomplished with Heavenly Father’s help. What is the work God has for us to do? (see, for example, Doctrine and Covenants 11:20).

Moses 1:12–26

I can resist Satan’s temptations.
As you study Moses 1:12–26 with your children, help them discover what Moses did to resist Satan (see verses 13, 15, 18, 20–22, 26). It might be fun for them to act out things they can do to resist temptation (such as praying, walking away, or asking for help).

Abraham 3:22–28

I lived as a spirit before I was born on earth.
Knowing about our premortal life can inspire your children to make choices based on eternal truths. To help them learn about it, you could give them some key words and phrases to find in Abraham 3:22–28, like “before the world was,” “spirits,” “make an earth,” and “prove.” What do these verses teach us about why Heavenly Father sent us to earth?

A song like “I Will Follow God’s Plan” (Children’s Songbook, 164–65) could reinforce what Abraham 3 teaches. Maybe you could invite your children to draw pictures that go with the words.

Help your children think of situations in which they have to choose whether or not to do what God has asked them to (see Abraham 3:25; see also For the Strength of Youth: A Guide for Making Choices). Let them practice possible responses to these situations. How can the Savior help us when we make a wrong choice?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Moses casting away Satan
Moses Overcomes Satan, by Joseph Brickey

Primary activity page: I am a child of God
Open PDF
Feedback
