February 9–15. “Noah Found Grace in the Eyes of the Lord”: Genesis 6–11; Moses 8








animals leaving the ark with Noah and his family standing on a rock
Jehovah Keeps a Promise, by Sam Lawlor

February 9–15: “Noah Found Grace in the Eyes of the Lord”

Genesis 6–11; Moses 8
Living in the latter days, we have special reason to pay attention to the story of the Flood. When Jesus Christ taught how we should watch for His Second Coming, He said, “As it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man” (Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:41). In addition, words that describe Noah’s day, like “corrupt” and “filled with violence,” could just as easily describe our time (Genesis 6:12–13; Moses 8:28). The story of the Tower of Babel also feels applicable to our day, with its description of pride followed by confusion and then division.

These ancient accounts are valuable not just because they show us that wickedness repeats itself throughout history. More important, they teach us what to do about it. Noah “found grace in the eyes of the Lord” (Moses 8:27). And the families of Jared and his brother turned to the Lord and were protected from the confusion and division in Babel (see Ether 1:33–43). If we wonder how to keep ourselves and our families safe during corruption and violence, the stories in these chapters have much to teach us.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Genesis 6; Moses 8

seminary iconThere is spiritual safety in following the Lord’s prophet.
Do you see anything in the description of Noah’s day that seems similar to conditions in our day? In particular, look in Moses 8:15–24, 28. What themes do you see repeated?

One important similarity you’ll see is that God called Noah to be a prophet, and He has called a prophet today too. Consider making a list of truths you learn about prophets from Moses 8:13–30. How is our living prophet like Noah? Of course, the Lord’s prophet today isn’t warning of a Flood or inviting us to help build an ark. But what is he warning us about? And what is he inviting us to do? To help answer these questions, you could review a chapter from Teachings of Presidents of the Church in Gospel Library, especially the “Invitations and Promised Blessings” section. Perhaps you could pick one warning and one invitation that seem especially important to you.

Elder Allen D. Haynie taught, “A perfect and loving Father in Heaven has chosen the pattern of revealing truth to His children through a prophet” (“A Living Prophet for the Latter Days,” Liahona, May 2023, 25). Consider studying Elder Haynie’s message, looking for reasons having a prophet is a sign of Heavenly Father’s love. How has following the Lord’s prophet helped you feel safe living in the latter days?

See also Topics and Questions, “Prophets,” Gospel Library; “Why Do We Have Prophets?” (video), Gospel Library.



1:37
Why Do We Have Prophets?

Genesis 6:5–13

The Flood was an act of God’s mercy.
Some people wonder about the justice of God in sending the Flood to “destroy man” (Genesis 6:7). Elder Neal A. Maxwell explained that at the time of the Flood, “corruption had reached an agency-destroying point that spirits could not, in justice, be sent here” (We Will Prove Them Herewith [1982], 58). You might also consider how the Flood was an act of mercy. What do you find in Genesis 6:5–13 that shows the Lord’s tender mercy and love for the people?

Genesis 9:8–17

Tokens or symbols help me remember my covenants with the Lord.
According to Genesis 9:8–17, what can a rainbow bring to your mind? What does Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 9:21–25 (in the Bible appendix) add to your understanding? You might also consider making a list of other things (like symbols, objects, or anything else) that God has given you to remind you of your covenants. What do these things teach you? How do they help you remember?

See also Gerrit W. Gong, “Always Remember Him,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2016, 108–11; “Reverently and Meekly Now,” Hymns, no. 185.

tower with men climbing up it with a rope and stairs
The Tower of Babel, by David Green

Genesis 11:1–9

Following Jesus Christ is the only way to Heavenly Father.
The account of the people of Babel building a tower provides an interesting contrast to the account of Enoch and his people building Zion, which you studied last week. Both groups of people were trying to reach heaven but in different ways. How did the people of Zion obtain heaven? (see Moses 7:18–19, 53, 62–63, 69). What do you learn from Genesis 11:1–9 and Helaman 6:26–28 about the people of Babel? What does this teach us about our own efforts to return to God’s presence? What has God provided to help us “reach unto heaven”? (Genesis 11:4; see also John 3:16).

Learn actively. Learning can involve more than just reading or listening. For example, when learning about the Tower of Babel, you and your family or class could write, on slips of paper, things that take us away from God. Then, on other slips of paper, you could write things that bring us nearer to God. Arrange the first group of papers in the shape of a tower and the second group in the shape of a temple.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Genesis 6:14–22; 7–8; Moses 8:16–24

Following the Lord’s prophet will bless me and my family.
Most children love the story of Noah and the ark. Consider giving your children opportunities to share what they know about it. To help them, you could use the pictures in this outline, “Noah and His Family” in Old Testament Stories (22–25), and the third verse of “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11). Your children might enjoy acting out parts of the story—for example, by pretending to use a tool to build the ark or walking like animals entering the ark.

As you talk about Noah together, help your children see how blessed we are to have a prophet of God today. Help your children search Moses 8:16–24 to find things Noah taught that the Lord’s prophets still teach today. How are we blessed when we obey these teachings?

Genesis 9:15–16

God will keep His promises to me.
Your children might enjoy drawing or coloring a rainbow while you talk about what it represents (see Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 9:21–25 [in the Bible appendix]). What did God want Noah and his family to think of whenever they saw a rainbow?

You could also show your children something you have that reminds you of something important in your life, such as a wedding ring, a picture, or a journal. Let your children share their own examples. This could lead to a conversation about things that help us remember our covenants, such as the sacrament, which helps us remember our baptismal covenant to follow Jesus Christ (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:75–79).

double rainbow
God told Noah’s family that the rainbow would be “the token of the covenant which I make between me and you” (Genesis 9:12).

Genesis 11:1–9

Following Jesus Christ is the only way to heaven.
It could be fun to build a tower out of blocks or other objects with your children. As you do so, explain that the people of Babel thought they could get to heaven by building a tall tower. You could then look together at a picture of the Savior and ask your children how He helps us get to heaven. Then you could talk with each other about things you can do to follow the Savior.

In addition to reading the story of the tower of Babel in Genesis 11:1–9, you and your children could read Helaman 6:28. According to this verse, why did the people of Babel build the tower? Why was building this tower the wrong way to reach heaven? Then you could search 2 Nephi 31:20–21 and Helaman 3:28 to find the right way to reach heaven. What advice would we give to the people of Babel?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Noah’s ark
Noah’s Ark, by Adam Klint Day. adamdayart.com

Primary activity page: Following the prophet will bless me and my family
Open PDF
Feedback

