Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

March

February 23–March 1

Genesis 18–23

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

The House of Israel

March 2–8

Genesis 24–33

March 9–15

Genesis 37–41

March 16–22

Genesis 42–50

March 23–29

Exodus 1–6

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


March 23–29. “I Have Remembered My Covenant”: Exodus 1–6








Moses and the burning bush
Moses and the Burning Bush, by Jerry Thompson

March 23–29: “I Have Remembered My Covenant”

Exodus 1–6
The invitation to live in Egypt saved Jacob’s family. But after hundreds of years, their descendants were enslaved and terrorized by a new pharaoh who “knew not Joseph” (Exodus 1:8). It would have been natural for the Israelites to wonder why God allowed this to happen to them, His covenant people. Did He remember the covenant He had made with them? Were they still His people? Could He see how much they were suffering?

There may be times when you’ve felt like asking similar questions. You might wonder, “Does God know what I’m going through? Can He hear my pleas for help?” Israel’s deliverance from Egypt answers such questions clearly: God does not forget His people. He remembers His covenants with us and will fulfill them in His own time and way. “I will redeem you with a stretched out arm,” He declares. “I am the Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under [your] burdens” (Exodus 6:6–7).

For an overview of the book of Exodus, see “Exodus, book of” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and Church
Exodus 1–2

God can work through me to fulfill His purposes.
What impresses you about the women described in Exodus 1–2? How did they help fulfill God’s plan for His people? What do their efforts teach you about service in God’s work?

Exodus 1–3

Jesus Christ is my Deliverer.
Before you begin reading Exodus, you might think about a hardship you’re going through—something you hope the Lord will deliver you from. What words and phrases in Exodus 1–3 sound similar to spiritual captivity or other things we face today? Notice also how the children of Israel sought deliverance and how the Lord responded (see, for example, Exodus 2:23–25; 3:7–8). How has the Lord “come down to deliver” you?

Throughout the book of Exodus, you might also note some similarities between Moses and Jesus Christ (see Deuteronomy 18:18–19; 1 Nephi 22:20–21). For example, what similarities do you see between Exodus 1:22; 2:1–10 and Matthew 2:13–16? Or between Exodus 24:18 and Matthew 4:1–2? What do you feel the Lord wants you to understand about Himself and His power?

Look for symbols that testify of Jesus Christ. “You can … find parallels to the Savior’s life in the lives of prophets and other faithful men and women in the scriptures. [Doing so] reveals truths about the Savior in places you might otherwise overlook” (See Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 7; see also Hosea 12:10).

women pulling basket out of a river
Faith at Water’s Edge, by Anne Marie Oborn

Exodus 3:1–6

seminary icon I can show reverence for holy things and places.
Can you think of a time when something filled you with awe and wonder? How did you react? How would you describe the emotions you felt?

With that in mind, read Exodus 3:1–6. What impresses you about Moses’s inspiring experience? What did Moses do to show reverence for God? What connections do you see between his actions and reverence for sacred things?

Reading these verses might prompt you to think about holy things and holy places in your life. Why are they sacred to you? How do you treat them differently from things that are common? To guide your pondering, you could refer to the section titled “Remembering the Promises” in Elder David A. Bednar’s message “Exceeding Great and Precious Promises” (Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2017, 91–93). You might also sing or listen to a hymn that inspires awe, like “I Stand All Amazed” (Hymns, no. 193) and ponder what it is about the gospel that amazes you.

Of course, even when we’ve had wonderful spiritual experiences, there’s a danger of becoming too casual about sacred things. How do you avoid this? Here are two messages that address this issue; pick one, and look for statements that help you: Ulisses Soares, “In Awe of Christ and His Gospel” (Liahona, May 2022, 115–17); Gérald Caussé, “Is It Still Wonderful to You?” (Ensign or Liahona, May 2015, 98–100).

See also Doctrine and Covenants 6:10–12; 63:64.

Exodus 3–4

God gives power to people He calls to do His work.
Today we know Moses as a great prophet and leader. But Moses did not see himself that way when the Lord first called him. As you read Exodus 3–4, list Moses’s concerns and how the Lord responded to each. What do you find in these chapters that might inspire you when you feel inadequate? When have you seen God empower you or others to do His work?

See also “The Church Gives Us Opportunities to Assist in God’s Work” in “Church Organization” in Topics and Questions, Gospel Library.

Exodus 5–6

The Lord’s purposes will be fulfilled in His own time.
It can be discouraging when our sincere efforts to do good don’t seem to be working—when we’re trying to do the Lord’s will but we’re not seeing the results we expected. To learn about a similar experience Moses had, read Exodus 5:4–9, 20–23. How did the Lord help Moses overcome his feelings of discouragement? (see Exodus 6:1–13). How has the Lord helped you persist in doing His will?

See also Jeffrey R. Holland, “Waiting on the Lord,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2020, 115–17.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Because this Sunday is the fifth Sunday of the month, Primary teachers are encouraged to use learning activities in “Appendix B: Preparing Children for a Lifetime on God’s Covenant Path.”

Exodus 1–2

God can work through me to fulfill His purposes.
Moses had a major role in freeing Israel from bondage. But he wouldn’t have been able to accomplish this if his mother, his sister, Pharaoh’s daughter, and other faithful women hadn’t protected and cared for him. Help your children learn about these women in Exodus 1:15–20; Exodus 2:2–10 (see also Numbers 26:59); and Exodus 2:16–21. You could also use this week’s activity page and “Baby Moses” (in Old Testament Stories, 61–63) to tell their stories. How did these women help fulfill God’s plan? Talk with each other about other people you admire who help with God’s work, including in small and simple ways. How can we follow their example?



1:36
Baby Moses

Exodus 3:1–5

I can treat holy places with reverence.
After reading Exodus 3:1–5 together, ask your children to summarize these verses in their own words (see also “Moses the Prophet” in Old Testament Stories, 64–66). How did Moses show reverence in the Lord’s presence? How does the Lord want us to show reverence? You might also ask your children to help you find (or draw) pictures of sacred places or activities where we should be reverent. What can we do to make our home a sacred place?



1:26
Moses the Prophet

Sing together a song about reverence, such as “Reverence Is Love” (Children’s Songbook, 31). As you do, your children could find words or phrases that explain what it means to be reverent. If we were bringing a friend to church for the first time, how would we explain what it means to be reverent?

Moses and Aaron speak to the people
Moses and Aaron Speak to the People, by James J. Tissot

Exodus 3–4

When the Lord asks me to do something, He will help me do it.
Using the account in Exodus 3; 4:1–17, let your children take turns pretending to be Moses. It might be fun to include objects or simple props, such as a flashlight and a plant to represent the burning bush. Help your children discover how Moses felt about the assignment the Lord gave him (see Exodus 3:11; 4:1, 10). Maybe you could share with each other times when you had similar feelings. What advice would we share with Moses to help him? Read about how the Lord encouraged Moses in Exodus 3:12; 4:2–9, 11–12. Tell the children how the Savior has helped you fulfill a calling, follow a prompting, or do something else that was hard for you.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

The Mother of Moses
The Mother of Moses, by Simeon Solomon

Primary activity page: I can forgive
Open PDF
Feedback
