August 3–9. “Thou Art Come … for Such a Time as This”: Esther








Esther kneeling before the king
Queen Esther Saves Jehovah’s People, by Sam Lawlor

August 3–9: “Thou Art Come … for Such a Time as This”

Esther
Many events in the book of Esther might seem like luck or coincidence. How else do you explain how an orphaned Jewish girl became the queen of Persia at just the right time to save her people from slaughter? What are the chances that Esther’s cousin Mordecai would happen to overhear a plot to assassinate the king? Were these coincidences, or were they part of a divine plan? Elder Ronald A. Rasband noted: “What may appear to be a random chance is, in fact, overseen by a loving Father in Heaven. … The Lord is in the small details of our lives” (“By Divine Design,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2017, 56). We might not always recognize the Lord’s influence in these “small details.” But we learn from Esther’s experience that He can guide our path and prepare us “for such a time” (Esther 4:14) when we can be instruments in His hands to fulfill His purposes.

For an overview of the book of Esther, see “Esther, book of” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Esther

seminary iconThe Lord puts me in situations where I can bless others.
President Dieter F. Uchtdorf taught that each of us “stands at a unique place and has an important task that only [we] can perform. … The Lord gave you your responsibilities for a reason. There may be people and hearts only you can reach and touch. Perhaps no one else could do it in quite the same way” (“Lift Where You Stand,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2008, 56).

As you read the story of Esther, ponder how this statement applies to her. Look for ways the Lord made it possible for her to save the Jews (see, for example, Esther 2:21–23; 3:10–14; 4:14–16). Then ponder how He has given you opportunities to bless others. What are some circumstances or relationships that He has guided you to “for such a time as this”? (Esther 4:14). If you have a patriarchal blessing, consider reading it to learn more about the work the Lord has for you to do. What can you do to accomplish this work?

See also “For Such a Time as This” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org.



13:44
For Such a Time as This

We learn more by doing than by listening. Elder David A. Bednar counseled teachers: “Our intent ought not to be ‘What do I tell them?’ Instead, the questions to ask ourselves are ‘What can I invite them to do? What inspired questions can I ask that, if they are willing to respond, will begin to invite the Holy Ghost into their lives?’” (in Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 25). If you are teaching your family or a class about Esther, what could you ask them to do that will help them learn?

Mordecai watching Haman ride through the streets on a horse
“When Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not … then was Haman full of wrath” (Esther 3:5).

Esther 3; 5:9–14; 7

Pride and anger can lead to downfall.
In the book of Esther, we learn from the faithfulness of Esther and Mordecai, but we also learn from the pride and anger of Haman. As you read Esther 3; 5:9–14, note Haman’s feelings, words, and actions. What do they reveal about him and his motivations? What consequences did he face? (see Esther 7). Reading about Haman may prompt you to evaluate what motivates your feelings and actions. Are you inspired to make any changes? How can you turn to Heavenly Father for help?

See also Proverbs 16:32; Alma 5:28.

Esther 3–4; 5:2–3; 8:11–12

Fasting shows that I trust and rely on the Lord.
Notice why Esther and the rest of the Jews decided to fast (see Esther 3:13; 4:1–3, 10–17). How did fasting bless them? (see Esther 5:2–3; 8:11–12). Why does the Lord ask us to fast? (see Topics and Questions, “Fasting and Fast Offerings,” Gospel Library). Consider how you can make fasting a greater blessing in your life.

See also Isaiah 58:6–12; “Fasting: Young Single Adult Ward, Amanda” (video), ChurchofJesusChrist.org.



2:41
Fasting: Young Single Adult Ward, Amanda

Esther 3:1–11; 4:10–17; 5:1–4; 9:17–19

Doing the right thing often requires great courage.
When Mordecai and Esther stood up for their beliefs and their people, they put their lives at risk. Our choices might have less severe consequences, but doing the right thing can still require courage. What do you learn from Esther 3:1–4; 4:10–17 about having courage to do the right thing? Note the different consequences Mordecai and Esther experienced after showing courage (see Esther 3:5–11; 5:1–4). What did Esther and Mordecai need to know about God to make the choices they made?

Think of situations where you need courage to stand up for what’s right. What do you learn from Esther and Mordecai that can help you find courage in the Lord?

Esther’s courage led to “a day of gladness” (see Esther 9:17–19). How has Christlike courage given you “a day of gladness”?

See also “Courage,” “Dare to Stand Alone” (videos), Gospel Library; “True to the Faith,” Hymns, no. 254.



3:19
Courage



4:20
Dare to Stand Alone

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Esther 2:5–7

I can serve my family.
You might feel inspired to use Esther 2:7 to teach your children about helping family members in need, as Mordecai did for Esther. You could read the verse together or summarize it in your own words. Then you and your children could think of family members who might need your help. Make a plan to help them.

Esther 3:1–11; 4:10–17

The Lord can help me be brave.
The examples of Esther and Mordecai can help your children understand that bravery means doing what is right even when you are afraid. Consider writing the phrases Mordecai was brave when he … and Esther was brave when she … . As you learn the story of Esther together, your children could suggest ways to finish the sentences. You could read Esther 3:1–11; 4:10–17 or “Queen Esther” (in Old Testament Stories, 166–70) or look at the pictures in this outline. Then write I will be brave by … , and invite your children to list things Heavenly Father wants them to do that require courage. A song about courage, such as “Dare to Do Right” (Children’s Songbook, 158), could help.



2:45
Queen Esther

You could also learn about times when Jesus Christ was brave—for example, when He suffered for our sins in Gethsemane and on the cross (see Matthew 26:36–39; 27:33–35). Ask your children to share a time when they were brave, and share your own experiences as well.

Esther 4:1–3, 10–17

Fasting brings the Lord’s blessings.
Reading Esther 4:1–3, 10–17 could help you teach your children about fasting. Why did Esther and the Jews fast? Tell your children why you fast. You could also ask them how they would explain fasting to a friend who has never done it before. How could we help our friends understand the blessings that come from fasting?

Encourage your children to think of something they might need the Lord’s help with. Suggest they make that part of their fast during the next fast Sunday.

Queen Esther standing next to the king
Because Esther was brave, she was able to save the Lord’s people.

Esther 4:14

I can be an instrument in God’s hands.
Help your children understand that when Esther was afraid, Mordecai encouraged her by explaining that the Lord had helped her become the queen “for such a time as this” (Esther 4:14). What did Mordecai mean by this? Talk with each other about how Esther was an instrument for the Lord. How can we be instruments for the Lord?

How could you help your children understand what an instrument is? Maybe you could invite someone to play a song on a musical instrument or show a picture of someone using a tool. You could then talk about what it means to be an instrument in God’s hands.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Queen Esther
Queen Esther, by Minerva Teichert, © William and Betty Stokes

Primary activity page: The Lord can help me be brave
Open PDF
Feedback

