Study Now
Hear the Word of God at General Conference

Skip to Main ContentSign In
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
My Home
Libraries
Serve
News
About Us
Filter Search
Search Books and Lessons

Find a Church
English

Resources

Sign In


Come, Follow Me

Come, Follow Me—For Home and Church: Old Testament 2026

Contents

Introductory Materials

January

February

March

February 23–March 1

Genesis 18–23

Thoughts to Keep in Mind

The House of Israel

March 2–8

Genesis 24–33

March 9–15

Genesis 37–41

March 16–22

Genesis 42–50

March 23–29

Exodus 1–6

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Appendixes


March 2–8. “Let God Prevail”: Genesis 24–33








Esau sells his birthright to Jacob for a bowl of pottage
Esau Sells His Birthright, by Glen S. Hopkinson (detail)

March 2–8: “Let God Prevail”

Genesis 24–33
How do you secure for yourself a blessing from God? You might say that the account of Jacob, grandson of Abraham and Sarah, is the story of a man who learned the answer to that question. In a culture where the firstborn son received a birthright blessing, Jacob was born second, grasping the heel of his twin brother, Esau. The name “Jacob” means “supplanter”—one who replaces someone else. Jacob lived up to that name by trying, more than once, to supplant Esau as inheritor of the birthright blessing because Esau was unworthy of it (see Genesis 25:30–34; 26:34–35; 27:36). The result was discord in the family, and Jacob had to flee for his life into the wilderness.

Years later, God commanded Jacob to return home. On the way, Jacob, in humility, again sought a blessing from God. The scriptures describe this time as a “wrestle” for Jacob, and he declared that he would not give up “except thou bless me” (Genesis 32:26). Then came the lesson—and the blessing. God changed Jacob’s name to Israel—meaning, among other things, “let God prevail.” Israel learned that to receive God’s most valuable blessings, His covenant blessings, it’s not necessary to supplant someone else. His blessings aren’t purchased or seized or won. He gives them freely to all who live up to the name of Israel—who let God prevail in their lives.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Genesis 24

Covenant marriage is essential to God’s eternal plan.
While reading Genesis 24, ask yourself why Abraham considered the marriage of his son Isaac to be so important. Why is marriage important to God?

What qualities do you find in Rebekah that would contribute to a strong marriage and family? (see especially verses 15–28, 57–61).

See also Topics and Questions, “Marriage,” Gospel Library.

Genesis 25:29–34

I can value eternal things over temporal things.
In Isaac and Rebekah’s culture, the oldest son received the birthright, which meant a greater inheritance, along with greater responsibilities for caring for the family. As you read Genesis 25:29–34, ponder why Esau might have been willing to give up his birthright in exchange for a meal. What lessons do you find for yourself in this account? It might help to make two lists: (1) eternal blessings God wants to give you and (2) worldly things that might distract you. Then you could read the passage, replacing “birthright” with something from the first list and “pottage” with something from the second. How will you focus on the Savior and the eternal blessings of His gospel?

See also Matthew 6:19–33; M. Russell Ballard, “Remember What Matters Most,” Liahona, May 2023, 105–7.

Jacob at Bethel
Jacob at Bethel, by James Smetham

Genesis 28

seminary icon The covenants of the Lord’s house bring God’s power into my life.
While sleeping on a pillow of stones, Jacob had a life-changing dream. It was such a sacred experience that Jacob named the place Bethel, or “house of God,” declaring, “Surely the Lord is in this place” (Genesis 28:16).

As you read Genesis 28, you might ask yourself what made this experience so sacred to Jacob. What was he going through at the time? How might he have been feeling? You could also look for words and phrases in verses 10–22 that remind you of the house of the Lord. What impressions do you receive about God, His house, and His covenants?

At the end of this outline is a painting that depicts Jacob’s dream; you might refer to it as you read. If you were to create your own artistic depiction of his dream, what would you do? What truths from the story would you try to portray?

The hymn “Nearer, My God, to Thee” (Hymns, no. 100) is based on Jacob’s experience. What connections do you see between this song and Genesis 28:10–22? How does the temple help you feel nearer to God? Consider looking for answers to this question in President Russell M. Nelson’s message “The Temple and Your Spiritual Foundation” (Liahona, Nov. 2021, 93–96). You may also want to review the covenants and blessings of the house of the Lord in General Handbook, 27.2 (Gospel Library). How does keeping these covenants bring God’s power into your life?

Be creative. There are many ways to learn from the scriptures besides just reading them. Some people find that they understand the scriptures better if they draw pictures of the accounts. Others find spiritual insights in sacred music related to the scriptures. Don’t limit yourself to one way of learning; be open to trying a variety of approaches.

Genesis 29:31–35; 30:1–24

The Lord remembers me in my trials.
As you read Genesis 29:31–35 and 30:1–24, look for words describing God’s mercy to Rachel and Leah. Ponder how God has “looked upon [your] affliction” and “remembered” you (Genesis 29:32; 30:22).

Genesis 32–33

The Savior can heal my family.
As Jacob returned to Canaan, he was “greatly afraid and distressed” about how his brother, Esau, would receive him (Genesis 32:7). As you read Genesis 32–33, ponder your own family relationships—perhaps especially one that needs healing. Maybe this story could inspire you to reach out to someone. Questions like these could guide your reading:

How did Jacob prepare to meet Esau?

What stands out to you about Jacob’s prayer found in Genesis 32:9–12?

What do you learn about forgiveness from Esau’s example?

How can the Savior help us heal family relationships?

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon 01
Ideas for Teaching Children
Genesis 24:10–21

I can be kind to others.
To highlight Rebekah’s impressive example of kindness, you could show your children the picture below or this week’s activity page as you summarize the story in Genesis 24:10–21. Your children might enjoy acting out the story. This could lead to a conversation about acts of kindness you and your children have seen.

Consider singing a song about kindness together, such as “Kindness Begins with Me” (Children’s Songbook, 145). Your children could listen for the word “kindness” (or a similar word) and stand when they hear it. How can we be kind like Rebekah?

portrait of Rebekah
Old Testament Heroes, by Dilleen Marsh (detail)

Genesis 25:21–34

Eternal things are more important than worldly things.
Consider using “Jacob and Esau” (in Old Testament Stories, 38–41) to help your children understand the story in Genesis 25:21–34. Maybe your children could imagine that Esau asked for their advice about whether he should trade his birthright for the pottage. What would they say to him?



2:5
Jacob and Esau

What things matter eternally to you and your children? Perhaps your children could find pictures or objects that represent these things. How can we show the Lord that these things are important to us?

Genesis 28:10–22

Covenants help me return to Heavenly Father.
As you read Genesis 28:10–22 together, you could use a ladder or a staircase (or a picture like the one at the end of this outline) to talk about how our covenants are like a ladder. Maybe your children could pretend to climb a ladder, and with each step, talk about times when we promise to obey God, such as when we are baptized, take the sacrament, or go to the temple. How do our covenants bring us closer to God?

Genesis 32:6–11; 33:1–4

Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ can help me love my family.
To introduce these verses, you might explain that after many years of hard feelings, Jacob was going to meet Esau again. Read together Genesis 32:6–11. How did Jacob feel? What did he do to get help? Read together Genesis 33:1–4 to discover how the Lord answered Jacob’s prayer. If Jacob and Esau could talk to us today, what might they say to help us when there is contention in our family?

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Jacob dreaming of a ladder and angels descending from heaven
Jacob’s Dream, by J. Ken Spencer

Primary activity page: I can be kind to others
Open PDF
Feedback
