September 14–20. “God Is My Salvation”: Isaiah 1–12








Isaiah writing on a scroll
The Prophet Isaiah Foretells Christ’s Birth, by Harry Anderson

September 14–20: “God Is My Salvation”

Isaiah 1–12
Even if this is your first time reading the book of Isaiah, you might find passages that sound familiar. That’s because, of all the Old Testament prophets, Isaiah is the one most often quoted in other books of scripture, including by the Savior Himself. Isaiah’s words also appear often in hymns and other sacred music.

Why is Isaiah quoted so often? Surely one reason is that Isaiah had a gift for expressing the word of God in vivid, memorable language. But it’s more than that. Isaiah has inspired prophets for generations because the truths he taught transcended his own generation (between 740 and 701 BC). He wrote of God’s great work of redemption, which is much bigger than one nation or one time period. From Isaiah, Nephi learned that he and his people, though separated from the rest of Israel, were still part of God’s covenant people. In Isaiah, New Testament writers found prophecies about the Messiah that were fulfilled right before their eyes. And in Isaiah, Joseph Smith found inspiration for the latter-day work of gathering Israel and building Zion. When you read Isaiah, what will you find?

For more about Isaiah and his writings, see “Isaiah” in the Bible Dictionary. For information about the time when Isaiah lived, see 2 Kings 15–20 and 2 Chronicles 26–32.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Isaiah 1–12

The words of Isaiah will all be fulfilled.
The Savior taught that “all things that [Isaiah] spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake” (3 Nephi 23:3). As you study the book of Isaiah, consider making a chart of prophecies with headings like these: Isaiah’s day, The Savior’s mortal ministry, and The latter days. Note that many of Isaiah’s prophecies are fulfilled in more than one way (see Bible Dictionary, “Isaiah”).

President Dallin H. Oaks taught: “The book of Isaiah contains numerous prophecies that seem to have multiple fulfillments. One seems to involve the people of Isaiah’s day or the circumstances of the next generation. Another meaning, often symbolic, seems to refer to events in the meridian of time, when Jerusalem was destroyed and her people scattered after the crucifixion of the Son of God. Still another meaning or fulfillment of the same prophecy seems to relate to the events attending the Second Coming of the Savior. The fact that many of these prophecies can have multiple meanings underscores the importance of our seeking revelation from the Holy Ghost to help us interpret them” (“Scripture Reading and Revelation,” Ensign, Jan. 1995, 8).

Understanding Isaiah. The Savior said, “Search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah” (3 Nephi 23:1; see also verses 2–3). Yet to many, Isaiah can be difficult to understand. The following ideas might help:

Ponder the symbols and metaphors Isaiah used.

Ask yourself, “What am I learning about Jesus Christ?” (see 1 Nephi 19:23).

Look for topics that feel relevant to our time.

Use study helps, such as a dictionary, the footnotes, chapter headings, and the Guide to the Scriptures.

Isaiah 1; 3–5

seminary iconProphets warn about sin and promise hope through repentance.
Like prophets in all times, Isaiah continually warned the people about their spiritual condition. As you read Isaiah 1; 3; 5, look for phrases that describe how the people were doing spiritually (see, for example, Isaiah 1:2–4, 21–23; 3:9, 16–17; 5:11–12, 20–23). What similar problems do you see in our time? You might also look for verses that warn about the consequences of the Israelites’ spiritual condition (such as Isaiah 1:7; 3:17–26; 5:5–7, 13–15).

In addition to warnings, Isaiah gave messages of hope for redemption through the Savior (see, for example, Isaiah 1:16–19, 25–27; 3:10; 4). What do you learn about the Lord from these messages? How is the Lord’s message in these verses different from what Satan wants us to believe?

Like Isaiah, prophets today warn us about sin and its consequences, and they provide messages of hope through Jesus Christ. What examples can you think of? You might want to review a message from a past general conference, looking for such warnings and promises.

Isaiah 2; 4; 11–12

God will do a great work in the latter days.
Many of Isaiah’s prophecies have specific meaning for our day. To find them, look for future-tense verbs (such as “shall be” or “shall go”). For example, look for these verbs as you read Isaiah 2; 4; 11–12. You might even try replacing them with present-tense verbs (like is or is going). Which prophecies are especially inspiring to you? What do you learn from these prophecies about Zion, building temples, and gathering Israel?

Isaiah 2:2–3 is especially relevant for Latter-day Saints. How are these prophecies being fulfilled? What do you learn about the Lord’s “ways” and “paths” in His house? (verse 3).

See also Isaiah 5:26; “High on the Mountain Top,” Hymns, no. 5.

Isaiah 6

Prophets are called by God.
In Isaiah 6, Isaiah recounted his call to be a prophet. As you read this chapter, what impresses you about Isaiah’s experience? How does this chapter influence the way you think about the Lord, His prophets, and the work they are called to do?

Mary holding baby Jesus
“For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given” (Isaiah 9:6).

Isaiah 7–9

God promised to send Jesus Christ to be my Savior.
During Isaiah’s ministry, Israel formed an alliance with Syria to defend itself against Assyria. Israel and Syria wanted to force Ahaz, the king of Judah, to join them. But Isaiah prophesied that the alliance would fail and counseled Ahaz to trust in the Lord (Isaiah 7:7–9; 8:12–13).

While Isaiah counseled Ahaz, he made several well-known prophecies, such as those found in Isaiah 7:14; 8:13–14; 9:2, 6–7. Whatever these prophecies meant to Ahaz, they clearly apply to Jesus Christ (see also Matthew 1:21–23; 4:16; 21:44; Luke 1:31–33). Why is “Immanuel” a good title for the Savior? (see Matthew 1:23). How has He been a “Counsellor” or “Prince of Peace” to you? (Isaiah 9:7). What else do you learn about the Savior from these verses?

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Isaiah 1:2–4, 16–19

Because of Jesus Christ, I can repent and be clean.
In Isaiah 1:2–4, you and your children could find reasons that the Lord was not happy with the people. Note the comparison with animals in verse 3—who is our “master”? How do we show that we know Him?

To visualize Isaiah 1:16–18, you and your children could look at something bright red and something pure white. Or maybe you could work together to wash something. How do we become unclean spiritually? How does Jesus help us become clean? What do we learn about the Savior from these verses? Share with your children how you feel about Him and what He has done for you.

Isaiah 2:2–4

In the temple, I learn about Jesus Christ.
Isaiah foresaw a time when “the mountain of the Lord’s house” would attract people from “all nations” (Isaiah 2:2). How can you help your children feel excited about going to the Lord’s house? You could invite them to draw a picture of their home. Then read together Isaiah 2:2, and invite them to draw a picture of “the Lord’s house,” which is a temple. Read Isaiah 2:3 together. Invite them to add to their pictures many people coming to the temple, including their families.

You could also read Isaiah 2:2–3 together and identify something that inspires you and your children to go to the temple. Then, after reading Isaiah 2:4 together, you could discuss how the temple brings them peace. Consider singing a song about the temple, such as “I Love to See the Temple” (Children’s Songbook, 95). Help your children find words in the song that teach what the temple is and what we do there.

Salt Lake temple at dusk
Salt Lake Temple

Isaiah 7:14; 9:6–7

Jesus Christ came to earth to be my Savior.
To introduce Isaiah’s prophecies of Christ, you and your children could talk about titles of people, like president, bishop, or teacher. What do these titles tell us about these people? Help your children find titles of Jesus Christ in Isaiah 7:14 and 9:6–7 (see also this week’s activity page). What do each of these titles teach about Him? What else do we learn about Jesus Christ from these verses?

You could also share with your children “Isaiah the Prophet” (in Old Testament Stories, 150–51). Pause periodically to ask what Isaiah knew about Jesus Christ many years before He was born. You can then use Matthew 1:21–23; Luke 1:31–33 to talk about how Isaiah’s prophecies in Isaiah 7:14; 9:6–7 were fulfilled.



1:18
Isaiah the Prophet

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

a lightning strike in the sky above a temple
Isaiah taught that the temple would be “a place of refuge” and “a covert from storm and from rain” (Isaiah 4:6). Idaho Falls Idaho Temple

Primary activity page: Isaiah prophesied of Jesus Christ
Open PDF
Feedback

