November 30–December 6. “He Delighteth in Mercy”: Micah; Nahum; Habakkuk; Zephaniah








a man with arms outstretched, looking into a starry sky
In the Beginning Was the Word, by Eva Timothy

November 30–December 6: “He Delighteth in Mercy”

Micah; Nahum; Habakkuk; Zephaniah
Reading the Old Testament often means reading prophecies about destruction. The Lord frequently called prophets to warn the wicked about His judgments. The ministries of Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah are good examples. In dreadful detail, these prophets foretold the downfall of cities that, at the time, seemed strong and powerful: Nineveh, Babylon, and Jerusalem. But that was thousands of years ago. Why is it valuable to read these prophecies today?

Even though those prideful, wicked cities were destroyed, prideful wickedness persists. We may even detect traces of it in our own hearts. Old Testament prophets reveal how we can turn away from these evils. Perhaps that’s one reason we still read their words today. They weren’t just prophets of doom—they were prophets of deliverance. The descriptions of destruction are tempered by invitations to come unto Christ and receive His forgiveness. As Micah put it, the Lord does not delight in condemning us, but “he delighteth in mercy” (Micah 7:18). This was the Lord’s way anciently, and it is His way today. “His ways are everlasting” (Habakkuk 3:6).

For overviews of these books, see “Micah,” “Nahum,” “Habakkuk,” and “Zephaniah” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Micah 6:1–8

“What doth the Lord require of thee?”
Micah invites us to imagine what it might be like to “come before the Lord, and bow … before the high God” (Micah 6:6). What do verses 6–8 suggest to you about what is important to the Lord as He evaluates your life?

See also Dale G. Renlund, “Do Justly, Love Mercy, and Walk Humbly with God,” Ensign or Liahona, Nov. 2020, 109–12.

stone walls of a fortress
“The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble” (Nahum 1:7).

Nahum 1

The Lord is both powerful and merciful.
Nahum’s mission was to foretell the destruction of Nineveh—the capital of the violent empire Assyria, which had scattered Israel and brutalized Judah. Nahum began by describing God’s wrath and matchless power, but He also spoke about God’s mercy and goodness. Look for verses in chapter 1 that help you understand each of these attributes—and other attributes of God that you notice. Why do you think it is important to know each of these things about the Lord?

Habakkuk

seminary iconI can trust the Lord’s will and His timing.
Even prophets sometimes have questions about the Lord’s ways. Habakkuk, who lived at a time of widespread wickedness in Judah, began his record with questions to the Lord (see Habakkuk 1:1–4). How would you summarize Habakkuk’s concerns? What similar questions do people ask about God today? Have you ever had similar feelings? You could also compare his questions with others in the scriptures, such as those found in Mark 4:37–38 and Doctrine and Covenants 121:1–6.

The Lord responded to Habakkuk’s questions by saying that He would send the Chaldeans (the Babylonians) to punish Judah (see Habakkuk 1:5–11). But Habakkuk was still troubled, for it seemed unfair for the Lord to stand by “when the wicked [Babylon] devoureth the man that is more righteous [Judah]” (see verses 12–17). What do you find in Habakkuk 2:1–4 that inspires you to trust the Lord when you have unanswered questions? (see also Mark 4:39–40; Doctrine and Covenants 121:7–8; “God Will Lift Us Up” [video], Gospel Library).



4:59
God Will Lift Us Up

Chapter 3 is Habakkuk’s prayer of praise and faith. How is Habakkuk’s tone in chapter 3 different from chapter 1? Here’s an idea to help you ponder verses 17–19: Make a list of temporal and spiritual blessings God has given you. Then imagine that you lost the temporal blessings. How might that make you feel about the other blessings? Why might it be hard to “rejoice in the Lord” (verse 18) during hardships like those described in verse 17? Ponder how you can develop greater faith in God, even when life seems unfair.

See also Gerrit W. Gong, “All Things for Our Good,” Liahona, May 2024, 41–44; “Lead, Kindly Light,” Hymns, no. 97; Topics and Questions, “Seeking Answers to Questions,” Gospel Library.

Be patient. Sometimes we want answers to our questions right away, but spiritual insights take time and cannot be forced. As the Lord told Habakkuk, “Wait for it; because it will surely come” (Habakkuk 2:3).

Zephaniah

“Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth.”
As you read Zephaniah’s prophecies, notice the attitudes and behaviors that led to destruction—see especially Zephaniah 1:4–6, 12; 2:8, 10, 15; 3:1–4. Then look for the characteristics of the people God would preserve—see Zephaniah 2:1–3; 3:12–13, 18–19. What message do you feel the Lord has for you in these verses?

Zephaniah 3:14–20

The Lord will rejoice with His people in Zion.
After reading Zephaniah 3:14–20, see how many ways you can complete this sentence: “Be glad and rejoice with all the heart” because … Why is it important to you to know about these reasons to rejoice? You might compare these verses to the experiences described in 3 Nephi 17 and ponder how Jesus Christ feels about His people—including you.

For more, see this month’s issues of the Liahona and For the Strength of Youth magazines.

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Micah 5:2

Jesus Christ was born in Bethlehem.
Your children may not know that it was a prophecy by Micah that helped the Wise Men find the baby Jesus in Bethlehem. Using Micah 5:2 and Matthew 2:1–6, perhaps your children could reenact their experience. Then you could talk about why Jesus’s birth was so important that prophets knew about it many years before He was born.

three Wise Men gazing at the new star
The Holy Child Is Born, by Dana Wood

Nahum 1:7

“The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble.”
After reading Nahum 1:7, your children could build or draw a simple “strong hold” or fortress (there’s a picture of one in this outline). What are some reasons people might need a fortress? What makes our day a “day of trouble”? How is Jesus Christ like a stronghold for us?

Habakkuk 2:3

God will always fulfill His promises.
To introduce Habakkuk 2:3, you and your children could talk about things that are good but only after we wait—like fruit that needs to ripen or dough that needs to bake. What would happen if we tried to eat the fruit or the dough before it was ready? Then you could talk about the prophet Habakkuk, who wanted to know when the Lord would stop the wickedness in the world. Read the Lord’s answer in Habakkuk 2:3. You could help your children think of things that God has promised. With each example, you could say together, “Wait for it; because it will surely come.”

Habakkuk 2:14

I can help fill the earth with knowledge of Jesus Christ.
To illustrate Habakkuk 2:14, you and your children could fill a jar or other container with pictures or words representing things Jesus did or taught. How can we help fill the world with knowledge of the Lord?

You could also show your children a map of the world (see Church History Maps, no. 7, “Map of the World”). Help them find the place where they live and places where missionaries they know have served. You could sing together a song about sharing the gospel, such as “We’ll Bring the World His Truth” (Children’s Songbook, 172–73). What can we tell others about Jesus Christ?

Zephaniah 3:14–20

Jesus Christ rejoices with those who follow Him.
In Zephaniah 3:14–20, your children could look for something that makes them want to “sing, … be glad and rejoice with all the heart.” Perhaps you could sing some joyful hymns or songs together and talk about the joy you find in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Jesus smiling at a group of children
And He Took Their Little Children One by One, by Casey Childs

Primary activity page: Seek ye the Lord
Open PDF
Feedback

