November 16–22. “I Will Love Them Freely”: Hosea 1–6; 10–14; Joel








a newly married couple outside a temple
November 16–22: “I Will Love Them Freely”

Hosea 1–6; 10–14; Joel
Israel’s covenant with the Lord was meant to be so deep and meaningful that the Lord compared it to a marriage. The covenant, like a marriage, included eternal commitment, shared experiences, building a life together, exclusive loyalty, and, most of all, wholehearted love. Sadly, the Israelites were not faithful to their covenant. And yet the Lord’s message to them was not “I will reject you forever.” Instead it was “I will invite you back” (see Hosea 2:14–15). “I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness,” He declared through the prophet Hosea (Hosea 2:19). “I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely” (Hosea 14:4). This is the same message He gives us today as we seek to live our covenants with love and devotion.

Joel shared a similar message: “Turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness” (Joel 2:13). Reading these prophets’ words may prompt you to ponder your own relationship with the Lord—to think about how His faithfulness to you inspires you to be faithful to Him.

For an overview of the books of Hosea and Joel, see “Hosea, or Hoshea” and “Joel” in the Bible Dictionary.

study icon
Ideas for Learning at Home and at Church
Hosea 1–3; 14

The Lord always invites me to return to Him.
Hosea’s wife, Gomer, was unfaithful to him, and God pointed to this sad event to teach the Israelites how He felt about them and their covenants with Him. As you read Hosea 1–3, ponder how the Lord views His relationship with His covenant people. How is making a covenant with the Lord like entering into a marriage? How is failing to keep that covenant like being unfaithful to a spouse? (see Hosea 2:5–7, 13). What does Hosea 2:14–23 teach you about the Lord’s love and mercy? How do you show Him your love and loyalty?

In Hosea 14, look for the many beautiful promises the Lord makes to those who return to Him. What does the phrase “love them freely” mean to you? (verse 4). What do the plant metaphors in verses 5–8 teach you about the Lord’s blessings, including the blessings of repentance? As part of your study, consider singing or listening to a hymn about the Savior’s mercy, such as “Come unto Jesus” (Hymns, no. 117).

a downcast woman
Gomer, who represents the house of Israel and their broken covenants, was offered redemption by the Lord. Illustration by Deb Minnard, licensed from goodsalt.com

Hosea 6:4–7; Joel 2:12–13

Devotion to God must be felt inwardly, not just expressed outwardly.
The people in Hosea’s day were offering animal sacrifices, but they were breaking more important commandments. What do you think it means that the Lord “desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings”? (Hosea 6:6). What do you think it means for righteousness to be like a cloud or like dew? (see Hosea 6:4). What should our righteousness be like? (see Isaiah 48:18; 1 Nephi 2:9–10).

You could also read Matthew 9:10–13; 12:1–8 to see how the Savior used Hosea 6:6 during His ministry. How do these passages help you understand Hosea’s words?

When reading Joel 2:12–13, it might help to know that rending or tearing one’s clothing was an outward sign of mourning or remorse. How is rending our hearts different from rending our garments?

Joel 2

seminary icon“I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh.”
What similarities do you see between our day and the day Joel foresaw? (see especially Joel 2:1–2, 11, 18–32). What impresses you about the blessings the Lord promised in verses 18–32? Why might these blessings be especially valuable today?

It might be interesting to read what Moroni said about Joel 2 when he visited Joseph Smith in 1823 (see Joseph Smith—History 1:41). How do you feel the prophecies in Joel 2:28–32 are being fulfilled in our day? (see also Acts 2:1–21). What do you think it means that the Lord would “pour out [His] spirit upon all flesh”? (Joel 2:28).

You might ponder these words from President Russell M. Nelson: “In coming days, it will not be possible to survive spiritually without the guiding, directing, comforting, and constant influence of the Holy Ghost” (“Revelation for the Church, Revelation for Our Lives,” Ensign or Liahona, May 2018, 96). Why is revelation essential to your spiritual survival?

What can you do if you feel like you aren’t receiving that outpouring? Here are some examples that might help. What did the people in these scriptures do to receive an outpouring of the Lord’s Spirit?

Mosiah 4:1–3, 19–20; 18:7–11

Helaman 6:34–36

Doctrine and Covenants 19:37–41

As you read these words from Elder David A. Bednar, ponder what it means to you to feel an outpouring of the Holy Ghost in your daily life:

“We often make it hard on ourselves to receive personal revelation. By that I mean the covenant promise is that as we honor our covenants, we may always have the Holy Ghost to be our constant companion. But we talk about it and we treat it as if hearing the voice of the Lord through His Spirit is the rare event. … [The Spirit] ought to be with us all of the time. Not every nanosecond, but if a person is doing his or her best—you don’t have to be perfect—but if you and I are doing our best and we’re not committing serious transgression, then we can count on the Holy Ghost guiding us. …

“… We seem to believe that the Holy Ghost is dramatic and big and sudden, when it’s still and small and incremental over time” (“Elder David A. Bednar Discussion” [evening with a General Authority, Feb. 7, 2020], broadcasts.ChurchofJesusChrist.org).

See also Gary E. Stevenson, “Promptings of the Spirit,” Liahona, Nov. 2023, 42–45; “Enemy Territory” (video), Gospel Library.



3:38
Enemy Territory

Create a spiritual environment. “What have you observed that contributes to a spiritual environment for learning the gospel? What detracts from it? … Think about the setting where you most often teach [or learn]. How do you feel when you are there? How can you more effectively invite the Spirit to be present there?” (Teaching in the Savior’s Way, 7).

children section icon
Ideas for Teaching Children
Hosea 2:19–20

I can faithfully keep my covenants.
In the book of Hosea, the Lord compared His covenants with His people to a marriage. To learn from this comparison, you and your children could look at a picture of a bride and groom and talk about how Heavenly Father wants a husband and wife to treat each other. Help your children find words in Hosea 2:19–20 that describe how the Lord feels about us. How can we show the Lord that we love Him and will be faithful to Him?

Hosea 10:12

“It is time to seek the Lord.”
Hosea 10:12 refers to sowing, reaping, time, and rain to invite us to seek the Lord. As you read this verse, what creative ideas come to mind that could inspire the children to seek Him? For example, maybe your children could draw a clock and write down ways they can seek the Lord at different times throughout the day. A song like “Anytime, Anywhere” (Gospel Library) could help you teach that it is always a good time to seek the Lord.

Or your children could do simple actions that go with the verse, such as pretending to plant seeds, pick vegetables, or stand in the rain. Help your children compare planting a seed and reaping good food to living righteously and receiving the Lord’s blessings. Then you could tell each other about the blessings the Lord has rained upon you as you have tried to seek Him.

Hosea 13:4, 14

Jesus Christ is my Savior and Redeemer.
To emphasize the truth in Hosea 13:4 that there is no Savior except Jesus Christ, you could show your children pictures of several people, including Jesus. Your children could take turns pointing to the person who has the power to save us from sin and death. Share your testimony of Jesus Christ and His Atonement.

Your children could look for words in Hosea 13:4, 14 that describe Jesus Christ. What do these words teach us about Him? Consider helping your children use the Guide to the Scriptures to find other scriptures that teach that Jesus is our Savior and Redeemer. Share with each other how you feel about Jesus Christ.

a boy praying
Joel 2:28–29

The Holy Ghost can guide me.
Maybe you could help your children understand Joel 2:28–29 by letting them pour a liquid and then contrasting it with a drip or a trickle. What could it mean for the Spirit to be “poured out” upon us?

As you read Joel 2:28–29 together, you might invite your children to insert each other’s names in place of the phrases “your sons” and “your daughters.” Then help them search scriptures like John 14:16; Moroni 10:5; Doctrine and Covenants 42:17 to find out how the Spirit can help them.

For more, see this month’s issue of the Friend magazine.

Jesus beckoning in a doorway
Savior, by Kelly Pugh

Primary activity page: The Holy Ghost can guide me
Open PDF
Feedback

