Normal anatomy and Doppler waveforms 
normal = hepatopetal ˜ow (towards the liver) hepatic arteries and portal veins ˜ow in the same direction 

RHA = right hepatic artery LHA = left hepatic artery CHA = common hepatic artery RPV = right portal vein LPV = left portal vein MPV = main portal vein 

•	 The normal hepatic artery waveform is pulsatile and towards the liver, called hepatopedal flow (-pedal = toward). 
Normal hepatic artery waveform: 
Doppler tracing shows a pulsatile waveform, above the baseline, indicating hepatopedal flow. The peak height corresponds to the peak systolic velocity while the trough corresponds to end-diastolic velocity. A typical resistive index (RI) is 0.55–0.7. 
RI is calculated by (peak systolic velocity – end diastolic velocity) / peak systolic velocity. 

•	 
The normal portal vein waveform is above the baseline (hepatopedal) and gently undulating (phasic) with velocity ranging from 16–40 cm/sec. 

•	 
The hepatic veins feed into the IVC and the right side of the heart. The spectral Doppler waveform is pulsatile and representative of changes during the cardiac cycle, though with the majority of blood flowing antegrade (away from the liver and towards the heart). The normal hepatic venous waveform has four distinct components: The A, S, V and D waves. 




Normal portal vein waveform. Normal hepatic vein waveform. 
A-wave 
V-wave 

atrial 
tricuspid 

systole 

valve 
retrograde 
opens
(towards transducer) 

anterograde (into heart; away from transducer) 




D-wave 
ventricular 


S-wave 
diastole 

ventricular systole 
A-wave: Atrial contraction, during which blood is forced retrograde (away from the heart) into the liver. S-wave: Ventricular systole, during which a large volume of blood returns to the right atrium. V-wave: Atrial overfilling, followed by tricuspid valve opening (peak of the V-wave) and early ventricular 
diastolic filling of the right ventricle. D-wave: Continued filling of the right ventricle during ventricular diastole, during which a smaller volume of blood returns to the right atrium. 


Portal vein pathologies 
Portal venous pulsatility 
•	 While the normal portal venous waveform may be gently undulating (described as phasic), a pulsatile portal venous waveform is abnormal. The differential diagnosis for a pulsatile portal venous waveform includes tricuspid regurgitation and right-sided heart failure. 

Portal vein thrombosis 
•	 
Thrombosis of the portal vein can be bland (simple thrombosis) or may be due to tumor invasion. 

•	 
Bland portal vein thrombus can be caused by a hypercoagulable state or may be due to local 


inflammation from pancreatitis or hepatitis. In infants, omphalitis or dehydration may also lead to portal vein thrombosis. 
•	 Tumor thrombus is most commonly caused by HCC and is referred to as “tumor-in-vein”. 

Grayscale transverse image of the porta hepatis shows echogenic debris within the main portal vein (arrows). Color Doppler confirms partial portal vein thrombosis with lack of flow in the proximal portal vein (arrow). 
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston. 
•	 Ultrasound of portal vein thrombosis shows lack of portal venous flow, often with echogenic 
thrombus within the portal vein. Expansion/enlargement of the portal vein can be seen with either bland or tumor thrombus. On color Doppler, flow within the thrombus suggests tumor thrombus. 
•	 
One potential pitfall to be aware of is slow (<16 cm/sec) or stagnant portal venous flow in the presence of portal hypertension, which may mimic portal vein thrombosis. 

•	 
Long-standing portal vein thrombosis leads to cavernous transformation of the portal vein, characterized by formation of multiple small periportal collateral vessels. 



Cavernous transformation of the portal vein: Grayscale transverse image of the porta hepatis shows numerous tubular hypoechoic structures in the expected location of the portal vein (arrows). Color Doppler (right image) demonstrates flow within these collateral vessels, with no identifiable portal vein. 
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston 
Portal venous gas 
•	 
Portal venous gas is due to bowel ischemia/infarction until proven otherwise. If the cause of the portal venous gas is unknown, CT should be performed emergently. 

•	 
Grayscale ultrasound shows peripheral branching echogenic foci that may be transient or seen to change position on cine clips. Spectral Doppler of the portal vein features numerous characteristic spikes. 

•	 
In contrast to portal venous gas, pneumobilia tends to be more central (discussed later in the chapter). 



•	 Portal hypertension is increased pressure of the portal venous system. Etiology is classified 
in relation to the hepatic capillary bed as pre-sinusoidal, sinusoidal, or post-sinusoidal: Pre-sinusoidal: Insult is proximal to the hepatic parenchyma, such as portal vein thrombosis. Sinusoidal: Insult is hepatic in origin, such as cirrhosis. Post-sinusoidal: Insult is beyond the liver, such as Budd-Chiari (hepatic vein thrombosis) or IVC thrombosis. 
•	 
Portal pressure is defined as a direct portal venous pressure of >5 mm Hg, although the portal venous pressure is not measured directly. 

•	 
Ultimately, when portal venous pressure is higher than forward pressure, the portal venous flow may decrease below 16 cm/sec or reverse (called hepatofugal; -fugal = away, same Latin root as fugitive), which is diagnostic for portal hypertension. 


reversed = hepatofugal ˜ow hepatic arteries and portal veins ˜ow in opposite directions 

•	 In addition to slow flow or flow reversal, there are several secondary findings of portal 
hypertension: 
Dilated portal vein (13 mm is the maximal normal diameter in quiet respiration). 
Splenomegaly. 
Gamna-Gandy bodies. 
Varices. 
Portosystemic shunts (most commonly gastroesophageal, paraumbilical, or splenorenal). Note that an 
isolated portosystemic shunt may not be caused by portal hypertension. For instance, isolated obstruction of the splenic vein from pancreatitis-related thrombosis or neoplasm may lead to a shunt. However, a recanalized paraumbilical vein is diagnostic of portal hypertension. 



Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 
•	 
Portal hypertension (and reversal of portal flow) can be treated with a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS), which connects a branch of the portal vein to a systemic hepatic vein. 

•	 
Ultrasound is used for surveillance of TIPS patency, starting with a post-procedure baseline. Routine follow-up is performed according to the following schedule: in 1 month, every 3 months for the first year, and then every 6 to 12 months. 

•	 
Flow in a patent TIPS will be towards the hepatic veins, and flow in the portal veins will be towards the TIPS. Therefore, flow in the main portal vein will be hepatopetal and flow in the right and left portal veins will be hepatofugal (highlighted below with yellow circles). 

•	 
US can evaluate for stenosis of the TIPS. 




TIPS stenosis: Spectral Doppler of a TIPS shows a velocity of 45 cm/sec, indicative of stenosis due to slow flow. 
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston 
High intra-TIPS velocity >190 cm/sec or low intra-TIPS velocity of <90 cm/sec suggests stenosis. Intra-TIPS velocity change of ± >50 cm/sec since the baseline study is also concerning for stenosis. Low main portal vein velocity (<30 cm/sec) suggests TIPS stenosis. 

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS; continued) 
•	 If the TIPS becomes occluded, the right and left portal vein will “re-reverse” and become hepatopetal. 


Increased hepatic vein pulsatility 
•	 Increased hepatic vein pulsatility is caused by a right-sided cardiac abnormality, either right-sided heart failure or tricuspid regurgitation. Both conditions are characterized by accentuated A- and V-waves due to increased retrograde flow during atrial systole. 
tricuspid regurgitation right-sided CHF 
accentuated accentuated A-wave and V-wave A-wave and V-wave 

Tricuspid regurgitation: Normally, the tricuspid valve closes at the beginning of ventricular systole (the beginning of the S-wave), allowing for filling of the right atrium (S-wave). In tricuspid regurgitation, there is less or even reversed antegrade flow into the right atrium during ventricular systole, resulting in a prominent A-wave and decreased or even retrograde S wave. 
Right-sided heart failure: Waveform is affected by too much blood volume in the right side of the cardiovascular system, including the right atrium, resulting in tall A- and V-waves due to increased right atrial pressure; however, in contrast to tricuspid regurgitation, the S-wave is normal since the tricuspid valve remains competent. 
Decreased hepatic vein pulsatility 
•	 Decreased hepatic vein pulsatility due to hepatic vein narrowing or compression is seen in cirrhosis, Budd-Chiari (hepatic vein thrombosis), and hepatic veno-occlusive disease. 

Flattened hepatic vein waveform thought to be due to chemotherapy-related liver injury and/or fatty liver. 



