Introduction
This study guide has been created to assist examinees in preparing for the noninterpretive skills (NIS)
section of the American Board of Radiology (ABR) Core and Certifying exams administered through
calendar year 2025.
The guide has undergone a few changes compared to the 2021 version. The primary changes in this
version are the expansion of Artificial Intelligence concepts in Informatics and additional content on
decision support to the regulatory chapter. Details of contrast safety and MR safety have also been
updated, reflecting new published guidelines.
The determination of whether specific NIS topics merit inclusion in the study guide—and on the
exams—is based primarily on two factors. First, material contained in the NIS section should reflect
knowledge that is needed to perform effectively in a modern radiology practice. Second, the public
interest should be served by expecting the examinee to know the material.
Core Elements of Professionalism were deemed to merit inclusion because they reflect basic principles
to which all physicians, including radiologists, should adhere. Core Concepts of Quality and Safety
were included because they reflect underlying principles that drive quality and safety in any complex
environment. Practical Quality and Safety Applications in Healthcare contain quality and safety
strategies as they are applied to healthcare. Practical Safety Applications in Radiology focus on
radiology-specific topics such as MR safety and management of intravenous contrast material.
Reimbursement, Regulatory Compliance, and Legal Considerations in Radiology reflect mechanisms
that external parties use to ensure quality and safety in radiology practice. Informatics and artificial
intelligence represent a growing area where knowledge is integral to the modern practice of Radiology.
The guide covers the majority of general conceptual and practical NIS information contained in the
Core and Certifying exams. However, questions on important subspecialty-specific quality and safety
knowledge and skills are also included on the exams that are not included in this guide, especially
those related to nuclear medicine and other procedure-based specialties. Examinees should be
knowledgeable in basic quality and safety practices relevant to all subspecialties regardless of whether
they are included in this study guide. Physics topics, including radiation safety, are on the exam but
not included in the NIS section.
Examinees are expected to understand general NIS concepts rather than esoteric details. For example,
examinees should understand regulatory requirements that are relevant to daily radiology practice, as
well as their underlying purpose. Less emphasis is placed on more superficial details, such as the
names of the various regulatory agencies.
This study guide will continue to evolve in future years to reflect continuing changes in the noninterpretive knowledge and skills needed to practice effectively in a modern radiology practice.
We also draw your attention to the references provided at the end of each chapter. We recommend that
you consult these “deeper” resources, which provide perspective and depth of understanding of the
concepts that are only superficially outlined in this study guide.