Chapter1: Core Elements of Professionalism
1.1 ABIM Physician Charter for
Medical Professionalism in the New
Millennium
Merriam-Webster defines a profession as “a
calling requiring specialized knowledge and
often long and in- tensive academic
preparation.” Professionalism, defined as “the
conduct, aims, or qualities that characterize or
mark a profession or a professional person,”
has been characterized as the basis of
medicine’s contract with society. Several
fundamental principles and physician
responsibilities that apply to all professionals in
medicine have been specified in a Physician
Charter supported by the American Board of
Internal Medicine (ABIM). Ten professional
responsibilities support the following three
fundamental principles of medical
professionalism:
1. Principle of primacy of patient welfare.
Physicians must be dedicated to serving
the interest of the patient. Trust is
central to the physician-patient
relationship, which must not be
compromised by market forces, societal
pressures, or administrative exigencies.
2. Principle of patient autonomy.
Physicians must be honest with their
patients and empower them to make
informed decisions about their
treatment. Patients’ decisions about
their care must be paramount, as long as
they are in keeping with ethical practice
and do not lead to demands for
inappropriate care.
3. Principle of social justice. The medical
profession must promote the fair
distribution of healthcare resources.
Physicians should work actively to
eliminate discrimination in healthcare.
The 10 professionalresponsibilities are
summarized below:
1. Commitment to professional
competence. Physicians must be
committed to lifelong learning of
medical knowledge and team skills
necessary for the provision of quality
care. More broadly, the profession as a
whole must strive to see that all of its
members are competent and must
ensure that appropriate mechanisms are
available for physicians to accomplish
this goal.
2. Commitment to honesty with patients.
Physicians must ensure that patients are
completely and honestly informed
before the patient has consented to
treatment and after treatment has
occurred. Medical errors should be
communicated promptly to patients
whenever injury has occurred.
Physicians should be committed to
reporting and analyzing medical
mistakes to develop appropriate
prevention and improvement strategies.
3. Commitment to patient confidentiality.
Physicians are responsible for
safeguarding patient information.
Fulfilling this commitment is more
pressing now than ever before, given
the widespread use of electronic
information systems. However,
considerations of public interest may
occasionally override this commitment,
such as when patients endanger others.
4. Commitment to maintaining
appropriate relations with patients.
Given the inherent vulnerability and
dependency of patients, certain
relationships between physicians and
patients must be avoided. In particular,
physicians should never exploit patients
for any sexual advantage, personal
financial gain, or other private purpose.
5. Commitment to improving quality of
care. Physicians should not only
maintain clinical competence, but
should work collaboratively with other
professionals to continuously improve
the quality of healthcare, including
reducing medical errors, increasing
patient safety, improving utilization of
healthcare resources, and optimizing
outcomes of care.
6. Commitment to improving access to
care. Physicians should work
individually and collectively toward
providing a uniform and adequate
standard of care and reducing barriers
to equitable healthcare. These barriers
may be based on education, laws,
finances, geography, or social
discrimination. This commitment entails
the promotion of public health and
preventive medicine, without
promotion of the self-interest of the
physician or the profession.
7. Commitment to a just distribution of
finite resources. To provide costeffective health care, physicians should
work with other physicians, hospitals,
and payers to develop evidence-based
guidelines for effective use of healthcare
resources. This includes the scrupulous
avoidance of superfluous tests and
procedures to reduce patient exposure
to harm, decrease health expenses, and
improve access to resources for patients
who need them.
8. Commitment to scientific knowledge.
Physicians should uphold scientific
standards, promote research, and create
new medical knowledge and ensure its
appropriate use. The integrity of this
knowledge is based on scientific
evidence and physician experience.
9. Commitment to maintaining trust by
managing conflicts of interest. Medical
professionals and organizations can
compromise their professional
responsibilities by pursuing private gain
or personal advantage, especially
through interactions with for-profit
companies. Physicians have an
obligation to recognize, disclose to the
general public, and deal with conflicts of
interest that arise in the course of their
professional duties and activities.
Relationships between industry and
opinion leaders should be disclosed,
especially when physicians are
determining criteria for conducting and
reporting clinical trials, writing
editorials or therapeutic guidelines, or
serving as editors of scientific journals.
10. Commitment to professional
responsibilities. Physicians have both
individual and collective obligations to
work collaboratively to maximize
patient care, be respectful of one
another, and participate in the processes
of self-regulation, including remediation
and discipline of members who have
failed to meet professional standards.
The profession should also define and
organize the educational and standardsetting process for current and future
members. These obligations include
engaging in internal assessment and
accepting external scrutiny of all aspects
of their professional performance.

1.2 Ethical Considerations Specific to
Radiology
The ABIM professional responsibilities largely
overlap with the Code of Ethics as described in
the American College of Radiology (ACR)
Bylaws. However, several principles and rules
of ethics apply specifically to the field of
radiology, as stated by the ACR.
1. Professional limitations. The Bylaws
state that radiologists should be aware
of their limitations and to seek
consultations in clinical situations where
appropriate. Any limitations should be
appropriately disclosed to patients and
referring physicians.
2. Reporting of illegal or unethical
conduct. To safeguard the public and
the profession against physicians
deficient in moral character or
professional competence, radiologists
are expected to report any perceived
illegal or unethical conduct of medical
professionals to the appropriate
governing body.
3. Report signature. Radiologists should
not sign a report or claim attribution of
an imaging study interpretation that
was rendered by another physician,
making the reader of a report believe
that the signing radiologist was the
interpreter.
4. Participation in quality and safety
activities. Radiologists who actively
interpret images should participate in
quality assurance, technology
assessment, utilization review, and
other matters of policy that affect the
quality and safety of care.
5. Self-referral. Referring patients to
healthcare facilities in which
radiologists have a financial interest is
not in the best interest of patients and
may violate the Rules of Ethics.
6. Harassment. Radiologists are expected
to relate to other members of the
healthcare team with mutual respect
and refrain from harassment or unfair
discriminatory behavior.
7. Undue influence. Radiologists should
seek to ensure that the system of
healthcare delivery in which they
practice does not unduly influence the
selection and performance of
appropriate available imaging studies or
therapeutic procedures.
8. Agreements for provision of highquality care. Radiologists should not
enterinto an agreement that prohibits
the provision of medically necessary
care or that requires care at below
acceptable standards.
9. Misleading billing arrangements.
Radiologists should not participate in
billing arrangements that mislead
patients or payers concerning the fees
charged.
10. Expert medical testimony. Radiologists
should exercise extreme caution to
ensure that the testimony provided is
nonpartisan, scientifically correct, and
clinically accurate. Compensation that is
contingent upon the outcome of
litigation is unacceptable.
11. Research integrity. Radiologic research
must be performed with integrity and
be honestly reported.
12. Plagiarism. Claiming others’ intellectual
property as one’s own is unethical. This
includes plagiarism or the use of others’
work without attribution.
13. Misleading publicizing. Radiologists
should not publicize themselves
through any medium orforum of public
communication in an untruthful,
misleading, or deceptive manner.