Chapter 3: Practical Quality and Safety Applications in
Healthcare
3.1 Practical QualityApplications in
Healthcare
Quality improvement activities can be divided
into two aspects: 1) frequent small
improvement efforts conducted in close
association with the management of the day-today clinical operations and 2) dedicated
improvement projects to address areas of
performance that generally require more
focused improvement efforts.
3.1.1 Daily Management Systems
A daily management system (DMS) provides a
day- to-day operating framework for leaders to
engage with staff to solve problems on a
continuous basis. The objective of the DMS is to
facilitate communication and coordination
within and across organizational units and
roles in the organization. For example, in a
radiology department, a DMS allows for
coordination and communication between 1)
radiologists, technologists, nurses, medical
assistants, IT professionals, administrators, etc.;
2) front line staff, managers, and leaders; and 3)
the radiology department and other units such
as the emergency department, inpatient units,
medical and surgical specialties, etc.
A DMS can be implemented in a variety of
ways to meet local organizational needs.
However, DMS programs tend to have a few
core elements that help them achieve the
programs’ objectives.
Tiered Huddles
A huddle is a brief structured meeting
occurring in an organizational unit in which
participants review what has recently occurred,
the current status of the unit, and what is
anticipated in the nearfuture. First-tier huddles
are held within local units and involve all
frontline staff on service for the day. Unit
leaders then attend huddles at a higher tier,
whose leaders in turn attend huddles at a
higher tier, up to the executive team. Huddles
generally take place at a visibility board (often
simply an organized white board), which tracks
important elements of the daily management
huddles for all staff members to see.
Goal and Metrics Review
Organizational goals help focus the members
on making tangible progress toward better
fulfillment of the organization’s missions.
Performance metrics enable members of the
organization to objectively determine how well
those goals are being met. Ideally such goals
and metrics should be aligned with the stated
values of the organization, including excellence
in care, patient safety, patient and family
experience, efficiency, etc. A brief review of
quantitative metrics at the huddle on a regular
basis helps the organization make iterative
improvements to facilitate continued progress
toward the goals.
Daily Readiness Assessment
A daily readiness assessment reviewed at the
huddle helps the staff be aware of the number
and types of patients to be seen that day and to
determine whether they are prepared to
accommodate their needs. Topics that are
typically reviewed include 1) methods:
ensuring that the proper protocols and plans
are in place to accommodate patients, especially
those with special needs, 2) equipment:
reviewing whether all of the equipment is
operational and staff have appropriate training,
3) supplies: ensuring that all needed supplies
are available for use, and 4) associates: ensuring
that appropriate staff are in place to meet
patient needs and that any staff shortages have
been accommodated.
Problem Management and Accountability Cycle
Continuous problem solving is a critical
element of the DMS. Staff are encouraged to
identify problems at the daily huddle. Problems
are documented on the visibility board, along
with an “owner” of the problem and an
expected resolution date. Problems that are
more complex often are listed on a separate
board along with the owner of the problem, the
date the issue was first identified, and a date on
which the owner is expected to make a progress
report.
Regular Follow-up
The regular cadence of the daily huddles, along
with the tracking of assignments on the visibility
board, provides a mechanism to routinely follow
up on assignments.
This visibility and follow-up greatly increases
the likelihood that assignments will be
completed or revised as needed.
Frequent Visits to the Workplace
A core tenet of effective management is that one
must see what is happening in the workplace to
truly understand it. Managers and leaders are
encouraged to minimize the time spent in
closed-door meetings in favor of spending time
where the work is done. When individuals visit
the workplace, they are expected to respectfully
observe and ask questions to learn about the
work; they should not give direction, solve
problems, or otherwise interfere with the work
during this time.
3.1.2 Project-based Improvement Methods
Problems that are too difficult to solve using
routine daily problem-solving methods may be
more amenable to dedicated improvement
projects. Several well-known improvement
models exist, including Lean, Six Sigma, and
the Model for Improvement. Each of these
models uses a similar approach to structuring
improvement projects, though framed in
different ways. The following sections
summarize the major steps that the models
share.
Identifying a Problem
As it relates to improvement, the term
“problem” can be interpreted two ways: 1)
something that is difficult to deal with, a source
of trouble, worry, etc. and 2) something to be
worked out or solved, such as an arithmetic
problem.
The fact that the problem is a source of trouble
is what drives the organization to decide to
focus improvement in a specific area. Before
beginning the project, leaders should make sure
that it addresses a problem that is of high
importance to the organization, so that it will
receive needed support when challenges arise.
Framing the problem as a challenge to be
solved helps depersonalize the issue and turn it
into an opportunity for improvement. Clearly
defining the problem is the first step in solving
the problem, helping to ensure that the project
team remains focused and aligned as team
members evaluate causes and consider possible
solutions.
Forming a Team
To effectively carry out the project, a dedicated
team is organized for a limited period of time
and given the guidance, resources, instruction,
and authority needed to make process and
other organizational changes to improve
performance in a sustainable way. Projectroles
typically include the following:
• Project Sponsor: This individual provides
organizational oversight and support,
removing barriers as they arise. The
sponsor should have the organizational
authority to provide resources and
resolve interpersonal conflicts. Projects
may have more than one sponsor.
While sponsors may provide general
guidance and suggestions, they
should be careful to avoid
overstepping their bounds and
assuming the project leader’s role.
• Project Leader: The project leader’s role is
to direct and coordinate activities of the
project to ensure its success. The leader
helps assemble the team, manage the
project, delegate and follow up on
assignments, report on progress, alert
the project sponsor when more help is
needed, and ensure the timely
completion of the project. Project leaders
should have strong organizational and
leadership skills.
• Project Participants: Participants should
be selected from the areas targeted for
improvement; each organizational unit
included in the process targeted for
improvement must be represented on
the team. It is generally more effective to
select “front-line” staff who perform the
work on a daily basis rather than
supervisors, managers, or other
organizational leaders. Participation
should be voluntary.
• Project Coach: The project coach is an
expert in improvement methods who
advises and supports the team. The
coach helps guide the project leader and
team, facilitates communication with the
sponsor, and alerts organizational
leaders when the project appears to be
veering off track. However, the coach
should avoid encroaching on the role of
project leader or performing tasks of the
project participants.
Assessing Current Performance
Improvement project team members are
expected to visit the workplace and spend at
least several hours quietly observing and taking
notes. Team members should respectfully ask
questions to deeply understand the process:
what is done and why it is done that way. They
should convene and discuss their observations,
mapping out the process, and then revisit the
workplace to validate their observations. They
should, to the extent possible, observe all steps
in the process at different times of day and days
of the week.
Measuring Performance
To be able to assess performance in an objective
and repeatable fashion, team members should
develop performance measures. These may
include outcome measures, including those of end
outcomes such as morbidity, patient satisfaction,
and costs, as well as those of intermediate
outcomes, such as service times, error rates, and
supply utilization. In addition to outcomes
measures, process measures can be used such as
adherence to standard work, equipment
utilization rates, and times for each process
step.
After one or more quantitative measures are
established, performance should be tracked and
monitored. Performance can be monitored with
a run chart, which displays data over time. The
run chart should display the mean before the
beginning of the project and at the end of the
project, as well as the performance goal. An
annotated run chart is a run chart that also
indicates the dates and the nature of
interventions implemented during the project
(Fig. 3.1).

Establishing a Specific Goal
The project team should establish a
performance goal (often referred to as an aim
statement). A commonly used acronym to
describe the attributes of the goal is “SMART,”
meaning that the goal should be specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant, and timebound. The goal should state the beginning
performance, the end performance, and the
date (i.e., “from what, to what, by when”). For
example, the goal might state, “Our goal is to
decrease mean daily examination completion
time from 120 minutes to 30 minutes by July 1,
2018.”
Identifying Causes of Problems
After establishing a measure and a goal and
observing the process in detail, the project team
should seek to discover and document the
causes of problems that negatively impact
performance. A tool for documenting these
causes is a cause-and-effect diagram, also known
as a fishbone diagram (Fig. 3.2).

Prioritizing Problem-solving Efforts
After possible causes of problems are
documented, the frequency of those causes
should be measured in some way. Often this is
accomplished with a simple tally sheet, in
which staff members document every time the
problem occurs over a period of time along
with the cause for the occurrence. These can
then be plotted in a Pareto chart (Fig. 3.3),
which illustrates which causes occur most
frequently. The Pareto principle, also known as
the “80/20 rule,” states that a few causes are
usually responsible for the majority of the
problems. Problem-solving efforts can then be
prioritized accordingly.
Developing Solutions through Iterative Testing
After the problem has been thoroughly
investigated, including likely causes, it is the
project team’s task to develop strategies to
solve the problem by making process changes.
However, such changes are rarely successful in
the form in which they are originally conceived
and typically require multiple revisions before
they can be fully implemented. The process of
iteratively testing, refining, and validating
process changes is known as the Plan-DoStudy-Act (PDSA) cycle.

The PDSA cycle is essentially a restatement of
the scientific method. A synonym for a PDSA
cycle is a planned test of change. A cycle starts
with a hypothesis of how a process change will
lead to a desired outcome. The steps include
developing a plan to test that hypothesis
(planning the test), testing the hypothesis
(doing the test), analyzing the data (studying
the results), and drawing actionable
conclusions and determining next steps (acting
accordingly).
Because the effects of process changes are not
known in advance, initial changes are typically
tested on as small a scale as possible and in a
relatively protected environment. It is expected
that many of these proposed changes will be
unsuccessful. For this reason, the team is wise
to generate a number of potential changes
through brainstorming. When a test of change
does not result in the desired outcome, the
project team may wish to modify the approach
and test it again or abandon it altogether and
try a different approach.
Changes are tested on a larger scale only after
they have been proven successful on a smaller
scale. The final determination of whether the
changes are effective in practice is if they result
in improved performance. Hence, it is critical to
continuously monitor performance throughout
the life of an improvement project.
Improvement is generally most effective when
multiple PDSA cycles are run in parallel or in
rapid succession. With each test, the
improvement team gains greater insight and
knowledge of how specific changes impact
outcomes—for better and for worse. Only after
the problems have been worked out and the
team is confident that the changes will result in
the desired improved outcomes are the changes
fully implemented. Despite the fact that
multiple PDSA cycles are needed for most
successful improvement projects, if they are
executed well and kept as small and brief as
possible, the process of testing, refining, and
validating changes need not be protracted.
Sustaining theImprovement
Without deliberate mechanisms to sustain
improvements, performance usually reverts to
the initial state. Strategies to increase the
likelihood that results will be sustained include
1) establishing regular measurement and
feedback, 2) using handoffs to enforce
standards by ensuring that all staff expect the
same standard, 3) establishing the practice of
stopping the process and summoning
immediate supervisors whenever a problem is
encountered, 4) embedding checks into the
process, and 5) using high-reliability solutions.
High-reliability Solutions: Process changes may
take many forms, including education and
feedback, standardization of procedures, and
infrastructure and system changes. In general,
processes that rely on education and feedback
tend to result in lower consistency in outcome,
or reliability, than those that rely on
standardization of procedures, which in turn
tend to result in lower consistency of outcome
than those that rely on changes to infrastructure
and organizational culture. As a general rule,
high-reliability process changes are more
effective and require less effort by the process
owner to sustain than low-reliability solutions.
QI Project Management
A project is defined as “a temporary group
activity, designed to produce a unique product,
service, or result.” Project management is the
“application of knowledge, skills, and
techniques to execute projects effectively and
efficiently.” Effective project management
techniques bring order to what can otherwise
be a chaotic process, to help ensure that projects
meet their objectives.
Examples include 1) task management: defining
each task, clearly setting expectations of what is
to be done by whom and by when, and
following up on each task; 2) progress tracking:
keeping people apprised of project progress,
reminding individuals as deadlines approach,
and alerting appropriate individuals when
milestones are missed; 3) conducting effective
meetings; and 4) avoiding mistakes common to
quality improvement.

3.2 Practical SafetyApplications in
Healthcare
3.2.1 Periprocedural Care
Patient Identifiers
Patient identification is critical to ensure that
the right patient receives the right treatment,
medication, invasive or noninvasive procedure,
and blood products, as well as to reduce the
chance of unnecessary radiation exposure. At
least two patient identifiers should be used
before every procedure. Identifiers can include
patient name, assigned identification number,
telephone number, or other person-specific
identifier(e.g., date of birth, government-issued
photo identification, and last four digits of the
social security number). Transient factors such
as patient’s location or room number cannot be
used. Sources of identifiers may include the
patient, a relative, a guardian, a domestic
partner, or a healthcare provider who has
previously identified the patient. In the case of
a discrepancy between identifiers, the
practitioner should stop and seek additional
information to confirm the identity before
proceeding.
Patient Assessment
Before sedation is initiated, a patient must be
assessed and approved for sedation. Recent oral
intake, recent illness, pulmonary status
(including upper airway), cardiac status,
baseline vital signs, level of consciousness,
pulse oximetry, capnography (if available), and
electrocardiography (when applicable) should
be obtained and documented.
Sedation
The Joint Commission and the American
Society of Anesthesiologists have defined four
levels of sedation, analgesia, and anesthesia:
1. Minimal Sedation or Anxiolysis. A
drug- induced state, created by the
administration of medications to reduce
anxiety, during which the patient
responds to verbal commands. In this
state, cognitive function and
coordination may be impaired, but
ventilatory and cardiovascular functions
are unaffected.
2. Moderate Sedation/Analgesia. A mildly
depressed level of consciousness,
induced by the administration of
pharmacologic agents, in which the
patient retains a continuous and
independent ability to maintain
protective reflexes and a patent airway
and to be aroused by physical or verbal
stimulation.
3. Deep Sedation/Analgesia. A druginduced depression of consciousness
during which the patient cannot be
easily aroused but responds
purposefully after repeated or painful
stimulation. Independent ventilatory
function may be impaired. The patient
may require assistance in maintaining a
patent airway. Cardiovascular function
is usually maintained.
4. General Anesthesia. A controlled state
of unconsciousness in which there is a
complete loss of protective reflexes,
including the ability to maintain a
patent airway independently and to
respond appropriately to painful
stimulation.
It is important to recognize that these “levels”
are actually a continuum. Patients may rapidly
move between the levels and may reach a
deeperlevel of sedation than desired. Sedation
may result in the loss of protective reflexes.
Thus, all sedated patients require monitoring
regardless of the intended level of sedation.
Patients who are candidates for sedation by a
non- anesthesia provider such as a radiologist
must be screened to determine if they have risk
factors that may increase the likelihood of an
adverse outcome. Such risk factors include, but
are not limited to, congenital or acquired
abnormalities of the airway, liver failure, lung
disease, congestive heart failure, symptomatic
brain stem dysfunction, apnea or hypotonia, a
history of adverse reaction to sedating
medications, morbid obesity, and severe
gastroesophageal reflux.
The patient’s American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical Status
Classification should also be assessed. This is a
six-level classification as follows:
• Class I - A normal healthy patient
• Class II - A patient with mild systemic
disease
• Class III - A patient with severe
systemic disease
• Class IV - A patient with severe
systemic disease that is a constant threat
to life
• Class V - A moribund patient who is not
expected to survive without the
operation
• Class VI - A declared brain-dead patient
whose organs are being removed for
donor purposes
Patients in Classes III and IV or with other
significant risk factors may require a
consultation with anesthesiology or the
performance of sedation by an anesthesiologist
or anesthetist. Patients in Class V should not be
sedated by non-anesthesiologists.
When sedation is performed under the
supervision of a radiologist, there must be a
separate qualified healthcare professional
whose primary focus is the monitoring,
medicating, and care of the patient. The patient
must have intravenous access. Continuous
monitoring should include, at a minimum, level
of consciousness, respiratory rate, pulse
oximetry, blood pressure (as indicated), heart
rate, and cardiac rhythm. Similar monitoring is
needed in the recovery period from sedation.
The supervising physician should have
sufficient knowledge of the pharmacology,
indications, and contraindications for the use of
sedative agents, including the use of reversal
agents. A key point related to reversal agents is
that their duration of effect may be shorter than
that of the sedating agent, leading to a risk of
relapse into a deeper level of sedation. It is
recommended that consciousness and vital
signs return to acceptable levels and remain at
those levels for a period of two hours from the
time the reversal agent was administered before
monitoring ends and the patient is discharged.
Informed Consent
Informed consent is required for invasive
image- guided procedures. Apart from legal or
regulatory requirements, patients have the right
to be informed about the procedures they
undergo and may request to speak with a
radiologist even when local policy does not
require the radiologist to initiate an informed
consent process.
Despite the fact that a consent form is often
used to document the discussion, the ACR-SIR
Practice Parameter on Informed Consent for ImageGuided Procedures states that “informed consent
is a process and not the simple act of signing a
formal document.” Consent can also be
documented by a note in the patient’s medical
record, by a recording on videotape, or by
another similar permanent modality. Consent
should be obtained from the patient or the
patient’s legal representative by a physician or
other healthcare provider performing the
procedure. The final responsibility for
answering the patient’s questions and
addressing any patient concerns rests with the
physician performing or supervising the
procedure.
Elements of informed consent include 1) the
purpose and nature of the intended procedure,
2) the method by which the procedure will be
performed, 3) likely risks, complications, and
expected benefits, 4) risks of not proceeding, 5)
any reasonable alternatives to the proposed
procedure, and 6) the right to decline the
proposed procedure. An exception to these
steps exists when a delay in treatment would
jeopardize the health of a patient who is unable
to provide informed consent (e.g., an
unconscious trauma patient for whom family
has not yet been identified). Since the patient
must be able to understand the consent process
for it to be valid, consent must be obtained
before procedure-related sedation is
administered.
When the patient is not able to give valid
consent because of short-term or long-term
mental incapacity, whether from pain
medications or otherwise, or when the patient
has not achieved the locally recognized age of
majority, consent should be obtained from the
patient’s appointed healthcare representative,
legal guardian, or appropriate family member.
In emergency situations when the patient needs
immediate care, the patient’s predetermined
wishes are not known or appropriately
documented, and consent cannot be obtained
from the patient’s representative, the physician
may provide treatment or perform a procedure
“to prevent serious disability or death or to
alleviate great pain or suffering.”
Minors’ Rights in Medical Decision Making Courts
in the United States have recognized that
children younger than 18 years deserve a voice
in determining their course of medical
treatment if they show maturity and
competence. However, rules that govern the
issue of parental rights versus minors’ rights
vary from state to state. States and courts have
never allowed children younger than 12 years
to make medical decisions and exercise selfdetermination, whereas adolescents between
ages 12 and 18 (or 19 in some states) experience
a gradual transition to self- determination.
Factors that impact the determination of
adolescents’rights include the following:
1. Legal determination of maturity, such
as married status, parenthood, selfsufficiency, or active duty in the armed
services.
2. Evidence that the child is sufficiently
mature to make his or her own
decisions, such as age greater than 14
years; evidence that the minor has the
ability to understand the implications of
treatment, including risks, benefits,
likely short- and long-term
consequences, and alternatives; and
evidence that the minor can make an
informed decision without coercion.
3. Conditions exempting parental
consent, such as seeking testing or
treatment for sexually transmitted
diseases, included HIV; seeking
contraception, prenatal care, or abortion;
or seeking mental health treatment,
emergency care, or treatment of alcohol
or drug abuse after the age of 12 years.
Universal Protocol
Universal protocol refers to the three-part
process of conducting a preprocedure verification,
marking the procedure site, and performing a
preprocedure time out. Note that site marking
may be performed before completing the
preprocedure verification.
1. Preprocedure verification. This is an
ongoing process of information
gathering and confirmation before the
procedure. The purpose is to ensure that
all relevant information and equipment
are 1) available before the start of the
procedure, 2) correctly labeled,
identified, and matched to the patient’s
identifiers, and 3) reviewed and are
consistent with the expectations of the
procedure to be performed.
Preprocedural verification may occur at
more than one time and place before the
procedure.
2. Marking of the procedure site. At a
minimum, a procedure site should be
marked when there is more than one
possible location for the procedure and
when performing the procedure in a
different location could harm the
patient. If possible, the patient should be
involved in the site marking. The site
must be marked by a licensed
independent practitioner who will be
present when the procedure is
performed. In limited circumstances,
site marking may be delegated to
medical residents, physician assistants
(PAs), or advanced practice registered
nurses (APRNs), but ultimately the
licensed independent practitioner is
accountable for the procedure, even
when delegating site marking.
The mark should be made at or near the
procedure site, and should be
sufficiently permanent to be visible after
skin preparation and draping. It should
also be unambiguous and used
consistently throughout the
organization. An organization should
have written alternative processes for
situations such as procedures on
mucosal surfaces or perineum, minimal
access procedures treating a lateralized
internal organ, interventional procedure
cases for which the catheter or
instrument insertion site is not
predetermined (such as cardiac
catheterization), procedures on teeth,
and procedures on premature infants,
for whom the mark may cause a
permanent tattoo.
3. Preprocedure time out. A standardized
time out should be conducted
immediately before an invasive
procedure is started or an incision is
made. The designated member of the
team starts the time out. The time out
should involve the immediate members
of the team, including the individual
performing the procedure, anesthesia
providers, the circulating nurse, the
operating room technician, and other
active participants who will be present
throughout the case. During the time
out, all relevant members of the team
actively communicate and at a
minimum agree on the following:
correct patient identity, correct site, and
procedure to be done. Documentation of
the time out should be performed
according to the organization’s policy.
3.2.2 Hand Hygiene
Hand hygiene refers to cleaning one’s hands by
using either handwashing (washing hands with
soap and water), antiseptic hand wash,
antiseptic hand rub (i.e., alcohol-based hand
sanitizer including foam or gel), or surgical
hand antisepsis.
Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are the most
effective products for reducing the number of
bacteria on the hands. When hands are not
visibly dirty, alcohol-based hand sanitizers are
the preferred method for cleaning one’s hands
in the healthcare setting. Soap and water are
recommended when hands are visibly dirty,
before eating, after using a restroom, or after
known or suspected exposure to Clostridium
difficile, norovirus, or Bacillus anthracis.
Hand hygiene should be performed 1) before
eating, 2) before and after having direct contact
with a patient’s skin, 3) after contact with
blood, body fluids or excretions, mucous
membranes, nonintact skin, or wound
dressings, 4) after contact with inanimate
objects in the immediate vicinity of the patient,
5) if hands will be moving from a
contaminated-body site to a clean- body site
during patient care, 6) after glove removal, and
7) after using a restroom. When hands are
cleaned with soap and water, the soap and
water should cover all surfaces of the hands
and fingers. When alcohol-based hand sanitizer
is used, the product should cover all surfaces as
hands are rubbed together. Adequate cleansing
can be achieved in about 20 seconds via either
route.
3.2.3 Root Cause Analysis
Root cause analysis (RCA) is a structured
method used to analyze serious adverse events
to decrease the likelihood of recurrence. The
goal of RCA is to identify both active errors
(errors occurring at the point of interface
between humans and a complex system) and
latent conditions (the hidden problems within
healthcare systems that increase the likelihood
of an adverse event). For example, an active
error occurs when a nurse accidentally
administers a full dose of heparin rather than a
heparin flush; an associated latent condition
might be the fact that the two vials appear
virtually identical and both are routinely
stocked near each other in the same cabinet at
the point of care.
RCAs should generally begin with data
collection to create an objective narrative of the
event based on a review of the medical record
and interviews with people involved. A
multidisciplinary team should then analyze the
sequence of events leading to the error, with the
goals of identifying how the event occurred
(active errors) and underlying conditions that
contributed to the event (latent conditions). It
should be recognized that serious adverse
events are almost never the result of a single
cause, and often are associated with numerous
contributing factors. The RCA should culminate
in an analysis of issues that should be
addressed to decrease the likelihood of
recurrence and a plan for addressing those
issues, including a timeline and individual
responsibility.
In the setting of a serious adverse event,
immediate interventions may be implemented
to quickly reduce the risk of recurrence of a
similar error. However, such quickly generated
solutions typically do not address the root
cause and should only serve as a placeholder
until more reliable and sustainable solutions
can be developed, tested, and implemented.