Chapter 4: Practical SafetyApplications in Radiology
4.1 MR Safety
Three unique magnetic fields in MRI, the static
magnetic field (B0), time-varying
radiofrequency magnetic field (B1), and timevarying gradient magnetic field (dB/dt) all
contribute to specific MR safety challenges.
Because the strong static magnetic field is
always on, the MR environment is associated
with unique safety issues. Safety must be
ensured for all in the MR environment,
including patients, research subjects, MRI
personnel, and visitors to the MR environment.
Greater risk can be presumed related to nonMR personnel who do not regularly work in the
MR environment. This includes physicians and
nurses who rarely enter the MR suite but may
do so in urgent situations related to acute
patient decompensation. Improperly trained
and inadequately screened security and
cleaning personnel may unknowingly bring
ferromagnetic materials into the MR
environment. Patients’ family members may be
overlooked in screening programs. To address
these and other issues, the American College of
Radiology (ACR) Manual on MR Safety exists
in the form of a free online document which
will be periodically updated.
Management of MR safety is now
recommended to include 3 specific roles: a
designated physician MR Medical Director for
MR safety (MRMD); MR safety officer (MRSO);
and MR safety expert (MRSE). The MRMD
assumes ultimate responsibility for a site’s
operational MR safety and the safe execution of
all MR examinations. They appoint MRSOs and
MRSEs, maintain MR safety policies and
procedures, and appropriately investigate any
MR safety adverse events. The MRSO role,
typically filled by a technologist, ensures that
policies and procedures are followed,
emergency procedures are in place and trained
for, education is appropriate and completed,
among other responsibilities. The MRSE,
typically an MR physicist, is a resource for the
MRMD and MRSOs, rendering expertise
related to the safe use of MR equipment, and
recommendations for appropriate scanning
conditions for patients with implanted devices,
among other roles.
4.1.1 Zoning and Screening
A key concept in MR safety is the conceptual
division of the MR site into four zones, with
progressive monitoring and restriction of entry
into the higher numbered, more controlled
zones. These zones are defined as follows:
Zone I: Access is unrestricted. This zone
includes all areas that are freely accessible
to the public. This is the area through which
patients and others access the controlled
MR environment.
Zone II: This is the interface between the
uncontrolled Zone I and the strictly
controlled Zones III and IV. Zone II may be
used to greet patients, obtain patient
histories, and screen patients for MR safety
issues. Patients in Zone II should be under
the supervision of MR personnel.
Zone III: This is the area where there is
potential danger of serious injury or death
from interaction between unscreened
people or ferromagnetic objects and the
magnetic field of the scanner. The scanner
control room is typically in Zone III. Access
to Zone III must be strictly restricted and
under the supervision of MR personnel,
with physical restriction such as locks or
passkey systems.
Zone IV: This is the MR scanner magnet
room and therefore is the highestrisk area.
This zone should be clearly demarcated and
marked as potentially hazardous because of
the strong magnetic field. Access to Zone IV
should be under the direct observation of
MR personnel. When a medical emergency
occurs, MR trained and certified personnel
should begin basic life support or CPR if
required, while urgently moving the patient
from Zone IV to a magnetically safe
location, and securing the door to Zone IV.
The ACR Committee on MR Safety now
recommends that other than when the door
is open for personnel and patient transit
across the threshold, the door is to be
closed, or is to be protected by a physical
barrier, such as a retractable safety strap,
plastic chain, or specific doorway gate
device.
The major transition happens from Zone II to
Zone III. MR personnel working within Zone III
and Zone IV should have specific education on
MR safety and pass an MR safety screening
process. Therefore, there are two safety levels of
MR personnel which are characterized as Level
1 and Level 2. Level 1 personnel have passed
the facility’s MR safety education requirements
to ensure that they would not be a danger to
themselves or others. Level 1 personnel are not
to be independently responsible for the safety
of others in Zone IV. Level 2 personnel are
more extensively trained, including topics such
as radiofrequency (RF)-induced heating, etc.
Level 2 personnel can be independently
responsible for the safety of others in Zone IV.
All other non-MR personnel and patients
entering Zone III should be appropriately
screened. MR screening begins with a focused
history to identify potential metallic foreign
objects and medical implants. This may be
supplemented as needed by reviewing any
existing radiographs, CT, or MR of the
questioned area as well as operative reports
and implanted devices information in electronic
medical records. When an object or implant is
identified, its MR safety potential should be
assessed specific to the field strength of the
magnet and specific factors such as RF
deposition (e.g., SAR, specific absorption rate).
Objects that are nonhazardous in all MR
environments, such as a plastic tube, are
deemed “MR Safe,” whereas those
contraindicated, such as a ferromagnetic
aneurysm clip, are labeled “MR Unsafe.” “MR
Conditional” devices can be safely scanned
providing the specific conditions for safe
scanning are appropriately adhered to,
including magnetic field strength (e.g., 1.5T or
3T), specific coils that are permissible (e.g.,
some device conditions require use of a local
transmit/receive coil at a distance from a device,
and do not permit use of a receive-only coil
using the magnet RF coil), and specific RF
deposition parameters (e.g. a defined SAR, such
at 1.0 W/kg). Published information is available
regarding the MR safety of most medical
implants, and it is essential that the
manufacturer’s most up to date MR safety
information defining the MR conditions for safe
scanning are used, as these change frequently.
Ferromagnetic objects should be restricted from
entering Zone III whenever practical. All MR
sites should have a handheld magnet (≥ 1000
Gauss) for testing purposes. Ferromagnetic
detection devices, either wall mounted or
handheld, can augment safety screening
processes in helping identify unknown
ferromagnetic objects concealed on a patient,
and some superficial internal implants, such as
pacemakers. To minimize risk of unsafe items
entering Zone IV, and to minimize risk of burns
from potential metallic fibers in clothing, the
ACR Committee on MR Safety now
recommends that all MR patients are changed
into MR safe gowns or scrubs.
Occasionally, devices that are determined to be
ferromagnetic and MR unsafe may be
permitted into Zone III. These must be
appropriately secured or tethered at all times
and be under the supervision of trained MR
personnel.
The strong magnetic field inherent to an MR
scanner can pose a risk for projectile injury if a
ferromagnetic object (e.g., hospital gurney,
scissors, cell phone) is brought too close in
proximity. There have been reports of projectile
injuries from anesthetic gas or oxygen
cylinders, and even patient deaths. In addition
to injuring patients, projectiles may also cause
extensive damage to the MR unit. It is
important to understand that magnetic
attraction does NOT increase linearly as one
approaches the magnet. The spatial gradient
magnetic field increases very steeply in close
proximity to the magnet such that in a short
distance one can perceive very little magnetic
pull on a ferromagnetic object, and then when
only a short distance closer, the object is
subjected to a tremendously higher attractive
force, typically ripping an object from one’s
grasp in an uncontrolled manner.
Screening is more difficult when the patient is
unconscious or otherwise unable to provide a
reliable history. In such cases, screening should
be performed as effectively as possible from
other sources, such as family members and the
medical record, and the urgency of the
examination should be balanced with the level
of uncertainty of the screening process. An
examination by trained MR personnel should
be performed to assess for surgical scars that
may warrant additional evaluation.
Radiography may be required to assess for
foreign bodies, implants, or devices.
The 9 gauss line is the point at which the
magnetic field begins to affect electromagnetic
devices such as pacemakers. This line should be
marked on the floors or walls for safety,
particularly when it extends beyond the walls
of the MR scanner room. It is important to
remember that the magnetic field is threedimensional. Thus, the restricted area may
extend through the floor and/or ceiling to
adjacent floors.
4.1.2 Implanted devices
Medical devices contain varying amounts of
ferromagnetic material and can be subject to
translational and rotational forces when
interacting with the magnetic field of an MR
unit. In addition, presence of any conducting
metal can result in current generation from the
radiofrequency B1 field and interactions with
the gradient dB/dt field. All metal-containing
implants are considered either MR unsafe (e.g.,
a ferromagnetic aneurysm clip), or MR
conditional (e.g., a titanium aneurysm clip, a
nitinol stent, an MR conditional cardiac
pacemaker system). There has been at least one
documented case of a fatality due to rotation of
an MR unsafe ferromagnetic aneurysm clip
while the patient was in the MR scanner. If a
patient is identified to have an intracranial
aneurysm clip(s), MRI should not be performed
until the specific manufacturer, model, and
type of (each) aneurysm clip is definitively
identified, and its MR safety conditions
identified. Although a patient may previously
have undergone an MR examination with an
aneurysm clip, that fact alone is not sufficient to
conclude that the clip is MR Conditional.
Cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIED)
similarly can be adversely affected by the B0, B1,
and dB/dt fields, potentially leading to
complications, including failure to pace,
induction of ventricular fibrillation, and heating
of cardiac tissue adjacent to the leads; these
complications can potentially be fatal. FDAlabeled MR Conditional pacemakers became
available in February 2011 If MRI is performed
on a patient with a MR conditional CIED, the
conditions for scanning must be followed in
their entirety, including attention to magnet
field strength, scanning parameters, and
cardiology programming of the device, and
monitoring the patient throughout the exam in
the presence of ACLS trained personnel, with
ready availability of a crash cart should
resuscitation be necessary. Of note, CIED
systems not specifically labeled as MR
conditional are being scanned at some centers
in an informed consent manner following
guidelines established by the Heart Rhythm
Society and the ACR. Some of the specific
elements that must be in place for this to occur
include: 1) there is to be an institutional
protocol in place with a responsible MRMD and
CIED MD using a Radiology / Cardiology team
approach; 2) medical necessity for the exam; 3)
patient monitoring of ECG and pulse oximetry;
4) defibrillator/monitor with external pacing
available (outside Zone IV); 5) ACLS personnel
in attendance during exam; and 6) appropriate
CIED reprogramming post MRI.
The number of active implanted medical
devices (devices that contain an energy source
such as a battery or can be inductively coupled)
continues to rapidly increase, including many
types of neurostimulators (e.g., deep brain,
spinal cord, hypoglossal nerve, cochlear
implants) and medication pumps. It cannot be
emphasized enough that there must be precise
identification of the make and model of each
component of an implanted device system (e.g.,
in the case of a spinal cord stimulator system,
this is to include the implanted pulse generator
as well as the leads) and if MR conditional, the
conditions for scanning must be strictly
adhered to.
4.1.3 MR and Pregnancy
MRI exposure alone, without the
administration of gadolinium-based contrast
media, has not been shown to have a
detrimental effect on the developing fetus. For
this reason, no special consideration is
recommended during pregnancy regarding
exposure to noncontrast MRI up to 3T at
normal operating mode. However, since it is
impossible to completely exclude the possibility
of any risk whatsoever, patients and clinicians
should consider whether it is safe to delay an
MR examination until the end of pregnancy.
Pregnant healthcare workers may work in an
MRI environment during all stages of
pregnancy, but they should notremain in Zone
IV during data acquisition or scanning.
4.1.4 MR-induced Burns
The possibility of thermal injury and burns,
some severe, in MRI is predominantly due to
the radiofrequency (RF) fields. Physical contact
alone with the inner surface of the bore can
produce burns, and insulating pads are
necessary to keep skin at least 1 to 2 centimeters
from the surface. In a large patient, tightly
wedging a sheet in place of a pad between the
skin and the bore, not maintaining the requisite
distance, creates a distinct risk of burns, and is
specifically not recommended in the ACR
Manual on MR Safety. RF fields can also induce
currents within the body, particularly when a
“closed loop” is formed; for example, if there is
skin-to-skin contact at the inner thighs. If there
is only a small surface area of skin-to-skin
contact, greater current density and resistive
heating can lead to burns. Skin-to-skin burns
have also occurred when overhanging
abdominal panniculus in an obese patient
contacts the upper thigh. Care must be taken to
ensure that padding prevents such situations.
Commercial pads are available that have
notches in them to keep thighs separated,
minimizing this skin-to-skin contact risk.
Other sources of heating can be associated with
metallic fibers in clothing, especially
undergarments, and burns related to this have
been reported. To minimize this risk, it is
recommended that patients change out of street
clothes into hospital gowns or similar MR safe
attire. Loops of metallic wire (e.g., from
electronic physiologic monitoring equipment),
patches of metal (e.g., in foil backed medication
patches), and other electrical conduction
circuits may be rapidly heated by RF pulses
during normal operation of an MRI system.
Because of the risk of burns, care must be taken
to prevent such loops or metallic patches from
touching patients’ skin during routine
scanning. As the RF resonant wavelength is a
function of magnet field strength (52 cm at 1.5T
and 26 cm at 3T), leads or other conductors can
have drastically different tendencies to heat in
different magnets.
As noted, certain transdermal patches may
contain aluminum and other conductive metals
that may cause RF burns. If medication patches
are removed for MRI, there must be a clear line
of communication to ensure medication
replacement after the MRI, particularly for
some critical medications (e.g., clonidine foil
backed patches). Occasionally, large tattoos
may undergo heating and cause burns;
application of a cold compress or an ice pack
may be necessary to reduce the risk of skin
burning.
4.1.5 Quenching
The main magnetic field is maintained by
bathing the electromagnetic coils of the MR
scanner in large volumes (typically 1500 to 2000
L) of extremely cold liquid helium (-269°C,
4°K). A “quench” occurs when heating of a
segment of the electromagnetic coils makes
them no longer superconducting. This produces
further heat in the coils, and collectively, these
events produce a rapid change of state of the
liquid helium into a gas (with a 760-fold
increased volume). A specifically designed
quench pipe accommodates the explosive force
of the rapidly boiling helium gas, by allowing it
to escape into the atmosphere.
If a quench pipe fails during a quench (due to
an obstruction or break), the enormous volume
of cold helium gas flowing into the magnet
room (Zone IV) would be extremely hazardous
because it would displace oxygen toward the
floor, creating a significantrisk of asphyxiation.
Cold helium gas flooding the room would form
a fog, making it impossible to see. An inwardswinging door to Zone IV would create the risk
of positive pressure entrapment. Because of
these risks, emergency procedures associated
with a quench should always include
immediate evacuation of Zone IV. A magnet
quench can occur spontaneously due to
equipment failure. In a situation when the
magnetic field must be shut off immediately
(e.g., personnel pinned to the magnet by a
ferromagnetic hospital gurney), a quench can
be initiated by pressing a quench button.
4.2 Management of Intravascular
Contrast Media
4.2.1 Iodinated Contrast Media
Types of Iodinated Contrast Media
All iodinated contrast media are derived from
tri-iodinated benzene rings. Iodinated contrast
media can be classified as ionic or nonionic, and
monomeric or dimeric.
Ionic contrast media dissociate into two
particles in solution (an anion, which contains
the tri-iodinated benzene ring, and a cation,
consisting of sodium or methylglucamine
[meglumine]). Nonionic contrast media are
hydrophilic molecules that do not need to be
conjugated with cations to be water soluble.
They do not dissociate in solution.
Monomeric contrast molecules contain only one
tri-iodinated benzene ring, while dimeric
contrast molecules contain two joined triiodinated benzene rings.
At standard iodine concentrations, ionic
monomeric contrast media have the highest
osmolality, roughly four times that of human
serum. They are referred to as high-osmolality
contrast media. These agents are not employed
routinely for intravascular injection in the
United States as they are associated with higher
rates of adverse reactions than are nonionic
monomeric or dimeric contrast media.
Nonionic monomeric contrast media have
about half the osmolality of high-osmolality
contrast media, and roughly twice that of
serum. Nonionic dimers have similar
osmolality to that of plasma and are referred to
as iso-osmolality contrast media. Iso-osmolality
media are sometimes used for intra-arterial
injection (and uncommonly for intravenous
injection), because they cause less discomfort
than do nonionic monomers when injected into
the arteries.
Many nonionic contrast media are approved for
intravascular use in the United States, including
the low-osmolality agents iohexol
(Omnipaque®), iopamidol (Isovue®), iopromide
(Ultravist®), ioversol (Optiray®), and ioxilan
(Oxilan®). Only one iso-osmolality contrast
agent has been approved for use: iodixanol
(Visipaque®).
Adverse Reactions to Iodinated Contrast Media
Most patients who receive iodinated contrast
media have no adverse effects. Adverse
contrast reactions of any type have been
reported in up to 3% of patients injected with
nonionic contrast material, though some series
have reported a much lower frequency.
Acute adverse reactions can be categorized as
either physiologic or allergic-like. Physiologic
reactions are dose related. These reactions are
less likely to occur, and when they do occur,
they are less likely to be severe when lower
doses of contrast material are administered.
They are believed to represent direct toxic
effects of the injected contrast media.
The mechanism of allergic-like reactions is not
understood in most patients. However, it is
known that in most patients these reactions do
not represent the antigen-IgE antibody
response characteristic of typical allergic
reactions, such as to penicillin. Therefore,
sensitization due to prior exposure is not
required for an allergic-like reaction to contrast
material to occur. Thus, these reactions are
generally considered to be “allergic-like” rather
than “allergic.” Nonetheless, allergic-like
reactions present with symptoms similar to
those of true allergic reactions. These reactions
are idiosyncratic and can occur from any
administered volume of contrast media.
Acute adverse reactions are categorized as
being mild, moderate, or severe. Examples of
some reactions of different types and severity
as summarized in the ACR Manual on Contrast
Media are as follows:
Mild Reactions: Signs and symptoms are selflimited and without progression.
1. Mild Physiologic Reactions: Nausea,
vomiting, flushing, warmth, chills,
headache, anxiety, altered taste, mild
hypertension, and spontaneously
resolving vasovagal reaction
2. Mild Allergic-like Reactions: Few hives,
pruritus, limited cutaneous edema,
itchy/scratchy throat, nasal congestion,
repetitive sneezing, stuffy nose
Moderate Reactions: Signs and symptoms are
more pronounced and commonly require
medical management

1. Moderate Physiologic Reactions:
Protracted nausea, chest pain, vasovagal
reaction that requires and is responsive to
treatment
2. Moderate Allergic-like Reactions: Diffuse
hives, diffuse erythema (with stable vital
signs), facial edema without dyspnea,
wheezing with mild or no hypoxia.
Severe Reactions: Signs and symptoms are
potentially life threatening and can result in
permanent morbidity or death if not managed
appropriately.
1. Severe Physiologic Reactions: Vasovagal
reaction resistant to treatment, arrhythmia,
seizures, hypertensive crisis, pulmonary
edema, cardiopulmonary arrest.
2. Severe Allergic-like Reactions: Diffuse
edema or facial edema with dyspnea,
erythema with hypotension, laryngeal
edema with stridor and/or hypoxia,
wheezing with hypoxia, severe
hypotension and tachycardia, pulmonary
edema, cardiopulmonary arrest.
As noted above, pulmonary edema and
cardiopulmonary arrest can be symptoms of
either severe physiologic or severe allergic-like
reactions.
Fortunately, a clear majority of acute adverse
reactions to contrast media are physiologic,
mild, and self- limiting, often consisting of
warmth, metallic taste, and nausea. Allergiclike reactions are much less common,
encountered in < 1% of injected patients. In one
recent series, 0.6% of patients injected with lowosmolality contrast media had allergic-like
reactions, most of which were mild. Severe lifethreatening allergic-like reactions are extremely
rare, with the incidence of such reactions
estimated to be 0.01% to 0.04% of injected
patients.
Risk Factors for Adverse Reactions
Several factors increase the likelihood of an
adverse reaction to contrast media. Patients
with a history of a prior allergic-like reaction to
the same class of contrast media (iodinated or
gadolinium-based) are believed to have
approximately five times the risk of the general
population for having another allergic-like
reaction to that same class of contrast media.
Patients with other allergies and asthma are
about two to three times as likely to have an
allergic-like reaction. Allergies to shellfish or
other iodine-containing products (such as
povidone-iodine [Betadine®]) are not believed
to increase the risk for an allergic-like contrast
reaction beyond that of other allergies. Also, a
history of a prior allergic-like reaction to
gadolinium-based contrast media (GBCM) is
not believed to increase the risk of an allergiclike reaction to iodinated contrast agents above
that of other allergies and vice versa.
Some patients’ underlying diseases may be
exacerbated by administration of contrast
media. Such disease exacerbations are
considered to be non-allergic-like reactions.
These can occur in patients with severe chronic
kidney disease (CKD) and acute kidney injury
(AKI) (see section on postcontrast AKI), cardiac
arrhythmias, congestive heart failure,
myasthenia gravis, and severe
hyperthyroidism.
Additional attention should be paid to the use
of intravascular iodinated contrast media in
patients with thyroid cancer or
hyperthyroidism who are anticipating
treatment with radioactive iodine (131I). Such
patients should not receive iodinated contrast
in the 4 to 6 weeks before anticipated
radioiodine treatment, because the
nonradioactive iodine load delivered by the
contrast media will saturate the thyroid gland
and could render treatment ineffective.
Screening of Patients before Contrast Media
Administration
Safe administration of contrast media begins
with a focused patient history to identify the
factors that may increase the likelihood of an
adverse reaction to contrast media.
The likelihood of an allergic-like contrast
reaction may be reduced by premedication.
Premedication
Premedication may be considered for patients
who are at increased risk of an acute allergiclike reaction to contrast media. The ACR
Manual on Contrast Media (2020) suggests
consideration of premedication only for
patients who have had a prior allergic-like or
unknown-type reaction to the same class of
contrast media as that to be administered.
However, policies vary by site, but it is
generally agreed in the United States that
premedication is indicated at least in patients
who have had a previous moderate or severe
allergic-like reaction to the same class of
contrast media. Surveys have shown that some,
but fewer, institutions administer
premedication to patients with a history of a
mild allergic-like reaction to the same class of
contrast media, to patients with a history of
allergies to substances other than contrast
media, or to patients with a history of asthma.
The most widely accepted premedication
regimens, or “preps,” involve the use of oral
corticosteroids, with the first dose administered
12 to 13 hours before contrast media injection.
One common adult regimen involves oral
administration of 50 mg of prednisone 13, 7,
and 1 hour(s) before contrast media injection,
and oral administration of 50 mg of
diphenhydramine (Benadryl®) 1 hour before
injection. Another common regimen involves
oral administration of 32 mg of
methylprednisolone 12 and 2 hours before
contrast media injection. While a 12- or 13-hour
oral regimen has been proven effective, and a 1-
or 2-hour oral regimen has been proven to be
ineffective, the precise minimum effective time
for premedication is not known.
Premedication can also be administered to
children who have had prior allergic-like
contrast reactions. One recommended regimen
calls for administration of 0.5-0.7 mg/kg of oral
prednisone at 13, 7, and 1 hours prior to
contrast injection, up to a maximum of 50 mg,
with one dose of oral diphenhydramine
(Benadryl ®) one hour prior to injection, at a
dose of 1 mg/kg, up to a maximum dose of 50
mg.
In some situations, patient health can be
seriously jeopardized by having the patient
wait 12 or more hours before a contrastenhanced study. In these situations, “rapid”
corticosteroid regimens may be utilized, with
the understanding that limited evidence
supports this approach. The ACR Manual on
Contrast Media (2020) suggests using one of
these regimens in inpatients and Emergency
Room patients. One of the more commonly
used rapid preps consists of intravenous (IV)
administration of 200 mg of hydrocortisone
every 4 hours until the study is performed,
preferably deferring imaging until at least two
doses of hydrocortisone have been
administered. In this rapid prep, 50 mg of
diphenhydramine is also administered 1 hour
before contrast media injection. In the rare
emergency situation where a contrast-enhanced
examination must be performed immediately,
the contrast media may have to be
administered without premedication.
The only proven benefit of corticosteroid
premedication regimens is a reduction in the
number of mild reactions. Studies showing the
reduction in the number of mild reactions after
premedication did not have sufficient numbers
of patients with moderate, severe, or lifethreatening reactions to draw statistically
significant conclusions about the ability of
premedication to reduce those reaction rates.
Thus while there is no definite evidence that
premedication protects against moderate,
severe, or life-threatening reactions, it is
typically assumed that there is a positive effect.
The rarity of severe reactions makes it difficult
to prove a benefit of premedication in this
setting.
Premedication likely reduces the risk of a
contrast reaction in high-risk patients, but it
does not eliminate it. A contrast reaction that
occurs despite premedication is called a
“breakthrough reaction.”
Even with appropriate use of an accepted
premedication regimen, breakthrough reactions
occur in a small number of high-risk patients.
When they do occur, they are of similar severity
to the initial reaction about 80% of the time, less
severe about 10% of the time, and more severe
about 10% of the time.
A patient who has had an allergic-like reaction
to contrast media despite steroid premedication
can be reinjected in the future after being
premedicated again, if clinical circumstances
require reinjection. Many such patients will not
have a repeat reaction, and if a repeat reaction
occurs, it will most likely be of the same
severity as the previous breakthrough reaction
(e.g., mild subsequent breakthrough reaction if
the previous breakthrough reaction was mild).
The greatest risk of corticosteroid
premedication to patient health is probably the
delay that it causes in the performance of an
imaging study (which can delay disease
diagnosis, increase cost, and, in inpatients,
expose patients to the additional risk of
hospital-acquired infections for longer periods
of time). For such patients, use of the “rapid”
prep has been recommended. While transient
hyperglycemia can occur from three doses of
corticosteroids, it is usually mild and is rarely
clinically significant. Other complications from
a short burst of corticosteroids, such as
exacerbation of infection and peptic ulcer
disease, steroid psychosis, and tumor lysis
syndromes, have been reported, but are very
rare.
Postcontrast Acute Kidney Injury and Contrastinduced Nephropathy
Postcontrast acute kidney injury (PC-AKI) is a
general term used to describe a sudden
deterioration in renal function that occurs after
the intravascular administration of iodinated
contrast media (with clinical onset detectable
within 24 to 48 hours as creatinine accumulates
in the serum). Such injury may occur whether
or not the contrast medium is determined to
have caused the deterioration in renal function.
PC-AKI is a correlative diagnosis, meaning that
AKI can be correlated to, but not proven to be
caused by, the administration of IV contrast.
Contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) is defined
as a sudden deterioration in renal function
caused by intra- vascular administration of
iodinated contrast media. CIN is a subset of PCAKI, that is, those cases of PC-AKI in which
iodinated contrast media is proven or known to
be the cause of the AKI; CIN is more of a
statistical concept because it is difficult in
practice to identify which individual cases of
PC-AKI can be proven to be due to the contrast
media. For example, if a group of patients who
are administered iodinated contrast media have
a higher rate of PC-AKI than a properly chosen
control group of patients not receiving
iodinated contrast media, then the excess rate is
due to CIN, but it is not generally not possible
to identify which patients have PC-AKI from
CIN and which have PC-AKI from causes other
than contrast media.
Nearly all papers published on CIN before
2006, and many afterwards, considered all PCAKI to be CIN. This error has led to
substantially inflated estimates of the rate of
CIN. It is now known that most PC-AKI is not
due to CIN.
CIN was previously believed to be common,
because a clear majority of published studies
that came to this conclusion did not include
control groups of patients who did not receive
contrast media. For this reason, distinction
between CIN and PC-AKI was not possible in
these studies. Additionally, many previous
publications studied patients who had
undergone arteriography rather than IV
contrast media injections. Catheter angiography
may be associated with additional risks to the
patient that could also affect renal function,
including catheter manipulation in the
abdominal aorta (i.e., atheroemboli) and
exposure of the kidneys to more concentrated
contrast media.
With the recent performance of several large
propensity-adjusted controlled retrospective
studies, it is now understood that true CIN is
much less common than previously thought,
and if CIN occurs at all, it is most likely to
develop in patients who have severe CKD
(estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] <
30 mL/min/1.73 m2) or AKI. CIN occurring in
patients with an eGFR of 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 or
higher is very unlikely, and in patients with an
eGFR between 30 and 45 mL/min/1.73 m2, it is
questionable. As a result, special precautions
for administering intravascular iodinated
contrast media are advised only for patients
with severe CKD or AKI. Administration of
large or multiple doses of contrast media within
24 to 48 hours may also be a risk factor for AKI,
although precise risk thresholds are not well
defined and likely vary by patient condition,
and whether the contrast medium is
administered intra-arterially or intravenously.
This dose-toxicity relationship has been
consistently shown after coronary
arteriography, but has not been conclusively
shown for IV administrations.
The historical definition of PC-AKI refers to an
absolute increase in serum creatinine from
baseline of at least 0.5 mg/dL, or a 25% to 50%
increase in the baseline serum creatinine. The
Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN) has
suggested that, regardless of the cause, AKI
should be diagnosed whenever there is 1) an
absolute serum creatinine increase of at least 0.3
mg/ dL; or 2) a percentage increase in serum
creatinine of at least 50% (1.5-fold above
baseline); or 3) a reduction in urine output to
0.5 mL/kg/h for at least 6 hours.
The usual clinical course of PC-AKI (including
CIN) is a rise in serum creatinine beginning
within 24 hours of contrast media
administration, peaking at about 4 days and
then usually returning to baseline by 7 to 10
days. Most affected patients do not have
oliguria. Permanent renal dysfunction is
unusual.
In addition to severe renal dysfunction, other
previously identified diseases or conditions
may predispose patients to develop AKI, but
most likely, in and of themselves, they do not
specifically predispose patients to develop CIN.
These include diabetes mellitus, dehydration,
cardiovascular disease, diuretic use, advanced
age, multiple myeloma, hypertension, and
hyperuricemia.
Although patients with end-stage renal disease
who are on chronic hemodialysis could
experience additional renal function
compromise (resulting in a further decrease in
any remaining urine output that might be
helpful for managing electrolyte balance), such
a risk is theoretical. Many nephrologists agree
to inject these patients with intravascular
contrast media if a contrast- enhanced study is
necessary. There is also a possibility that such
patients, if their fluid status is brittle, could
develop fluid overload as a result of the
administration of even a relatively small
volume of hyperosmolality contrast media.
Because iodinated contrast media have no
significant toxicity if retained in the body after
injection, there is no requirement that chronic
hemodialysis be timed to occur either
immediately before or immediately after
contrast media administration.
Some nephrologists advocate more caution in
administering potential nephrotoxins such as
intravascular iodinated contrast to patients on
peritoneal dialysis because the urine output of
these patients may be more important to their
well-being than for patients on chronic
hemodialysis.
There is some controversy concerning screening
of patients’ renal function before contrast media
administration if no recent serum creatinine
level/eGFR level is available. Suggested
indications for obtaining a serum creatinine,
from which an eGFR can be determined, have
included a history of renal disease (including
dialysis, renal transplant, solitary kidney, renal
cancer, or renal surgery), hypertension and
diabetes mellitus. If a potentially at-risk
patient’s condition is stable, a creatinine value
within 30 days of contrast administration is
generally considered sufficient.
In patients with severe CKD or AKI who are
considered at increased risk of developing CIN,
several prophylactic strategies should be
considered. Since most iodinated contrast
media are currently administered intravenously
for CT scans, alternatives include performing
only unenhanced scans or using other
modalities such as ultrasound or MR (note that
contrast-enhanced MR performed with certain
MR contrast media is associated with a risk of
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis [NSF] in patients
with severe CKD or AKI —see separate section
on NSF). When iodinated contrast media
administration is deemed necessary in high-risk
patients, the lowest possible dose needed to
perform a diagnostic study should be used.
The most widely accepted strategy for
minimizing the risk of PC-AKI in at-risk
patients is IV volume expansion with isotonic
fluids, such as 0.9% saline or Lactated Ringer’s
solution. Some suggested volume expansion
protocols have included administration of
volumes of 100 mL/h for 6 to 12 hours before
contrast administration and continued for 4 to
12 hours after contrast administration. Volume
expansion with sodium bicarbonate solution
instead of saline or Lactated Ringer’s solution
has been used, but it is not clear that this
solution is any more efficacious.
Several other prophylactic agents have been
suggested, but there is no consistent proof that
any of these are effective in preventing PC-AKI
or CIN. Administration of N-acetylcysteine has
been widely studied and is now thought to be
of no value. Other agents, such as mannitol,
furosemide, theophylline, etc., have been
discredited.
It has recently been shown that prophylactic
administration of high-dose statins appears to be
effective in reducing the risk of PC-AKI after
cardiac catheterization.
Metformin
Metformin-containing drugs are prescribed as
oral agents of choice for treating many patients
with diabetes mellitus. Metformin is
contraindicated in patients with severe renal
dysfunction because a very small percentage of
these patients develop lactic acidosis, leading to
a reported 50% mortality rate.
There is no direct interaction between iodinated
contrast media and metformin; however, if a
patient receiving metformin develops AKI, the
possibility of developing lactic acidosis exists.
The American College of Radiology Committee
on Drugs and Contrast Media currently
recommends that no precautions are necessary
in diabetic patients taking metformin, unless
the patient has CKD and the eGFR is < 30
mL/min/1.73 m2 (in which case the patient
should not be taking metformin anyway), the
patient has AKI, or the patient is undergoing
arterial catheterization with the risk of emboli
to the renal arteries. In the latter instances, the
drug should be withheld for 48 hours after
contrast media administration and only
reinstituted if the renal function is reassessed
and found to be acceptable.
Thus, metformin itself is not a risk factor for the
development of CIN, but patients who develop
renal failure while taking metformin are at risk
of developing lactic acidosis.
Iodinated Contrast Media in Pregnancy
Although iodinated contrast media cross the
placenta, there is no evidence that maternal
exposure to intravascular iodinated contrast
media is harmful to the fetus. Specifically, there
is no evidence that fetal exposure to iodinated
contrast media increases mutagenesis or fetal
cancer risk or affects fetal renal function.
Iodinated Contrast Media in Women Who Are
Breastfeeding
Only 1% of maternally administered contrast
media enters the milk of breastfeeding mothers
and, of this, only 1% of the contrast media in
breast milk is absorbed through an infant’s
gastrointestinal tract.
This represents less than 1% of the
recommended infant dose of iodinated contrast
media that could be used for a contrastenhanced imaging study on that infant.
There is no evidence that this tiny amount of
absorbed iodinated contrast media has any
adverse effect on the infant. Although it is
generally accepted that no precautions need to
be taken, it is recommended that a lactating
mother be informed that studies assessing the
risks to an infant are limited. If concerned, the
mother can abstain from breastfeeding for 12 to
24 hours after a contrast-enhanced study is
performed and pump and discard breast milk
that is produced during this time.
Extravasation
Extravasation of IV-administered iodinated
contrast media is an occasionally encountered
complication of intravascular contrast media
administration, usually occurring during CT.
The reported overall rate of extravasation with
power injection for CT ranges from 0.1% to
1.2%. While extravasations are more likely to
occur when poor catheter insertion technique is
utilized, they can be encountered even when
proper technique is employed.
Patients are believed to be at increased risk for
extravasation when more peripheral access sites
are used (such as the hand, wrist, foot, and
ankle) rather than the antecubital fossa, when
utilized indwelling lines have been in place for
more than 24 hours (in which case some degree
of phlebitis may be present), and when there
are multiple punctures into the same vein.
Certain risk factors are believed to be associated
with an increased volume of extravasated
contrast, including inability of the patient to
communicate (as is the case with infants, young
children, and patients with altered
consciousness), severe illness, and debilitation.
Immediately after extravasation of contrast
media occurs, most patients complain of
swelling or tightness and/or stinging or burning
pain at the site of extravasation. Edema,
erythema, and tenderness may be found on
physical examination. Ninety-eight percent of
extravasation injuries resolve with no adverse
sequelae. In the remaining 2% of injuries, some
patient morbidity develops because contrast
media can damage adjacent tissue, likely due to
a combination of direct toxic effects and its
hyperosmolality. Adverse effects are usually
self-limited, most commonly consisting of
prolonged pain or swelling.
Severe extravasation injuries occur in < 1% of
patients with extravasations. The most common
and most potentially devastating severe injuries
after extravasation of nonionic contrast media
are compartment syndromes, which result from
mechanical compression. Skin ulceration and
tissue necrosis are less commonly encountered.
Other complications, including lymphedema
and reflex sympathetic dystrophy, are
extremely rare.
Compartment syndromes are more likely to
develop when large volume extravasations
occur, especially into smaller compartments
such as the hand, wrist, or foot, but even largevolume extravasations most often resolve
without any adverse effects. The risk of a severe
extravasation injury may also be increased in
patients with arterial insufficiency or
compromised venous or lymphatic drainage.
Severe symptoms may not be evident
immediately after the extravasation occurs.
They may develop gradually overtime. Forthis
reason, patients should be monitored to assure
that minor symptoms remain stable or that
minor or more significant symptoms are
resolving or improving. When a
symptomatically stable or improving patient is
discharged from the radiology department, he
or she must be given clear instructions
concerning what new or recurring symptoms
may indicate a severe injury and where and
how to seek prompt additional treatment if
necessary.
Little can be done to mitigate the effects of
contrast extravasations after they occur.
Elevation of the affected extremity above the
level of the heart is recommended to decrease
capillary hydrostatic pressure. This may
promote resorption of the extravasated contrast
media. Cold compresses or ice packs can be
applied to the site of extravasation. Attempted
aspiration of the extravasated contrast media
and injection of medications into the
extravasation site (such as corticosteroids or
hyaluronidase) are ineffective.
Surgical consultation should be obtained after
an extravasation whenever there is concern for
a developing compartment syndrome or for
tissue necrosis. Ominous symptoms that
indicate the need for prompt surgical
consultation include progressive swelling or
pain, decreased finger mobility, altered tissue
perfusion (manifested by decreased capillary
refill), change in sensation, or skin ulceration or
blistering. In some instances, it may be difficult
to recognize the early signs of a compartment
syndrome. Symptoms concerning for severe
extravasation injury includeworseningpain or
failureofexistingpainto improve;decreasingarm,
wrist, orfingermotion;lossof sensation or
paresthesia in the affected extremity; and skin
breakdown.
In general, however, the earliest and most
reliable sign of a severe injury is severe or
progressive pain. It should be noted that there
is no extravasation volume threshold above
which surgical consultation is considered
mandatory.
4.2.2 Gadolinium-based Contrast Media
(GBCM)
Classification of GBCM
Most contrast agents used for MRI contain
gadolinium bound within a chemical moiety
called a chelate.
Gadolinium-based contrast media (GBCM) are
classified as linear or macrocyclic, and ionic or
nonionic. In general, macrocyclic GBCM, in
which the gadolinium ion is surrounded by a
chelate ring, have more stable binding of the
gadolinium ion within the chelate than do
linear agents, in which the chelate is not in the
form of a ring. Among the linear agents, the
nonionic agents are less stable than the ionic
agents. Table 4.1 summarizes the gadoliniumcontaining contrast agents currently available
for use in the United States

The table outlines the characteristics of approved gadolinium-containing contrast agents based on their ionicity and structure (linear or macrocyclic).

Gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist®): Ionic, linear.
Gadobenate dimeglumine (MultiHance®): Ionic, linear.
Gadoxetate disodium (Eovist®): Ionic, linear.
Gadodiamide (Omniscan®): Nonionic, linear.
Gadoteridol (ProHance®): Nonionic, macrocyclic.
Gadobutrol (Gadavist®): Nonionic, macrocyclic.
Gadoterate meglumine (Dotarem®/Clariscan®): Ionic, macrocyclic.

Acute adverse reactions to GBCM occur
approximately two to fourtimes less frequently
than acute adverse reactions to iodinated
contrast media. In general, the physiologic and
allergic-like reactions that occur after GBCM
administration are similar to those that occur
after injection of iodinated contrast agents. For
this reason, treatment of contrast reactions to
GBCM is similar to that of contrast reactions to
iodinated contrast media (see separate section
on treatment, to follow).
A clear majority of GBCM reactions are mild
and non-allergic-like (i.e., physiologic),
including coldness at the injection site, nausea
with or without vomiting, headache, warmth or
pain at the injection site, paresthesias, and
dizziness. Rash, hives, and urticaria are the
most frequent allergic-like symptoms; however,
respiratory and cardiovascular reactions can
occur. Fatal contrast reactions have been
reported but are exceedingly rare.
A unique physiologic side effect of gadoxetate
disodium (Eovist®) is transient tachypnea,
which can cause motion artifact on arterialphase MRI. It is more common with high
volume, off-label administrations.
Patients at highestrisk for adverse reactions to
GBCM are those who have had previous
reactions to these agents (even to different
GBCM). Lesser risk factors include other
allergies and asthma. A history of a prior
allergic-like reaction to iodinated contrast
media is not believed to increase the risk of an
allergic-like reaction to GBCM above that of
other allergies.
Some preventive measures can be considered in
patients who have experienced previous
adverse reactions to GBCM. This includes using
a different gadolinium compound for
reinjection. It should be noted that the FDAapproved package insert for one GBCM
(gadobenate dimeglumine [MultiHance®])
states that use of this GBCM is specifically
contraindicated in patients who have had prior
allergic-like contrast reactions to ANY GBCM.
Another preventive measure is premedicating
patients with corticosteroids and antihistamines
(using a regimen identical to that used for
prophylaxis of adverse reactions to iodinated
contrast media) before injection. The
effectiveness of premedication before GBCM
has not yet been determined, but premedication
is still often performed, based on evidence
extrapolated from experience with iodinated
contrast media.
GBCM in Pregnancy
GBCM have been classified by the Food and
Drug Administration as pregnancy class C
drugs (no adequate and well-controlled studies
in humans have been performed, although
animal reproduction studies have shown an
adverse effect on the fetus) and are therefore
relatively contraindicated in pregnant patients.
These agents pass through the placental barrier
and enter the fetal circulation. They are then
filtered by the fetal kidneys and excreted into
the amniotic fluid, where they may remain for a
prolonged period. Prolonged presence of the
agent in the amniotic fluid could theoretically
increase the risk of dissociation from the chelate
of the potentially toxic gadolinium ion (see
separate section on nephrogenic systemic
fibrosis, to follow). For this reason, GBCM
should only be administered to pregnant
patients in carefully selected situations in which
the benefit is thought to outweigh the potential
risk.
GBCM in Women Who Are Breastfeeding
Only tiny amounts (0.04%) of administered
GBCM are excreted into the milk of
breastfeeding mothers, and only a tiny
percentage of this (1%) GBCM is absorbed
through an infant’s gastrointestinal tract. This
is much less than the allowed GBCM dose,
when a contrast-enhanced imaging study is
needed in an infant. There is no evidence that
the tiny amount of absorbed GBCM has any
adverse effect on a breastfed infant. Therefore,
there is no need for a mother to stop
breastfeeding after a GBCM-enhanced study.
However, as with the administration of
iodinated contrast media, if the mother is
concerned, she can stop breastfeeding for 12 to
24 hours after the study, and pump and discard
any milk produced during this time.
Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis (NSF)
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is a
fibrosing disease most evident in the skin and
subcutaneous tissues, but it also may involve
other organs, such as the lungs, esophagus,
heart, and skeletal muscles. Initial symptoms
typically include skin thickening with plaque
formation. Symptoms and signs may progress
rapidly, with some affected patients developing
contractures and joint immobility. Occasionally,
the disease may be fatal. There is no known
effective treatment.
NSF occurs nearly exclusively in patients with
severe CKD (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2) or in
patients with AKI who have been exposed to
GBCM. Symptom onset can occurfrom days to
years after GBCM administration. Identification
of the GBCM responsible for the precipitation
of this disease is sometimes difficult, because
many patients have received multiple different
MR contrast agents. GBCM agent exposure is
considered to be “confounded” in patients with
NSF who have been exposed to multiple
GBCM; the exposure is considered to be
“unconfounded” when a patient with NSF has
only been exposed to one agent.
NSF has been encountered almost exclusively
after patient exposure to several specific linear
GBCM, with the high-risk agents being
gadodiamide (Omniscan®), gadoversetamide
(OptiMark®, no longer manufactured), and
gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist®).
Higher doses and multiple doses of the higher
risk GBCM are believed to increase the
likelihood of NSF, although cases have
occurred after only a single administration of a
standard dose of GBCM.
Few, if any, cases of unconfounded NSF have
been reported with the lower-risk agents, which
include gadobenate dimeglumine
(MultiHance®), gadobutrol (Gadavist®),
gadoterate meglumine (Dotarem® and
Clariscan®), and gadoteridol (ProHance®).
Gadoxetate disodium (Eovist®) is a newer agent
with limited information about its association
with NSF; however, the risk of NSF developing
after gadoxetate disodium administration is
probably very low.
Because most patients with severe CKD who
are exposed to NSF-associated GBCM do not
develop NSF, other factors are believed to be
required for disease development. Additional
suggested risk factors for NSF have included
metabolic acidosis or medications that
predispose patients to acidosis; increased iron,
calcium, and/or phosphate levels; high-dose
erythropoietin therapy; immunosuppression;
vasculopathy; an acute pro-inflammatory event;
and infection. Unfortunately, no consistent
relationship between these factors and NSF has
been identified.
The mechanism of NSF is unknown, although
many experts have speculated that it may result
from dissociation of the gadolinium ion from its
chelate in vivo, with subsequent precipitation
of gadolinium in tissue. This mechanism has
been suggested because the three high-risk
GBCM have lower stability of gadolinium ion
binding to the chelate than do most of the
nonimplicated GBCM. With high-risk GBCMs,
a different ion is thought to be able to replace
the gadolinium ion within the chelate more
easily, thereby freeing up the toxic gadolinium
atom. This replacement process is referred to as
transmetallation.
In response to the emergence of NSF,
radiologists have instituted a number of
precautions that have been effective in nearly
eliminating this disease. The most important
precaution is avoiding the high-risk GBCM
(gadodiamide [Omniscan®], gadoversetamide
[OptiMark®], and gadopentetate dimeglumine
[Magnevist®]) in any patients requiring
contrast- enhanced MRI who might have severe
CKD (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2) or AKI. At
institutions where high-risk GBCM are used,
patients referred for contrast-enhanced MRI
should be screened for renal disease (which
may include obtaining eGFR levels in any
patient with a history of a solitary kidney,
kidney transplant, or renal neoplasm; or
hypertension or diabetes mellitus). The three
high-risk GBCM are absolutely contraindicated
by the Food and Drug Administration when the
eGFR is less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2.
There is no proof that immediate post-MRI
dialysis reduces the risk of NSF in any high-risk
GBCM- exposed patients.
Gadolinium Retention
Some administered gadolinium remains in the
body after GBCM administration. It has long
been known that this retention occurs in the
skeleton and is greater with linear than
macrocyclic agents.
More recently, investigators have found that
gadolinium is also retained within the brain
(particularly in the globus pallidus and dentate
nucleus). This occurs even in patients with
normal renal function. The amount of
gadolinium accumulation is proportional to the
amount of GBCM that a patient has received. It
is not clear in what state the gadolinium is
retained. As with retention in the bones,
retention in the brain is greater with linear than
with macrocyclic agents.
There is no evidence of any adverse neurologic
effects of this accumulation (even after millions
of GBCM administrations throughout the
world); however, further study is necessary to
determine long-term effects, if any, that
gadolinium deposition in the brain may have
4.2.3 Treatment of Acute Contrast Reactions
When an allergic-like reaction occurs, rapid
recognition, patient assessment, and diagnosis
are important so that appropriate treatment can
be instituted rapidly.
A responding radiologist should assess the
patient quickly. A brief discussion with the
patient and any present healthcare providers,
when possible, should provide the following
information: the reason for the imaging study, a
description of the patient’s current symptoms,
and a summary of the patient’s health problems
and medications. Vital signs should be obtained
promptly. IV access should be secured. A pulse
oximeter should be available. Oxygen should
also be available and, if administered, should
be given at high doses.
The examining radiologist should quickly
determine the level of patient consciousness,
the appearance of the skin, the quality of
phonation, and the presence or absence of
respiratory and cardiovascular symptoms.
Mild reactions usually resolve within 20 to 30
minutes and do not require medical treatment;
however, some patients with moderate and
severe reactions may initially develop only
mild symptoms. For this reason, all patients
should be monitored until their symptoms have
improved.
The management of a contrast reaction depends
on the nature of the reaction and its severity.
Treatments recommended in the ACR Manual
on Contrast Media (2020) for different types of
reactions in adults are condensed and
summarized below.
Hives (Urticaria)
• No treatment is needed in most cases.
• If symptomatic, administer
diphenhydramine (Benadryl®), 25 to 50
mg orally (PO), intra- muscularly (IM),
or intravenously (IV). Alternatively, use
fexofenadine (Allegra®), 180 mg PO.
Diffuse Erythema
• Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and
use a pulse oximeter.
• Give O2, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
• If the patient is normotensive, no further
treatment is usually needed; note that
antihistamines should be administered
with caution, as they may exacerbate
existing or developing hypotension.
• If the patient is hypotensive, give 1 L of
IV fluids rapidly, either 0.9% normal
saline or Lactated Ringer’s solution.
• If hypotension is profound or does not
respond to IV fluids, consider
epinephrine IV (1 mg/ 10 mL)
(1:10,000), 1 mL (0.1 mg) slowly into a
running infusion of IV fluids. Repeat as
needed at 5- to 10-minute intervals up to
10 mL total. In the absence of IV access,
consider epinephrine IM (1 mg/mL)
(1:1000), 0.3 mL (0.3 mg), or IM EpiPen
or equivalent (0.3 mL, 1:1000 dilution
fixed). IM epinephrine may be repeated
up to 1 mg total.
• Consider calling an emergency response
team or 911 based on the severity of the
reaction and the completeness of patient
response to treatment.
Laryngeal Edema
• Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and
use a pulse oximeter.
• Give O2, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
• Give epinephrine IM (1:1000), 0.3 mL
(0.3 mg), orIM EpiPen or equivalent (0.3
mL, 1:1000 dilution fixed), or, especially
if hypotensive, epinephrine IV
(1:10,000), 1 mL (0.1 mg) slowly into a
running infusion of IV fluids.
• Repeat epinephrine as needed up to a
maximum of 1 mg.
• Consider calling an emergency response
team or 911 based on the severity of the
reaction and the completeness of patient
response to treatment
Bronchospasm
• Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and
use a pulse oximeter.
• Give O2, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
• Give beta-agonist inhaler albuterol, 2
puffs (90 mcg per puff); can repeat up to
three times. In cases in which
bronchospasm is severe and/or
unresponsive to an inhaler, consider
adding epinephrine IM (1 mg/mL)
(1:1000), 0.3 mL (0.3 mg), orIM EpiPen
or equivalent (0.3 mL, 1 mg /mL 1:1000
dilution fixed), or epinephrine IV (1
mg/10 mL) (1:10,000), 1 mL (0.1 mg)
slowly into a running infusion of IV
fluids.
• Repeat epinephrine as needed up to a
maximum of 1 mg.
• Consider calling an emergency response
team or 911 based on the completeness of
patient response to treatment.
Hypotension, Any Cause (systolic blood pressure <
90 mm Hg)
• Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and
use a pulse oximeter.
• Elevate legs at least 60 degrees
(Trendelenburg position).
• Give O2, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
• Consider rapid administration of 1 L of
IV fluids, 0.9% normal saline or Lactated
Ringer’s solution.
Hypotension with Bradycardia (pulse < 60 bpm)
(Vagal Reaction)
• If mild, no additional treatment is
usually needed beyond that listed
above for any cause of hypotension.
• If severe (patient remains unresponsive
to above measures), give atropine, 0.6
to 1.0 mg IV, into a running infusion of
IV fluids. (Note: lower doses of
atropine may exacerbate bradycardia.)
• May repeat atropine up to a total dose
of 3 mg.
• Consider calling an emergency
response team or 911.

Hypotension with Tachycardia (pulse > 100 bpm)
(Allergic-like Reaction)
• If hypotension persists after the basic
treatment listed above for any cause of
hypotension, give epinephrine IV (1
mg/10 mL) (1:10,000), 1 mL (0.1 mg)
slowly into a running infusion of IV
fluids. Can repeat as needed up to 10
mL (1 mg) total. Alternately, IM
epinephrine (1 mg/mL) (1:1000) could
be given, 0.3 mL (0.3 mg), or IM
EpiPen or equivalent (0.3 mL, 1 mg/mL
1:1000 dilution fixed). IM epinephrine
may be repeated up to 1 mg total.
• Consider calling an emergency
response team or 911 based on the
severity of the reaction and the
completeness of patient response to
treatment.
Unresponsive and Pulseless
• Check forresponsiveness.
• Activate emergency response team or
call 911.
• Perform CPR per American Heart
Association protocols.
• Defibrillate as indicated if equipment
is available.
• May administer epinephrine IV 1
mg/10 mL) (1:10,000), 10 mL (1 mg),
between 2-minute cycles of CPR.
Reaction Rebound Prevention
• IV corticosteroids are not useful in
acute treatment of any reaction.
• However, IV corticosteroids help
prevent a short- term recurrence of an
allergic-like reaction and may be
considered for a patient having a
severe allergic-like reaction before
transportation to the emergency
department.
• Give hydrocortisone, 5 mg/kg IV over
1 to 2 minutes ,or methylprednisolone,
1 mg/kg IV over 1 to 2 minutes.
Hypertensive crisis, pulmonary edema,
seizures or convulsions, and hypoglycemia are
uncommon reactions. If these occur, the
radiologist should refer to standard treatment
sources, including the ACR Manual on Contrast
Media.
Pediatric Dosing
Pediatric dosing for some of the
interventions/medications utilized for treating
allergic-like contrast reactions are provided as
follows:
• Isotonic fluid: 10-20 mL/kg of 0.9%
normal saline or Lactated Ringers up to
a maximum volume of 500-1,000 mL
• Diphenhydramine (Benadryl ®): 1
mg/kg up to a maximum of 50 mg
• Beta agonist inhaler (Albuterol ®): 2
puffs (90 mcg/puff) for a total of 180
mcg; can repeat up to three times
• Epinephrine:
o IM dosing: (up to 30 kg):
epinephrine autoinjector (EpiPen
Jr®) single dose of (0.15 mg)
o IM dosing: (over 30 kg patient
weight): use adult autoinjector; or
0.01 mL/kg (0.01 mg/kg) of 1
mg/mL or 1:1000 dilution
(maximum single dose of 0.3 mL
[0.3 mg]); repeated every 5-15
minutes needed up to a
maximum dose of 1 mg (1 mL)
o IV dosing: 0.1 mL/kg (0.01
mg/kg) of 1 mg/10 mL or 1:10,000
dilution (maximum single dose of
1 mL [0.1 mg]), repeated every 5
– 15 minutes, as needed up to a
maximum dose of 1 mg (10 mL)