Chapter 5: Reimbursement, Regulatory Compliance, and
Legal Considerations in Radiology
5.1 Reimbursement and Regulatory
Compliance
5.1.1 Coding, Billing, and Reimbursement
Appropriate reimbursement for healthcare
services involves a series of complex and
interconnected steps that often vary depending
on the payer. A number of generalizable
principles based on Medicare rules should
guide best practice efforts to optimize revenue
and compliance activities. These principles of
reimbursement are also important to
understand as they often serve as the basis for
how third-party payors structure their
reimbursement. Traditionally, physician
services and procedures are reimbursed on a
fee-for-service basis. Although this fee-forservice system of reimbursement forms the
basis for physician reimbursement today, it is
important to recognize that especially with
primary care models, there is a clear shift away
from a volume-based form of reimbursement
(i.e., fee-for -service) towards more value-based
payments requiring attainment of certain
quality measures.
Each service or procedure that a physician
provides is given a unique code called a
Current Procedural Terminology code (CPT)
that in turn is assigned a specific
reimbursement amount. The first step in
obtaining reimbursement for a new service or
procedure is to have it assigned a unique CPT
code. The American Medical Association
(AMA) CPT Editorial Panel, is responsible for
maintaining the CPT code set, including
authorizing new codes, modification of existing
codes, and deletion of codes no longer relevant.
The CPT Editorial Panel is composed of
physicians nominated by national medical
societies, CMS, and other industry leaders. A
separate committee, the AMA CPT Advisory
Committee, assists the CPT Editorial Panel by
making recommendations regarding new
codes and existing codes. The CPT Advisory
Committee is composed of representatives
nominated by national medical societies. For
example, national radiology societies designate
representatives to serve on the CPT Advisory
Committee who then advocate for radiologists
by making recommendations for new or
existing radiology CPT codes.
Each CPT code is assigned a value called the
Relative Value Unit (RVU) based on the
Resource Based Relative Value Scale. This value
is relative in that each value reflects its relative
value compared to other services or procedures
within the specialty as well other medical
specialties. The AMA RBRVS Update
Committee (also known as “The RUC”), makes
recommendations to CMS for RVU valuation
for each CPT code, and is predominantly
composed of physicians representing various
medical societies. The AMA RUC Advisory
Committee, supports the RUC by making
recommendations just as the CPT Advisory
Committee supports the CPT Editorial Panel.
National medical societies can nominate
representatives to the RUC Advisory
Committee who then advocate for their
membership by recommending specific RVU
valuations to the RUC, which in turn makes its
final recommendations to CMS.
Each service or procedure’s total RVUs reflect
the amount of 1) encounter time, intensity,
effort, and skill (the work RVU); 2) costs of
maintaining a practice, such as equipment,
supplies, and nonphysician staff (practice
expense RVU); and 3) professional liability
expenses (malpractice RVU). Work RVU is used
by many practices to track physician
productivity. Although the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
ultimately sets the valuation of RVUs, it has
historically accepted the AMA RUC
recommendations in the vast majority of cases.
Once an RVU is determined for a specific
service or procedure designated by its CPT
code, a multiplier called the Conversion Factor
(CF) is used to determine the actual
reimbursement. Thus, to obtain the actual
reimbursement for a specific procedure, the
RVU for that procedure is multiplied by the CF.
Payment = RVU x CF
The conversion factor is set annually by CMS in
Final Rule of the Medicare Physician fee
schedule. For example, the CF for 2020 was set
by CMS at $36.09 and in 2021 this fell to $34.89.
CMS and private insurers generally pay only
for services deemed medically necessary. CMS
defines medical necessity as “healthcare
services or supplies needed to prevent,
diagnose, or treat an illness, injury, condition,
disease, or its symptoms and that meet
accepted standards of medicine.” In
practicality, the determination of medical
necessity is usually a rules- based
administrative exercise performed at the time a
claim is submitted to a payer, wherein a CPT
service code must match a pre-approved
diagnosis code list. Those diagnosis codes must
be in the form of the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) system, established by the World
Health Organization, currently in its 10th
revision (ICD-10). ICD-10 codes describe the
signs, symptoms, or specific diagnosis of a
patient that form the indication for a healthcare
service. Terms such as “rule out” or “consistent
with” are not capable of being coded by ICD-10,
and therefore do not meet medical necessity
criteria.
Reimbursement forradiology services is largely
predicated on the adequacy of documentation
within the physician report. Professional
coders, assisted by software tools, extract
information from radiology reports to assign
both ICD-10 and CPT codes. The Radiology
Coding Certification Board is the primary
organization that credentials professional
medical imaging coders. These individuals
extract ICD-10 information from radiology
reports using any statements 1) about
examination indication and clinical history
provided by the referring physician or patient
and 2) from any specific diagnostic information
located in the findings section or(preferably) in
the impression section of the radiologist’s
report. CPT codes are assigned based on the
specific details of the described service. For
radiography, more views generally translate to
higher complexity codes. For ultrasound, organ
inventory “checklists” apply to abdominal,
pelvic, obstetrical, and extremity imaging. For
CT and MRI, details of contrast administration
(i.e., without, with, or without and with
contrast) determine the CPT code for a specific
body part. Structured template reporting helps
radiologists comply with many of these
reporting requirements, facilitating appropriate
reimbursement and regulatory compliance.
Many private payers, Medicaid plans, and
Medicare Advantage (i.e., not traditional
Medicare indemnity) payers contract with
radiology benefit management (RBM)
companies, and require preauthorization (also
known as precertification) as a condition for
reimbursement for any elective outpatient
advanced imaging service. Before performing
advanced imaging services such as CT, MRI,
and PET/CT, radiology facilities should
determine whether preauthorization is required
for a particular service for a particular patient
and, if so, whether such preauthorization has
been obtained. Although a necessary condition
for payment, preauthorization by an
outsourced RBM does not always guarantee a
subsequent favorable medical necessity
determination by the insureritself when a claim
is filed. As a general rule, preauthorization
requirements do not apply to emergency
department and inpatient services.
The consultation of software for imaging
Clinical Decision Support software (CDS) is
technically required for all Medicare outpatient
and certain ED patients when ordering
advanced imaging tests (CT, MRI, and Nuclear
Medicine), although payment consequences
have not yet been defined. This software
further scores appropriateness of imaging
orders in 8 clinical priority conditions;
Coronary artery disease (suspected or
diagnosed), Suspected pulmonary embolism,
Headache (traumatic and nontraumatic), Hip
pain, Low back pain, Shoulder pain (including
suspected rotator cuff injury), cancer of the
lung (primary or metastatic, suspected or
diagnosed) and cervical or neck pain. These
initial 8 clinical priority conditions were
designated by the CMS in 2016 with scores now
being transmitted on provider claims. The list is
likely to grow in future years after the initial
operations testing period. These software
systems are to use appropriate imaging
recommendations from Qualified Provider Led
Entities (QPLEs) which include national
medical societies. The intent is to guide
ordering physicians to the most appropriate
studies for their patients, and this approach is
being attempted by CMS as an alternative to
the pre-authorization process.
The False Claims Act (FCA) protects the
government from being overcharged or sold
substandard goods or services. A false claim is
generally defined as a request for payment for
services that a provider knew or should have
known was false or fraudulent. While the U.S.
Department of Justice does not expect
physicians to be experts in all of these nuanced
matters, it has set an expectation thatradiology
practice processes, structures, and cultures be
oriented toward optimizing the integrity of
revenue cycle operations. Best practice
techniques call for formal compliance plans,
with a formally designated compliance officer
and compliance committee appropriately
empowered to oversee these activities. A false
claim ruling can result in fines of up to three
times the billed amount plus $11,000 per claim
filed, because each single exam or service billed
to Medicare or Medicaid counts as a claim. In
2014, the largest radiology practice settlement
occurred for $15.5 Million based upon
allegations at a diagnostic testing facility that it
falsely billed federal and state health care
programs for tests that were not performed or
not medically necessary and paid kickbacks to
physicians. Multi-million dollar settlements
occur almost annually with $5 million being
paid in 2020 to resolve allegations of
unsupervised radiology services and services
provided at unaccredited facilities.
5.1.2 Patient Privacy and HIPAA
Respect for patient privacy is a core
responsibility of a medical professional. The
Privacy and the Security rules of the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA) represent a codification of this
principle in the law. They provide a set of
national privacy standards and bring with them
the power of law. As such, compliance activities
must prioritize patient privacy. HIPAA rules
apply to healthcare providers, plans, and
clearinghouses alike.

The Privacy Rule establishes national standards
for the protection of individually identifiable
health information, referred to as protected
health information (PHI). The Security Rule
establishes a national set of security standards
for securing PHI when held or transferred in
electronic form. It operationalizes the
protections contained in the Privacy Rule by
addressing both technical and nontechnical
safeguards that organizations must put in place
to secure individuals’ electronic PHI (e-PHI).
Within the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, the Office for Civil Rights
(OCR) has responsibility for enforcing these
rules with civil money penalties.
The major goals of the HIPAA rules are to
assure appropriate protection of each
individual’s PHI while still permitting the flow
of information necessary to provide and
promote quality healthcare. The following
identifiers are included in the definition of PHI:
1) names; 2) geographic subdivisions smaller
than a state (except for the first three digits of a
ZIP code representing a population greater
than 20,000); 3) all elements of dates (except
year) related to an individual, such as birthdate,
admission date, discharge date, and date of
death; 4) phone numbers; 5) fax numbers; 6)
email addresses; 7) Social Security numbers; 8)
medical record numbers; 9) health plan
beneficiary numbers; 10) account numbers; 11)
certificate and license numbers; 12) vehicle
identification and license plate numbers; 13)
device identifiers and serial numbers; webpage
universal resource locators (URLs); Internet
Protocol (IP) addresses; 16) biometric identifiers
such as finger- and voice-prints; 17) full face or
similar photographs; and 18) any other unique
identifier, characteristic, or code.
As a general rule, an individual’s PHI cannot be
disclosed or transmitted to anyone other than
the individual without that individual’s
authorization. Exceptions include information
disclosed or transmitted when necessary for 1)
the delivery of care or treatment, 2) payment
activities, and 3) healthcare operations
involving quality or competency assurance,
fraud or abuse detection, or compliance. In
addition, when required by law, information
can be released 1) to public health authorities,
2) during investigation of abuse, neglect, or
domestic violence, 3) to oversight agencies, 4)
for judicial and administrative proceeding, 5)
for law enforcement purposes, and 6) for
worker’s compensation.
5.1.3 Human Subjects Research
Properly controlled biomedical research
involving human subjects is essential to
advancing medical knowledge and care.
Unfortunately, human cruelty has occasionally
been perpetrated in the name of research, and
not all human studies have been either
justifiable or useful. The discoveries of such
abuses during Nazi Germany were the basis for
the development of the Nuremberg Code,
which represented the first international
codification of minimal expectations for the
conduct of ethical research involving human
subjects. The Code’s most important principles
were that experiments involving human
subjects should occur only with subjects who
have freely chosen to participate, and in the
context of a clear scientific rationale. The
subsequent Declaration of Helsinki, now
widely regarded as the cornerstone of human
research ethics, has recommended that all
research protocols be reviewed by an
independent committee prior to initiation.
That recommendation led to the development
of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) system
currently in place in the United States, wherein
appropriately constituted groups, usually at the
university or health system level, are formally
designated to review and monitor biomedical
research involving human subjects. In
accordance with Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) regulations, an IRB has
the authority to approve, require modifications
in order to secure approval, or deny approval
for proposed research protocols. These review
groups serve important roles in the protection
of the rights and welfare of human research
subjects.
IRBs are required to ensure a “diversity of
members, including consideration of race,
gender, cultural backgrounds, and sensitivity to
such issues as “community attitudes” and to
register with the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS). Institutions engaged in
research involving human subjects usually have
their own IRBs to oversee research conducted
within the institution or by its staff. However,
institutions without an IRB are permitted to
arrange for an outside IRB to assume oversight
responsibilities.
Because the free choice of research subject
participation is a fundamental prerequisite to
ethical research, an IRB carefully scrutinizes all
aspects of consent. The research informed
consent process involves 1) providing adequate
information about a study to potential subjects,
2) providing an adequate opportunity for
subjects to consider all options, 3) responding
adequately to all subject questions, 4) ensuring
that the subject comprehends all necessary
information, 5) obtaining the subject’s
voluntary agreement to participate, and 6)
providing ongoing information as the subject or
situation so requires. In some situations (such
as many studies involving the retrospective
review of imaging), an IRB may waive the
requirement for informed consent when the
research involves no more than minimal risks
to participants, and cannot be practically
carried out without such a waiver. IRBs
typically provide an exemption from formal
protocol review when a project constitutes a
quality improvement activity, as long as the
primary objective is to improve local practice
rather than to create generalizable knowledge.
IRB approval is notrequired for studies that do
not meet federal definitions of human subjects
research (e.g., studies that utilize open source
public datasets).
5.2 Malpractice and Risk Management
5.2.1 General Principles of Malpractice
Malpractice fears have been cited as a cause of
physician burnout and distress, including in
radiology.
Approximately 7% of all radiologists are named
in a medical malpractice lawsuit each year;
radiology indemnity payments in malpractice
cases average approximately $480,000. The
average radiologist spends approximately 19
months of his or her career with an unresolved
open malpractice claim. Malpractice concerns
have also been identified as a cause of
overutilization of services; more than 90% of
physicians report that they at least sometimes
engage in the practice of defensive medicine.
Malpractice insurance coverage is usually
mandated as a condition of state licensure and
hospital credentialing. “Claims-made” policies
are the most common types of policies and
protect physicians from personal financial
liability, up to a predetermined policy cap, but
only while the policy is in effect. Physicians
with claims- made policies thus usually need to
arrange for tail insurance when changing jobs
or retiring to ensure continued financial
protection. “Occurrence” policies cover any
claim for an event that took place during the
period of coverage, even if a claim is filed after
the policy lapses.
Medical malpractice lawsuits are based on the
tort of negligence, and require four elements:
1. The physician must have an established
duty to a patient. For example, duty
would exist for a radiologist to provide
treatment for a patient undergoing a
contrast reaction in the radiology
department but not for interpreting the
contents of a CT scan on a CD in a
patient’s purse in her ICU room unless
those images were submitted forformal
review under established hospital
policy.
2. There must have been a breach of duty,
which usually involves a failure to meet
the standard of care. The definition of
standard of care varies by jurisdiction,
but is generally how a reasonable,
prudent, or ordinary physician of a
similar specialty would have acted in
similar circumstances.
3. Causation must exist, in that the breach
must have been the proximate cause of
injuries. A radiologist, for example, may
have negligently missed a lung mass on
a chest radiograph, but establishing that
as the proximate cause of a hemorrhagic
stroke the next day would be difficult.
4. The negligence mustresult in damages.
In many jurisdictions, emotional
distress, pain, and suffering are
frequently considered remunerative
damages.
Claims of negligence against radiologists
generally fall into 3 categories: 1) diagnostic
errors, 2) procedural complications, and 3)
communication deficiencies.
5.2.2 Malpractice Related to Diagnostic Errors
The most common cause of malpractice
lawsuits againstradiologists is for alleged
errors in diagnosis. Depending on the clinical
indication and modality, the sensitivity of
imaging in detecting disease is highly variable,
and plaintiff lawyers frequently contend that
any false negative interpretation represents
medical negligence. In considering a chest
radiograph with missed lung cancer, for
example, as many as 90% of cancers are
identifiable in retrospect; a radiologist’s
potential legal exposure is not insignificant.
Hindsight bias represents the tendency for
people with a knowledge of the actual outcome
of a case to believe falsely that they would have
predicted its outcome. This jury bias makes
defending such cases difficult.
Negligent diagnosis claims can be categorized
as related to 1) failures of perception (i.e., not
identifying a finding), 2) failures of
interpretation (i.e., identifying a finding but not
appropriately appreciating or adequately
communicating its significance), or 3)
combinations of both. Diagnostic errors can also
be categorized as 1) cognitive errors (e.g., not
identifying a lung nodule when interpreting a
chest radiograph), which are usually errors of
visual perception (scanning, recognition, and
interpretation), or 2) system errors (e.g., failure
to adequately communicate the presence of that
nodule), which are usually attributed to health
system issues or context of care delivery
problems.
As in other medical disciplines, errors in
diagnosis in radiology often result from a
combination or interaction between cognitive
and system errors, such as preliminary reports
by residents that are revised in a final report
but not fully communicated to care teams.
Certain system factors, such as lighting
conditions, shift length, or pace of
interpretation, have been shown to increase the
likelihood of diagnostic errors. Enhanced
awareness of these types of errors helps

radiologists identify areas of diagnostic
vulnerability and institute interventions to
improve patient care and mitigate their own
potential risks.
5.2.3 Malpractice Related to Procedural
Complications
Any invasive procedure has a risk of
complication. Such complications vary in type
and severity based on the procedure, and can
similarly serve as the grounds for medical
negligence claims. Despite what some plaintiff
lawyers might contend, complications by
themselves do not indicate negligence.
Lawsuits based on procedural complications,
however, are more successfully argued in
scenarios in which a radiologist did not exercise
appropriate care in 1) minimizing the risk of the
complication, 2) identifying complication once
it occurred, or 3) treating the complication. In
the instance of the very common complication
of pneumothorax after a lung biopsy, for
example, a radiologist’s malpractice risk would
increase if he or she 1) used an overly large
needle or chose a trajectory unnecessarily
crossing an aerated lung, 2) did not obtain a
postprocedural chest radiograph, or 3)
discharged the patient to home in the setting of
an enlarging pneumothorax.
Patients and their families are more likely to
sue physicians for damages related to
complications if they believe that details of their
care were withheld. As a result, most risk
managers advocate full and prompt disclosure
of any untoward events, and ongoing
communication about decision-making and
treatment. Detailed and contemporaneous
documentation of events, discussions, and
rationale for decisions in the radiology report
and/or elsewhere in the medical record may
prove helpful in court.
Engaging patients (and theirfamilies, when
appropriate) in decision-making before a
procedure also helps set realistic expectations.
The doctrine of informed consent has been
codified in the U.S. courts as a basic right of
self-determination: “Any human being of adult
years and sound mind has a right to determine
what shall be done with his body; and a
surgeon who performs an operation without his
patient’s consent commits an assault.” Courts
have subsequently expanded that decision to
apply to procedures other than open operations
and those performed by nonsurgeon
physicians. Necessary elements of informed
consent are described in Section 3.2.1 of this
study guide. Although most hospitals have
standard consent forms in place, additional
detailed documentation in procedure reports
may prove helpful in a claim of negligence.
5.2.4 Malpractice Related to Communications
Deficiencies
Appropriate communication of actionable
information from radiologists to clinical
caregivers is a critical component of patient
care. Both courts and regulatory agencies are
increasingly holding radiologists to higher
standards of ensuring prompt communication
of diagnostic information. In fact, a number of
court decisions have focused not only on a
radiologist’s duty to communicate important or
critical findings with referring physicians, but
also on communications with patients
themselves when their treating physicians may
not be available.
RoutineCommunication
In radiology, routine communication refers to
the creation and delivery of written reports. The
ACR Practice Parameter for Communication of
Diagnostic Imaging Findings outlines
suggested formatting for reports, which
includes relevant demographic information
(e.g., patient name and identifying information,
referring physician, facility information),
examination details (e.g., type and time of
examination including contrast administration
information, time of dictation), and report
content recommendations (e.g., findings,
impressions, limitations, complications). It is
acceptable for demographic information and
examination details to be contained in the
metadata associated with the report (rather
than in the dictated report body itself).
Radiology reports are now typically generated
and transmitted electronically.
The final report represents the definitive
documentation of the results of an imaging
examination or procedure. It should be
proofread to minimize typographical errors and
confusing or conflicting statements. The use of
abbreviations or acronyms should be limited to
avoid ambiguity. The final report should be
completed in accordance with all appropriate
state and federal requirements (e.g.,
Mammography Quality Standards Act). A copy
of the final report should be archived by the
imaging facility as part of the patient’s medical
record and be retrievable for future reference.
Retention and distribution must be in
accordance with all state and federal
regulations and facility policies.
Nonroutine Communication
While routine communication is typically
carried out through institutionally established
final reporting mechanisms, certain
circumstances dictate alternative
communication mechanisms to ensure timely
receipt of important diagnostic information.
These include situations warranting
preliminary reports and results of an urgent or
other significantly important nature.
Occasionally, a preliminary report is issued
before the final report, and may be rendered for
the purpose of directing immediate patient
management (e.g., when old comparison
images are not yet available but reporting
cannot wait) or to meet the needs of a particular
practice environment (e.g., by a trainee in a
teaching institution or by a general practice
radiologist when a subspecialist radiologist is
not immediately available). Such preliminary
communications should be archived, since they
may have served as the basis of immediate
clinical decisions. Institutions are expected to
maintain policies for reconciling discrepancies
between preliminary and final reports and for
discrepancies encountered upon subsequent
review of a final report. Any clinically
significant variation in findings or impression
between a preliminary and final interpretation
should be clearly documented and reported as
soon as possible and in a manner that ensures
receipt by the ordering or treating physician.
Clinical situations that may warrant nonroutine
communication include the following:
1. Findings that warrant immediate or urgent
intervention. These are generally new or
unexpected findings on an imaging study
that suggest life-threatening conditions or
those that may require an immediate
change in patient management. Aside from
risk management imperatives, The Joint
Commission (TJC) requires that
professionals “report critical results of tests
and diagnostic procedures on a timely
basis.” TJC-accredited facilities are required
to define critical tests and critical results
and monitor performance in reporting those
results. A critical result is defined as “any
result orfinding that may be considered life
threatening or that could result in severe
morbidity and require urgent or emergent
clinical attention.” Examples include
tension pneumothorax, ruptured aortic
aneurysm, acute intracerebral hemorrhage,
and pneumoperitoneum. Each facility has
leeway in defining its own critical tests and
critical results; there is no standard list for
either category. For all critical results,
communication requires direct contact
between the radiologist and the requesting
or responding clinician or another licensed
healthcare provider responsible for that
patient’s care. In addition, communication
is generally expected to occur within 60
minutes of the time that the observation is
made, and it must be documented. When
the ordering physician or healthcare
provider cannot be contacted expeditiously,
it may be appropriate to convey results
directly to the patient, depending on the
nature of the findings. At some institutions,
these critical results are deemed “Level 1
results.”
2. Findings that may not require immediate
attention but nonetheless may seriously
impact a patient’s health, worsen over
time, or result in an adverse outcome.
These include the following: 1) New or
unexpected findings that could result in
mortality or significant morbidity if not
treated in a timely manner. Referred to as
“Level 2 results” by some institutions, these
are less dire than critical results and
generally warrant communication within 12
hours. For such findings, the radiologist
might call the care team directly, or might
request a call service or assistant to call on
his or her behalf. Examples include intraabdominal abscess or impending
pathological hip fracture. 2) New or
unexpected findings on an imaging study
that could result in significant but not
immediate morbidity if not appropriately
treated. Deemed “Level 3 results” by some
institutions, communication is not
particularly time sensitive but mechanisms
must be in place to ensure that these
important or potentially important findings
are not overlooked. Examples include a
newly identified lung nodule or solid renal
mass. These findings may be reported
electronically when electronic messaging
tracking mechanisms are in place to make
sure that information was successfully
received and, when necessary,
supplemented by telephone confirmation.
Documentation of all nonroutine
communication should include the date and
time of the communication, the person
reporting the information, the person receiving
the information, and a summary of orreference
to the information that was conveyed.
Informal Communication
Radiologists may occasionally be asked to
provide interpretations that do not result in a
formal report but are nonetheless used to make
treatment decisions.
Such communications may take the form of a
“curbside consult” that may occurinformally in
the reading room or during a clinical
conference. These circumstances often preclude
immediate documentation and may also occur
in suboptimal viewing conditions (e.g., no
comparison studies, no original reports, or
inadequate incomplete history). Informal
communications carry additional inherent risk
since the documentation of the clinician
initiating the informal consultation may
constitute the only written record of that
communication. For these reasons, informal
communications are largely discouraged; when
such communications do occur, radiologists
should document them independently from the
referring clinician’s documentation.
Radiology departments are encouraged to
establish processes and policies forreporting
studies performed at outside institutions.
Radiologists who provide consultations of this
nature are encouraged to document any
information conveyed, including formal
interpretations. Although formal second
opinion interpretations are historically non
payable, Medicare and private payers are
increasingly reimbursing radiologists forthem
when they are medically necessary and are
billed in accordance with payer rules.
5.2.5 Discoverability of Communications
In malpractice lawsuits, most communication
related to any part of the case—whether written
or oral—is considered discoverable and can be
used as evidence at trial. However, certain
important exceptions apply. The attorney–client
privilege is one of the oldest recognized
privileges for confidential communications. It
encourages clients in all legal matters (not just
malpractice cases) to make full and frank
disclosures to their attorneys, who should then
be better able to provide candid advice and
effective representation. Nearly all
communication between a client and his or her
attorney is protected from discovery. For this
reason, physicians involved in lawsuits are
strongly discouraged from speaking with any
parties other than their attorneys about any
elements of their cases.
Most jurisdictions also protect certain peer
review activities from legal discovery. Peer
review protection laws are designed to provide
an incentive for healthcare providers to
perform ongoing quality improvement
activities without fear of increased tort risk. As
a general rule, no person who participates in
any approved peer review process shall be
permitted or required to testify in any civil
action as to the findings, recommendations,
evaluations, opinions, or other actions of the
peer review process. However,
communications are only protected if they
occur within established peer review processes;
informal conversations with colleagues outside
established peer review processes, for example,
are typically not protected from legal discovery