Uterus 
Anatomy 
• Normal segments of the uterus include: fundus (superior to the ostia of fallopian tubes), body (upper 2/3, superior boundary is the fundus), cervix (lower 1/3), and isthmus (junction of body and cervix). 
Normal variant uterine positions 
• 
“Version” of the uterus refers to angle between the cervix and the vagina. 

• 
“Flexion” of the uterus refers to angle between the body and the cervix. 

• 
About 20 degrees of uterine anteflexion is normal. As the bladder fills, the degree of anteflexion decreases. 

• 
Retroversion of the uterus may cause • Retroflexion of the uterus may cause poor visualization of the uterine fundus even poorer visualization of the fundus transabdominally. and can mimic an intramural fibroid. 



Normal T2 zonal anatomy 
• T2-weighted MRI sequence can distinguish the 
three layers of the uterus. 
• Endometrial stripe: T2 hyperintense 
(glandular). 
• Junctional zone (first zone of myometrium): T2 
hypointense. The T2 hypointense signal is due to the extremely compact smooth muscle. 
Normal junctional zone should measure =12 mm: Thickening of the junctional zone is seen in 
adenomyosis. 
• Outer myometrium: Relatively T2 hypointense, although less so than junctional zone. 

Normal sagittal T2 zonal anatomy of the uterus. 
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 

Endometrium 
Endometrial thickness 
• 
The thickest portion of the endometrium should be measured transvaginally in the sagittal orientation. Information about the last menstrual period is critical to adequately evaluate the endometrium. Ideally, the endometrium should be measured in the menstrual phase. 

• 
Endometrial fluid is not included in the measurement: If endometrial fluid is present, the flanking endometrium is measured and the two components are summed. 


Variation with menstrual cycle 
Days  Phase in menstrual cycle  Endometrial thickness  Ultrasound findings  Illustration  
1–4  Menstrual  <4 mm  Thin, echogenic line  MENSTRUAL PHASE < 4 mm  
5–9  Early proliferative  4–8 mm  PROLIFERATIVE PHASE 4 10 mm  
10–14  Late proliferative             (peri-ovulatory) Estrogen effects dominate, increasing functional zone thickness.  6–10 mm  Classic trilaminar appearance, with hypoechoic zone between the linear echogenic collapsed endometrial cavity and the thicker peripheral echogenic endometrium.  
15–28  Secretory Progesterone effects dominate, causing further thickening of the functional layer. The functional zone becomes soft and edematous as the spiral arteries become tortuous.  7–14 mm  The endometrium reaches maximum thickness and echogenicity (becomes isoechoic relative to the basal layer).  SECRETORY PHASE 7 14 mm  


Thin, linear endometrium during menstrual phase. Trilaminar endometrium during proliferative phase. 


Benign endometrial pathology 
Endometrial polyp 
• An endometrial polyp can cause mucous discharge or irregular vaginal bleeding between 
cycles. Most endometrial polyps are benign, but larger polyps (>1.5 cm) occurring in postmenopausal patients may have malignant potential. 
• Ultrasound shows a focal nodular area of endometrial thickening, often with a feeding vessel or internal flow by Doppler. A polyp is more definitively diagnosed by sonohysterogram, where saline is instilled into the uterus prior to transvaginal ultrasound. 
Endometrial hyperplasia/metaplasia 
• Endometrial hyperplasia refers to abnormal proliferation of the endometrial glands and 
stroma. It can be seen in all age groups. It typically presents as abnormal uterine bleeding. 
• 
Hyperplasia occurs due to unopposed estrogen stimulation, and can have various causes (obesity, polycystic ovary syndrome, pregnancy, estrogen-secreting ovarian tumors, and tamoxifen). 

• 
Endometrial hyperplasia is typically diagnosed by ultrasound. The imaging findings are nonspecific but can include smooth endometrial thickening and/or cystic changes. Hyperplasia, metaplasia, or carcinoma cannot be reliably distinguished by imaging. 


In premenopausal women, evaluation is based on clinical symptoms, in particular, abnormal uterine bleeding. Endometrial thickness varies with the menstrual cycle and is a poor predictor for endometrial 
pathology. 
In post-menopausal women, endometrial thickness in combination with clinical picture (symptoms, medications) can prompt further workup including biopsy and/or hysteroscopy. Refer to the chart below 
for more detail. 
Management of uniform (non-focal) post-menopausal endometrial thickness (ET) 

< 5 mm ˜ 5 mm 
no further workup 
bleeding no bleeding 
(low malignancy risk)   *if bleeding, likely due to atrophy   *ACOG uses 4 mm 
no workup recommendation needs workup varies by group 
needs workup   *if cyclic, repeat exam o˜ HRT 


no medications 
*The ET cutoff for further workup of post-menopausal bleeding varies by institution. For example, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) use 4 mm instead of 5 mm. 
The above management approach can only be used if the entire endometrial lining is visualized. 
Focal endometrial thickening requires workup regardless of thickness. 
GU: 303 



Endometrial cancer 
Endometrial carcinoma overview 

Endometrial cancer: Grayscale ultrasound of the uterus (left image) shows a mildly echogenic, irregular endometrial mass (arrows). Fluid in the endometrial canal has likely accumulated due to cervical stenosis. Color Doppler shows vascularity within the mass. 
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
• 
Endometrial carcinoma is the most common female gynecologic malignancy and is thought to be caused by prolonged estrogen exposure. Specific risk factors include nulliparity, hormone replacement therapy (HRT), and tamoxifen. 

• 
Over 95% of endometrial carcinoma presents with postmenopausal bleeding. The average endometrial thickness of patients with endometrial carcinoma is 21 mm. 

• 
In patients with postmenopausal bleeding, endometrial thickness =5 mm requires further workup (usually biopsy and/or hysteroscopy).  If endometrial thickness <5 mm, this most 


likely represents endometrial atrophy. 
For patients on HRT, postmenopausal bleeding with endometrial thickness =8 mm requires further workup. This cutoff accounts for effects of HRT on endometrial proliferation. If HRT is given cyclically, imaging should be repeated when patient is off HRT. 
• 
Without bleeding, endometrium thickness =8–11 mm (based on source) requires workup. 

• 
Although uncommonly seen in the absence of bleeding, the finding most suggestive of endometrial carcinoma is the presence of ill-defined margins separating the endometrium 


and the myometrium. 
Staging of endometrial carcinoma 
• MRI can be used for staging once endometrial carcinoma is confirmed by histologic 
sampling. 
• Staging of endometrial carcinoma is based on the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) system, which characterizes extent of disease based on involvement of the cervix, vagina, uterine serosa, adnexa, adjacent bladder/bowel, inguinal lymph nodes, 
and/or distant metastases. 
• 
The presence (and extent) of myometrial invasion is key for staging purposes. In a premenopausal patient, an intact junctional zone confirms no myometrial invasion. The junctional zone cannot be distinguished in post-menopausal patients. 

• 
The depth of myometrial invasion highly correlates with the presence of lymph node metastasis. 

• 
Postcontrast images demonstrate the tumor with the highest conspicuity, as endometrial 


cancer enhances less avidly than the surrounding myometrium. 
Staging of endometrial carcinoma (continued) 

Endometrial carcinoma, stage IB: 
Sagittal T2-weighted MRI (left image) shows a large mass distending the endometrial canal and invading into the myometrium, and protruding into the cervix (yellow arrows). No definite cervical stromal invasion is seen. 
Sagittal postcontrast fat-suppressed T1-weighted MRI (right image) shows that the mass is relatively hypoenhancing relative to the myometrium. The extent of myometrial invasion is best appreciated, with foci of invasion extending >50% of the myometrial wall (red arrow). 
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 

Other diseases of the endometrium/endometrial cavity 
Endometrial fluid 
• 
Trace amount of fluid in the endometrial canal can be normal finding, particularly in premenopausal patients (e.g., menses). Larger amount of fluid is always abnormal, and it can be due to spontaneous abortion. 

• 
In a postmenopausal woman, endometrial fluid can be due to cervical stenosis, and a careful evaluation for cervical malignancy should be performed. 



Infection 
• Endometritis is inflammation or infection of the endometrium, commonly seen postpartum. Imaging findings are often normal in uncomplicated cases. Gas in the uterus >3 weeks post delivery is suspicious for endometritis. Other less specific features include an enlarged (and tender) uterus, 
associated with endometrial thickening. Note that gas in the uterus can be found up to three weeks postpartum (seen in 7% of normal cases). 
• Pyometra (pus within the uterus) is very rare and usually due to outflow obstruction, usually due to cervical malignancy – which needs to be excluded – but untreated endometritis is another potential cause. 
Hemorrhage 
• Intrauterine hemorrhage can occur for a variety of reasons in both the gravid and non-gravid 
uterus. In the non-gravid uterus (outside of menstruation), it may be seen with endometrial polyps, endometrial hyperplasia, endometrial carcinoma, and fibroids. 
• If a patient has had a recent miscarriage or dilation and curettage, blood clot (nonvascular) should be distinguished from retained products of conception (vascular). This is further explained within the Obstetrics chapter.  


Ectopic endometrium 
Endometriosis 

Axial postcontrast fat-suppressed T1-weighted MRI (left image) and sagittal postcontrast CT (right image) 
demonstrate an irregular enhancing lesion within the anterior abdominal wall involving the rectus 
abdominis (arrows). This was a biopsy-proven endometriosis within a Caesarian section scar (termed “scar endometriosis”). 
• Endometriosis is ectopic endometrial tissue outside of the endometrial cavity. Endometriosis has three main forms including superficial masses/implants, ovarian endometriomas, and deep infiltration endometriosis. 
• The most common sites of endometriosis include the ovaries, followed by the myometrium (adenomyosis), ligaments and peritoneal surfaces of the anterior, posterior, and middle pelvic compartments. Less common sites of endometriosis include surgical scars (post Caesarean section, myomectomy), or even rarely within organs outside of the pelvis, such as the liver surface, lungs and brain. 
• Pelvic endometriosis can manifest in three main forms. Superficial lesions: non-invasive implants, which are typically small and not visible on MRI. Ovarian endometrioma: typically seen as T2 hypointense, T1 hyperintense lesions on MRI. Deep (or solid) infiltrating type: defined by invasion of endometrial glands and stroma at least 5 mm beyond the peritoneal surface. 
• Endometrioma is described in more detail later under the Ovarian section. 

Benign myometrial pathology 
Adenomyosis 
• 
Adenomyosis refers to ectopic endometrial tissue within the myometrium (endometriosis interna). In contrast to endometriosis, the ectopic endometrial tissue seen in adenomyosis is nonfunctioning, and it does not respond to cyclic ovarian hormones. 

• 
Most patients are asymptomatic. But classic clinical presentation includes dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia, dyspareunia, infertility, and chronic pelvic pain. 

• 
Ultrasound shows an enlarged uterus with heterogeneous myometrium, without focal mass. Multiple subendometrial cysts or echogenic foci can be found. There is often loss of differentiation of the endometrial-myometrial junction. 

• 
On MRI, adenomyosis is best seen on T2-weighted images as diffuse (or focal) thickening of the junctional zone (>12 mm), often associated with multiple small T2 hyperintense foci. Borderline thickening of the junctional zone (8–12 mm) may be due to adenomyosis, but not diagnostic. 

• 
Focal adenomyosis may mimic leiomyoma, appearing as more focal T1 and T2 hypointense signal. Although imaging features may overlap, leiomyomas typically show well-defined margins, no relationship to the junctional zone, mass effect (lobular external uterine contour), and more homogeneous T2 hypointense signal. 



Adenomyosis: Sagittal (left) and axial T2 MRI of the uterus shows a markedly thickened junctional zone 
containing numerous T2 hyperintense foci. 
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
Fibroid (leiomyoma) 
• 
Fibroids are extremely common benign tumors of smooth muscle seen in 25% of white women, 50% of black women over age 30, and 40% of reproductive-age women. 

• 
A lipoleiomyoma is a variant of fibroid which contains fat and is echogenic on US. 


• Fibroids can be found in several locations: Intramural: located within the myometrium; most common location. Submucosal: directly underneath the endometrial mucosa and may bulge into the endometrial canal. 
A submucosal fibroid can be resected hysteroscopically if >50% of the fibroid is intraluminal. 
An intracavitary fibroid is a variant which is located nearly entirely within the endometrial cavity. 
Subserosal: directly underneath the outer uterine serosa. A subserosal fibroid may simulate an adnexal 
mass if pedunculated, but Doppler will show blood supply coming from the uterus. 
Cervical: rare, may simulate cervical cancer. 
• The typical ultrasound appearance of a fibroid is a slightly heterogeneous, hypoechoic 
uterine mass with linear bands of shadowing. 
Calcification is often seen. May undergo cystic degeneration and appear as an anechoic mass with posterior through-transmission. 
Fibroid (leiomyoma; continued) 

Fibroid: Ultrasound shows a hypoechoic myometrial mass (calipers) with linear 
bands of shadowing. 

Submucosal, subserosal, and intramural fibroids: Sagittal T2-weighted (left image) and postcontrast sagittal T1­weighted fat suppressed MRI shows numerous fibroids, with the largest a dominant intramural fibroid. There are other smaller intramural fibroids, in addition to single submucosal and subserosal fibroids. 
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
• On MRI, leiomyomas are T2 hypointense due to the presence of compact smooth muscle 
but up to 2/3 of leiomyomas show some form of degeneration. Internal cystic or myxoid degeneration may increase T2 signal heterogeneously. Red (carneous) degeneration due to hemorrhagic infarction, often during pregnancy or following oral 
contraceptive pill (OCP) use, may appear T1 hyperintense. 
• 
Calcifications are common and can be seen in up to 25% of cases. 

• 
MRI is often performed for treatment planning prior to uterine artery embolization (UAE). Hemorrhagic or necrotic leiomyomas are not treated effectively by UAE. Surgical 


myomectomy or hysterectomy would be the preferred treatment in these cases. 
Additionally, there is less chance of UAE success if an ovarian-uterine artery anastomosis is 
present. 



Malignant myometrial pathology 
Leiomyosarcoma 
• 
Uterine leiomyosarcoma is very rare and may arise de-novo or from malignant degeneration of a fibroid. 

• 
A “funny looking fibroid” is much more likely to be a benign inhomogeneous fibroid rather than a leiomyosarcoma, but rapid growth should raise suspicion. 

• 
Although signal heterogeneity, restricted diffusion, internal hemorrhage, and ill-defined contour have been described in leiomyosarcomas, imaging cannot reliably differentiate 


between leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma. In the absence of obvious malignant features 
(such as local invasion or regional metastases), an unusual-looking fibroid is overwhelmingly likely to represent a degenerating benign fibroid rather than a leiomyosarcoma. 
• Tamoxifen increases the risk of leiomyosarcoma in addition to endometrial carcinoma. 


Congenital Uterine Malformations 
• Uterine malformations are caused by abnormal development of the paired Müllerian ducts, 
which normally fuse during embryogenesis. A septate uterus is the most common congenital 
abnormality, followed by bicornuate uterus. 
• 
These anomalies increase the risk of infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss because the uterine cavity is abnormal in size (often small, multiple) or morphology. 

• 
Congenital uterine abnormalities are associated with urinary tract abnormalities such as 


renal ectopia or agenesis. 
• The American Society of Reproductive Medicine classifies Müllerian duct anomalies. Class I is uterine agenesis/hypoplasia; Class II is a unicornuate uterus, and classes III through VII 
represent the anomalies discussed below. 
Normal  • The normal uterus is shaped like a pear.  
uterus  
 • The endometrial cavity changes with the menstrual cycle. • The fundus of the endometrium should be smooth without thickening or protrusion.  
Arcuate  • Small indentation of the fundal surface of the  
uterus  endometrial cavity, with indentation depth <10 mm  
(class VI)  
 and angle >90 degrees. • There is no division of the uterine horns and external fundal contour is convex. This is considered along a spectrum with septate uterus. • Usually incidental and asymptomatic, and rarely associated with pregnancy loss, arcuate uterus is often considered a normal variant rather than an anomaly. Treatment is almost always conservative.  
Septate  Failed  • Two uterine cavities, divided by a fibrous or  
uterus  resorption of  muscular septum (>15 mm indentation depth, angle  
(class V)  
 inter-Mlerian septa  <90 degrees). External fundal contour is convex. • Most likely of all uterine anomalies to be implicated in pregnancy loss since the fibrous septal tissue or myometrium is relatively avascular. • Metroplasty (resection of the septum) can be performed hysteroscopically if the septum is fibrous, or transabdominally if the septum is muscular.  
Bicornuate  Partial failure  • Two uterine fundi with shared lower uterine  
uterus  
 of Mlerian  segment; can have one cervix (bicornis unicollis) or  
(class IV)  
 duct fusion  two cervices (bicornis bicollis). • In contrast to a septate uterus, bicornuate uterus has a concave external fundal contour which pinches inwards > 15 mm. • If treated, metroplasty must be performed transabdominally.  
Didelphys uterus (class III)  
 Complete failure of Mlerian duct fusion  • Two completely separate uteri and cervices, with complete endometrium, myometrium and serosal surfaces on each side. • 75% have a vaginal septum.  
DES uterus  • In utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) causes  
(class VII)  
 the fetus to develop classic imaging appearance of hypoplastic uterus with a T-shaped endometrial contour. It is associated with an increased risk of clear cell vaginal cancer. • DES has not been used since the 1970s.  


Septate uterus: Hysterosalpingogram (left image) shows a common lower endometrial cavity which splits to form two separate endometrial cavities (yellow arrows). HSG appearance may correspond to either a septate or bicornuate uterus. Bilateral intraperitoneal spillage of contrast confirms tubal patency. 
Axial T2 MRI (right image) reidentifies the two endometrial cavities and provides further information about the external fundal contour, which is normal (convex) and diagnostic of septate uterus. 

Bicornuate bicollis uterus: Axial T2 (left image) and coronal T2 (right image) show two separate endometrial canals (yellow arrows) with a definite external fundal cleft (red arrow). There are two separate cervices (bicollis; blue arrows) that share a common myometrium. 
Cases courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 

Miscellaneous uterine disease 
Uterine arteriovenous malformation (AVM) 
• 
Uterine arteriovenous malformation is caused by abnormal communication between the uterine arterial branches and draining myometrial venous plexus. It may be congenital (very rare) or acquired (post-traumatic, infection, or iatrogenic, such as post dilation and curettage (D&C)). 

• 
Grayscale and color Doppler can show an enlarged, heterogeneous, and multicystic­


appearing uterus. The appearance is similar to gestational trophoblastic disease (discussed 
in the first trimester of pregnancy section), but with negative ß-hCG. 


Intervention/post-surgical change 
Intrauterine device (IUD) 



3D ultrasound shows normal position of IUD within the 
endometrial cavity. 
• 
The ultrasound appearance of an intrauterine device (IUD) is dependent on the type of IUD: Hormonal plastic IUD (delivers progesterone): Shadowing structure in endometrial canal. Copper IUD: Highly echogenic. 

• 
Complications of IUD are overall rare and include: Malpositioning. Infection: Increased risk of infection with prolonged IUD use, especially actinomycosis. Ectopic pregnancy: When pregnancy occurs in the presence of an IUD, there is increased risk for ectopic 


pregnancy. 
Uterine perforation (extremely rare). 
Post-Caesarean section complications 
• Bladder-.ap hematoma is a rare complication of a low-transverse Caesarean section, where 
a postsurgical hematoma forms in the vesicouterine space (between the posterior bladder 
and the anterior uterus). Ultrasound of a bladder-flap hematoma will show a complex mass posterior to the bladder. 
• Subfascial hematoma is also a rare complication of Caesarean section due to extraperitoneal hemorrhage within the prevesical space (anterior to the bladder). 
Ultrasound shows a complex mass anterior to the bladder. 
• It is important to distinguish a subfascial hematoma from a bladder-flap hematoma, as the surgical approach for repair is different. 

MRI of the cervix 
Normal cervical T2 zonal anatomy 
• 
Endocervix: T2 hyperintense due to mucin, analogous to uterine endometrium. 

• 
Cervical mucosa: T2 intermediate. 

• 
Inner cervical stroma: Very T2 hypointense, analogous to the uterine junctional zone. Unlike the uterine junctional zone, however, the decreased T2 signal is due to compact fibrous tissue, not smooth muscle. The superior aspect of the inner cervical stroma is continuous with junctional zone of uterus. 



Cervical carcinoma 
• Cervical carcinoma is the third most common gynecologic malignancy. There has been a 
steep decline in prevalence over the past 50 years due to screening with Pap smears. 
• 
Ultrasound may show a hypoechoic or isoechoic soft tissue mass involving the cervix with/ without intratumoral necrosis. The endometrial cavity may be distended by fluid or blood products due to cervical obstruction. 

• 
MRI typically shows a T2 intermediate to hyperintense signal mass replacing the normally T2 


hypointense cervical stroma. Enhancement is variable on postcontrast images. 

Sagittal T1-weighted MRI with fat saturation Coronal T2-weighted MRI 

Local cervical cancer: 
MRI images show a heterogeneous, T2 intermediate 
cervical mass with well circumscribed margins. Although the mass abuts neurovascular bundles and 
the parametrium, there is no evidence of parametrial invasion. This mass was treated with chemoradiation. 
• A cervical mass >1.5 cm should be evaluated by MRI for staging. The cervical stroma is the key landmark in the staging of cervical cancer: If tumor extends through the cervical stroma into the parametrium, the cancer is stage IIB and treatment is typically non-surgical (“IIB or not IIB”). Other key findings to note are involvement of bladder or rectum, which denotes stage IV disease (if shown to extend to the mucosal surface with cystoscopy or endoscopy). 

Cervical carcinoma (continued) 
• Staging of cervical carcinoma is based on the FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) system, which characterizes extent of disease based on involvement of the uterus, vagina (upper 2/3 versus lower 1/3), parametrium, pelvic sidewall, adjacent bladder and rectum, pelvic lymph nodes, and/or distant metastases. 

Sagittal T2-weighted MRI 
Axial T2-weighted MRI 

Adenoma malignum 

Sagittal T1-weighted MRI with fat saturation. Cervical carcinoma, stage IIB: MRI images show an ill-defined, hyperintense mass 
(yellow arrows) centered at the cervix, with invasion 
into the lower uterine segment and the anterior 
vaginal fornix (*). There is nodular parametrial invasion (red arrows). A subserosal fibroid (fib) is 
present. The mass enhances heterogeneously (top right 
image). The axial (left image) shows near complete circumferential cervical involvement (yellow arrows) and left parametrial spread (red arrow). 
Case courtesy Cheryl Sadow, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 
• 
Adenoma malignum is a rare subtype of well-differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma of the cervix. It has an unfavorable prognosis due to peritoneal dissemination in early stage and poor response to radiation and chemotherapy. 

• 
Classic imaging appearance is a multicystic mass (cluster of cysts) with solid components 


that extends from the endocervical glands to deep cervical stroma. 
• Associations with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and mucinous ovarian neoplasms have been 
reported. 



