In 2020 the world experienced a global health crisis that not only grounded economic activities but also claimed millions of lives around the world. During this period, executives at my place of work, in a bid to provide awareness and safety, invited health professionals to provide health education on COVID-19 and ways to prevent infection. Throughout these health sessions, there was one recurring word: immunity .

I learned that immunity is the body’s inherent biological ability to defend and protect itself against infectious diseases, harmful substances, and foreign invaders.

During this period I reflected not on my physical immunity but on what I call “spiritual immunity.” I pray for the help of the Holy Ghost as we consider some of the ways to build our spiritual immunity.

We live in troubled times marked by wars, family challenges, and economic uncertainty. Yet, as frightening as these challenges may be, we need not fear! As we build our spiritual immunity, we develop the strength and courage to withstand the challenges of life.

President Henry B. Eyring said: “[Proving] moments are not evidence that the Lord has abandoned you. Rather, they are evidence that He loves you enough to refine and strengthen you” (“ Proved and Strengthened in Christ ,” Liahona , Nov. 2025, 95).

As you listen today, think for a moment: What keeps you awake at night or weighs on your mind? Know that the Lord has provided us with a spiritual compass to help us navigate life’s challenges. This I call “small and simple things.” Alma taught his son Helaman in the Book of Mormon, “By small and simple things are great things brought to pass” ( Alma 37:6 ).

May I share some of these small and simple things with you?

First, scripture study. When we study the scriptures, we get knowledge, but more important, we come to know the Lord. As we apply what we learn, His words begin to shape how we think and how we respond to life challenges. The counsel of King Benjamin to his sons rings true:

“O my sons, I would that ye should remember that these sayings are true, and also that these records are true. …

“And now, my sons, I would that ye should remember to search them diligently, that ye may profit thereby” ( Mosiah 1:6, 7 ).

Daily, meaningful scripture study invites the guidance of the Holy Ghost and builds our faith to face the temptations and the troubles of the world.

While serving as mission leader, I received a new missionary. In our welcome interview, this young missionary began to cry and asked to be sent home. When I asked why, he couldn’t find the right words to explain. Then I asked him if he had a testimony of the Book of Mormon. He said, “President, I don’t.”

I bore my testimony of the Book of Mormon and then encouraged him to begin to study the scriptures, especially the Book of Mormon. He and his trainer made a scripture study plan. Later I received a letter from this missionary testifying of how daily scripture study had helped him understand his purpose as a missionary. He said, “I am happy now and do not want to be sent home any longer.”

My dear friends, I invite you to search the scriptures diligently, that you might know the word of God (see Alma 17:2 ). As we do this, little by little we learn how to become lifelong disciples of Jesus Christ.

Second, prayer. Our Savior extended a remarkable invitation to all of us when He said, “Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me” ( Doctrine and Covenants 88:63 ).

When we pray to our Heavenly Father, we draw near to Him and seek His help, guidance, and blessings.

There are many examples in the scriptures of people who experienced the enabling power and miracle of prayers: Enos, Nephi, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the Savior Jesus Christ. They remind us of the power that comes when we turn to Heavenly Father in prayer.

While serving as an Area Seventy, I attended a stake conference in Côte d’Ivoire. After the Saturday adult session, the stake president and I decided to visit a sister who is battling with cancer. When we asked how she was feeling, she said something that remains with me to this day: “As I pray daily, I realize that the Savior loves me. I see His hands all around me, telling me, ‘My daughter, all is well.’”

As we pray in faith, our spiritual immunity will be strengthened. The burden we carry may not always be removed, but our backs will be built to carry the load placed upon them (see Mosiah 24:14–15 ).

Third, the sacrament. The sacrament is a sacred ordinance that strengthens our relationship with the Savior.

During the sacrament we make promises to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ, to always remember Him, and to keep His commandments (see Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, 79 ). As we partake of the sacrament, we can ask ourselves, “What would He have me do?” As we remember Jesus Christ throughout the week and strive to keep His commandments, our lives are gradually refined and reshaped. Our “Why me?” questions will be replaced by “What can I learn, and what can I change?”

Fourth, covenants. Making covenants and staying on the covenant path are inseparable companions. Covenants create a bond between us and God, and staying on the covenant path brings the promised blessings that come with that bond. Worshipping in the Lord’s house, the temple, is vital to staying on the covenant path.

President Dallin H. Oaks taught, “As we honor those covenants by keeping [Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ’s] commandments and following Their plan of redemption, Their promised blessings enable us to soar to celestial heights” (“ Following Christ ,” Liahona , Nov. 2024, 24).

What a promise, my friends. Remember that trials may come, yet as we worship in the temple and remember our covenants, we receive personal direction from the Lord that will guide us along the covenant path.

My beloved brothers and sisters, I invite you to always remember scriptures, prayers, the sacrament, and covenants. While they may seem small and simple, they are truly the armor of God that will help us stand against the tactics of the devil!

I bear you my witness that we have a loving Father in Heaven, that Jesus Christ is our Savior and Redeemer. President Dallin H. Oaks is truly the mouthpiece of God on earth today. In the name of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, amen.
