I am a child of God and He loves me. This statement is powerful and empowering. More importantly, it is true, not just for me but for each of us and all of us.

“All human beings—male and female—are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny. …

“In the premortal realm, spirit sons and daughters knew and worshipped God as their Eternal Father and accepted His plan [for] His children.”

I bear solemn witness of the reality of this “plain and precious” truth, powerful and simple. Understanding our Father’s love and our true identity as His children is essential for our daily and eternal happiness. It prevents deception and gives purpose to this mortal life.

The divine pattern of families teaches us of our Father’s love and our relationship to Him. In fact, “our relationship to God … [is] explained in terms of the family.” Holy scriptures also teach us in terms of the family. The New Testament begins with a young family and a baby born in Bethlehem. The Book of Mormon begins with a family’s journey of faith, and the Old Testament teaches how the Creation was not complete until God had organized a family. It is often through families, despite all their imperfections, that our Father teaches us about His love.

While at a Church meeting last year, I received an impression to do what the teacher was doing. So, in a text, I asked my wife to find a baby picture of each of our children. When I got home, we sat down and showed my kids their pictures. I told them that there are no words to fully express the love we felt when they were born, including the day each picture was taken. I then asked, “As of the date of this picture, what had you done to earn our love?” They lowered their eyes and said, “Nothing.” I asked them to look up and said, “You are right. You did nothing to earn our love. By that same token, there is nothing you can ever do that will unearn or remove that love from you. You did not earn it; you cannot lose it. It is yours forever.”

I continued, “We need you to always remember that what we feel is but a small fraction of what your Heavenly Father feels for you. You are His child and He loves you. He loved you before you were born, He loves you today, and He will love you tomorrow. He wants you to prepare to be like Him. You must never forget this. We hope this understanding gives you courage to do your best, to trust Him, and to live up to your potential. We also hope it gives you the strength and the humility to come home when you need to, because no matter what has happened, you can always come home, just as you can always turn to your Father in Heaven.” There were tears and tender hearts as the Holy Spirit bore witness that this was true.

I referenced my children, but for you it might be a special love for siblings, parents, spouse, aunts, uncles, a grandparent you never met before. Or maybe all that is there is a desire for a family or for healthy family-like relationships. Families evidence a divine and eternal pattern, connecting us to our Eternal Father and to His eternal family. Even when a loving family is not part of our earthly experience, knowing that our Heavenly Father loves us can provide power, peace, and comfort, especially as we remember the eternal blessings that await all who make and keep sacred covenants—including all the blessings of an eternal family.

As I bear witness of the eternal depth and nature of our Father’s love, I also offer this warning: Beware of the adversary’s deceitful lie that twists this precious truth. He tries to deceive God’s children into believing that because God loves us, we can be saved regardless of our pride, regardless of our rebellion, regardless of our sins, and regardless of our rejection of His Son and His Son’s servants. Receiving Christ through priesthood ordinances and covenants, and then being faithful to those covenants, is the only way for us to fully understand His love and the only way to exaltation.

Knowing and understanding our Father’s love is important for many reasons. I will share just three.

First, understanding our Father’s love helps us better understand Jesus Christ. We better understand why He did what He did and why He loves us the way He does. We recognize why He is anxiously engaged in trying to save and bless all of His Father’s children. This understanding makes us eager to quickly and wholeheartedly join Him in His Father’s work. As we are anxiously engaged in this work, we are able to become more like Him.

Second, when we understand God’s love for us and for the rest of His children, we become immune to the divisive and misleading labels of our fallen world, both the labels that people try to put on us and the labels the world tries to put on others. We see ourselves and all of God’s children as beloved and divine. We become quick to repent, slow to judge, and ever hopeful that the best is yet before us. We are forever willing to love and to make sure that no one is ever sitting, standing, or walking alone.

Third, understanding our Father’s love protects us from the pernicious lie that it is too late for someone to change, too late for someone to turn to Christ, and too late to receive His redeeming grace. From the prodigal son to leaving the 99 sheep to find the one, our Father’s message, through His Son, has always been that there is still yet time if we turn to Christ today.

God’s love is real, and Jesus Christ is evidence of that love. To fulfill His divine responsibility to help His Father’s children, He conquered sin and the grave. While still a mortal, He taught us to pray to “our Father.” Not just His Father, not someone else’s father, but our Father—a loving Heavenly Father who gives better gifts to His children than any other earthly father gives to his. Jesus Christ, through His premortal, mortal, and current ministry, points us to eternal life and personifies our Father’s deep, abiding, and eternal love.

Today Christ shows us our Father’s love through priesthood keys held by living prophets and apostles. These priesthood keys allow access to sacred ordinances and covenants that prepare us to return to our Father. Living prophets and apostles stand as witnesses that the resurrected Christ is evidence of the continuing and immeasurable love of our Eternal Father.

What I witness before you today first came by way of the Holy Spirit when I was a young boy riding from Nuku‘alofa to my home village of Mu‘a. I was reading a copy of the New Testament that referenced John 3:16 in several different languages: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” I knew this was true then, and I know it is true now.

Jesus is the Christ. He, His restored Church, and the divine pattern of families stand as witnesses of our Father’s love.

I, Hutch ‘Ungapapalangi Fale, am a child of God. He loves me and He loves you. May this truth never leave our minds or our hearts, and may it change us forever. In the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen.

“I know that God the Father lives. He loves us” (Henry B. Eyring, “ Prayers for Peace ,” Liahona , May 2026, 28).

“I bear witness of this truth: God and His Son, Jesus Christ, love all —and They love each ” (Gérald Caussé, “ Love All; Love Each ,” Liahona , May 2026, 45).

“ The Family: A Proclamation to the World ,” Gospel Library.

See 1 Nephi 13:26–29 .

See Russell M. Nelson, “ Choices for Eternity ” (worldwide devotional for young adults, May 15, 2022), Gospel Library.

“Our relationship to God and the purpose of our mortal life are explained in terms of the family” (Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Family-Centered Gospel of Jesus Christ ,” Liahona , Nov. 2025, 121).

See Matthew 1–2 .

See 1 Nephi 1–18 .

See Genesis 1–2 .

See Dallin H. Oaks, “ Divine Love in the Father’s Plan ,” Liahona , May 2022, 102–3.

At this time, we had three children at home and two serving missions. This discussion was with the three at home. Similar discussions with the two serving missions occurred at a later time and date via technology.

See Clark G. Gilbert, “ Come Home ,” Liahona , May 2026, 15–17.

“All who live or ever have lived who come unto Christ and live His gospel will feel joy beyond any earthly expression as we reunite, resurrected, with our Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ and with our parents, grandparents, siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins, and ancestors” (Ronald A. Rasband, “ He Is Risen ,” Liahona , May 2026, 75).

Part of God’s comfort in letting us leave our heavenly home may be that His children are not left alone. They are sent to the earth with support from “parents, family, leaders, friends, ministering brothers and sisters[;] you and I [are] stewards of His [children, His] most precious possessions” (Gary E. Stevenson, “ Lost Luggage, Redeemed Souls ,” Liahona , May 2026, 33).

“We can truly say that the gospel plan was first taught to us in the council of an eternal family, it is implemented through our mortal families, and its intended destiny is to exalt the children of God in eternal families” (Dallin H. Oaks, “ The Family-Centered Gospel of Jesus Christ ,” 121).

“Every true disciple of Jesus Christ, if it is his or her desire, will be eternally sealed to a righteous companion of his or her choosing throughout eternity, whether in this life or the next” (Neil L. Andersen, “ Eternal Marriage Is an Eternal Journey ,” Liahona , May 2026, 103).

See 2 Nephi 28 , especially verses 7–9 and 24–32 .

“Because God’s love is all-embracing, some speak of it as ‘unconditional,’ and in their minds they may project that thought to mean that God’s blessings are ‘unconditional’ and that salvation is ‘unconditional.’ They are not. Some are wont to say, ‘The Savior loves me just as I am,’ and that is certainly true. But He cannot take any of us into His kingdom just as we are, ‘for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence’ [ Moses 6:57 ]. Our sins must first be resolved” (D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Love of God ,” Liahona , Nov. 2021, 16).

See D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Love of God ,” 16–18.

See D. Todd Christofferson, “ The Character of Christ ,” Liahona , May 2026, 90–92.

See Patrick Kearon, “ About His Business ,” Liahona , May 2026, 7–9.

“I invite you to contemplate how you can:

“Provide Christlike love, caring, and service.

“Offer help and comfort in times of spiritual or temporal need.

“Prayerfully seek the guidance of the Spirit.

“Help prepare families to make and keep sacred covenants with God as they receive ordinances.

“Consider your ministering assignment as ‘Christlike caring’ of the Lord’s most treasured possessions, who at the end of their mortal journey can be claimed and redeemed by Him” (Gary E. Stevenson, “ Lost Luggage, Redeemed Souls ,” 34).

“Living the message of the risen Christ testifies of our devotion and love for our Savior. It may well be that our consistent, courageous, and humble acts of service and love for God and His children will speak far more eloquently and powerfully than we ever could through words alone” (Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “ Encounter at the Empty Tomb ,” Liahona , May 2026, 59).

See Russell M. Nelson, “ Choices for Eternity .”

See Gerrit W. Gong, “ ’Tis Eastertide: No One Walks Alone ,” Liahona , May 2026, 111–13; Gerrit W. Gong, “ No One Sits Alone ,” Liahona , Nov. 2025, 40–42.

“If you feel you have strayed … too far or too long and have no way to return, that simply is not true” (Russell M. Nelson, “ The Power of Spiritual Momentum ,” Liahona , May 2022, 99).

“It is neither too early nor too late for you to become a devout disciple of Jesus Christ. Then you will experience fully the blessings of His Atonement” (Russell M. Nelson, “ The Lord Jesus Christ Will Come Again ,” Liahona , Nov. 2024, 122).

“Jesus lived and died to do His Father’s will” (Dale G. Renlund, “ Because of Jesus Christ ,” Liahona , May 2026, 76; see also Moses 1:39 ).

“It is my witness that His Atonement accomplished His Father’s plan of salvation and provides the way for everyone who has ever lived to be free of death unconditionally and free of sin on condition of repentance” (Quentin L. Cook, “ Keys, Covenants, and Easter ,” Liahona , May 2026, 105).

See Matthew 6:9–13 .

See Matthew 7:9–11 .

“The Redeemer ‘marked the path and led the way’ [“How Great the Wisdom and the Love,” Hymns , no. 195]. The power of His doctrine, covenants and ordinances, and example can bless us in every aspect of our lives.

“The pattern of spiritual development evident in the Savior’s mortal life also applies to each of us. Jesus Christ was ‘in the beginning with the Father’ [ Doctrine and Covenants 93:21 ]. So were we.

“He ‘came and dwelt in the flesh’ [ Doctrine and Covenants 93:11 ], and ‘he received not of the fulness at first, but [received and] continued … grace to grace, until he received a fulness’ [ Doctrine and Covenants 93:13 ]. As children of God, we also can receive of His fulness ‘in due time’ [ Doctrine and Covenants 93:19 ], following the same ‘grace for grace’ pattern as did the Savior” (David A. Bednar, “ All Who Have Endured Valiantly ,” Liahona , May 2026, 20).

“Abiding in Christ … is choosing to listen to His voice and the voice of His servants and following what they teach, above all the enticing voices of the world” (Ulisses Soares, “ Jesus Christ—the True Vine ,” Liahona , May 2026, 53).

See “ The Living Christ: The Testimony of the Apostles ,” Gospel Library.

Distributed by the Gideons International, it was a pocket-sized copy of the New Testament that included the book of Proverbs and the book of Psalms. At the beginning of the book were several pages referencing John 3:16 in various languages.
