Lifelong disciples of Jesus Christ best reflect the Savior’s teaching and direction when they joyfully live lives of integrity and virtue. The covenant path that will return us to our beloved Father in Heaven and His Son, Jesus Christ, is not obscure; it is well marked. We have been repeatedly taught the principles and covenants essential for this sacred path.

The virtuous, Christlike life necessary to sustain us and propel us along the covenant path has never been more important or challenging. If we are to be spiritually prepared to have the integrity and virtue required of disciples of Jesus Christ, we can stay on the path and continue to follow wise, righteous principles that lead to happiness.

Mary and I recently had the privilege of meeting with the missionaries in the Scotland/Ireland Mission. On the grounds of one building there is a replica of a message that significantly influenced President David O. McKay when he was a young missionary in Scotland.

As a new missionary, Elder McKay passed a building where the stone above the doorway bore this carved inscription: “WHAT-E’ER THOU ART ACT WELL THY PART.”

This message, “Whate’er thou art, act well thy part,” was so important and had such an impact on Elder McKay that he used it for inspiration as a missionary and for the rest of his life. He determined that whatever responsibility he had, he would do his very best.

When I was young, President McKay was the prophet, and his teachings had a lasting influence on me. I especially loved this message and have often referred to it.

It was clear that one of President McKay’s purposes in mentioning this incident was to teach that some conduct which is not inherently evil can keep us from engaging in spiritual matters that will bless us now and throughout eternity.

In our day, the application of this principle is essential if we are to be true lifelong disciples of Christ. We need to live our lives with integrity and follow His example. The Lord, speaking of one servant in Nauvoo, declared, “He may be trusted because of the integrity of his heart.” Preach My Gospel teaches, “Integrity includes being honest with God, yourself, your leaders, and others.”

President Spencer W. Kimball taught that “integrity (the willingness and ability to live by our beliefs and commitments) is one of the foundation stones of good character, and without good character one cannot hope to enjoy the presence of God here or in the eternities.”

In the Father’s plan, integrity, virtue, and happiness are intrinsically linked. Living a virtuous life with integrity aligns us with God’s will. True happiness, often translated as blessedness, is the actual outcome of integrity and being virtuous. Virtue includes not only a strong personal moral compass but also cleanliness, modesty, goodness, holiness, and reverence for the sacred.

The idea of happiness is a predominant goal of most people. The means of achieving the goal have been impacted in recent years by conduct and choices that do not result in happiness. A major concern is the lack of interest in the concept and pursuit of virtue. The relationship between virtue and happiness is not as well understood today as it was in the past.

In the United States we have been celebrating the 250th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, which highlights the premise that all are created equal and are endowed by their Creator with unalienable rights and includes the inspiring emphasis on “Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.” Some scholars have noted that the reference to “happiness” was understood by the founders to be based on living a virtuous life. Among the touching guidance that Joseph Smith received in Liberty Jail is the declaration, “Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly.”

Significantly President McKay taught: “Happiness is the purpose and design of existence. ‘Men are that they might have joy’ [see 2 Nephi 2:25 ]. Virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping the commandments of God lead to a happy life.”

The Lord wants us to experience the joy of a virtuous life. He provides us with many beautiful gifts both physical and spiritual. Those who make sacrifices in His name will be richly rewarded.

In contrast, what we are seeing in society and social media today is conduct and language that are often coarse and crude and lack virtue. They are destructive of civil discourse. They also violate the basic principles the Savior taught. Any use of the internet to bully, destroy a reputation, or place a person in a bad light is reprehensible.

It is clear that evil communications are not just a matter of bad manners. If practiced by Latter-day Saints, they can adversely affect others who do not have a knowledge of God or a testimony of our Savior. The Lord has inspired marvelous technology that provides us with unparalleled experiences and opportunities when used wisely.

The Church has experienced physical and verbal attacks over the years. We cannot control the conduct of others, but we can strive to be a peaceable people who live in accordance with the Christlike conduct and virtues taught by our Savior, Jesus Christ. Both President Russell M. Nelson and President Dallin H. Oaks have been inspired to consistently talk about being righteous peacemakers.

If we dedicate some time every day to the scriptures and spiritual renewal, we will be deeply blessed. Young people who attend For the Strength of Youth and young single adult conferences often tell me the testimony meeting, a small portion of the event, is the most appreciated.

One of the special messages of the gospel of Jesus Christ teaches, “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” The Savior explained that He had not come to condemn the world but to save the world.

The Lord expects us to live lives of virtue and integrity and to follow His commandments. He taught, “And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?” On another occasion, He said, “Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.”

The Apostle Paul beautifully taught, “Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.”

We show our integrity by living virtuous lives and caring for and serving others. The ultimate reward of integrity and virtue is the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost does not attend us when we do evil. But when we do what is right, He can dwell with us and guide us in all that we do.

Part of having integrity is acknowledging our faults to the Lord and repenting of transgressions. When we make repentance a constant, day-to-day part of our lives, we can approach the Lord with integrity and receive His saving blessings.

When I was a young missionary in the British Mission, one of my most memorable experiences was teaching a wonderful man who had served on a battleship in the European theater during World War II, 16 years before we met him. When we taught him the principles of repentance, he was overcome with emotion. He then shared with us the feelings he was experiencing while being taught, especially about repentance. He compared repentance to the feelings he had when he arrived back in England, departed from the battleship, and felt the earth of his island home under his feet. It had overwhelmed him, and he fell to his knees in appreciation.

When he learned that through repentance, baptism, and confirmation he could receive forgiveness for inappropriate conduct and sins he had engaged in, he was deeply touched. He said that his tender feelings about the Savior were spiritually profound. Just before his baptism, he prayed to the Lord to help him that he might be able to give other people the same joy that he was experiencing and then added, “Especially my family.”

Integrity, virtue, and ongoing repentance are the answer in a world where coarse language and serious challenges are so prevalent. I am eternally grateful for the Father’s plan of happiness. I testify that Jesus Christ accomplished the eternity-shaping sacrifice necessary for our salvation and exaltation, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

See Russell M. Nelson, “ The Everlasting Covenant ,” Liahona , Oct. 2022, 4–11.

See Matthew 7:13–14 ; see also “The Road Not Taken,” in Complete Poems of Robert Frost (1964), 131. Perhaps the most poignant part is:

Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—

I took the one less traveled by,

And that has made all the difference.

When the building was scheduled for demolition in 1965, Latter-day Saint missionaries and leadership arranged to purchase the stone. Later it was relocated to Salt Lake City, Utah, for permanent preservation and is located at the Church History Museum. Replicas are on display at the Scotland/Ireland Mission home in Edinburgh, the Provo Missionary Training Center, and a museum in Stirling, Scotland. You may have seen the quotation and pondered the significance of its message. President Russell M. Nelson reaffirmed the message at the 50th anniversary of the Missionary Training Center on January 31, 2012 (see R. Scott Lloyd, “A Jubilee Year for Missionary Language Instruction,” Church News , Feb. 4, 2012, thechurchnews.com).

In a talk given in 1957, President McKay spoke of the message. He said it had inspired him as a member of the Church and as a missionary to serve faithfully and fully accept the responsibility to do his part. (See “Pres. McKay Speaks to Pioneer Stake Youth,” Church News , Sept. 21, 1957, 4; see also “Preparation of David O. McKay: A Mission Experience” [video], Media Library.)

President McKay taught that “the foundation of a noble character is integrity” and that “no man can do better than to accept Christ as the great Exemplar and the safest Guide” ( Pathways to Happiness , comp. Llewelyn R. McKay [1957], 3; Teachings of Presidents of the Church: David O. McKay [2003], 216).

Doctrine and Covenants 124:20 .

Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Sharing the Gospel of Jesus Christ (2023), 129.

Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Spencer W. Kimball (2006), 126.

The word blessed is mentioned numerous times by Jesus Christ in Matthew 5:3–11 and 3 Nephi 12:1–11 .

See Topical Guide, “ Virtue, Virtuous ” and “ Morality ”; see also index to the triple combination, “Virtue.”

See US Continental Congress, Declaration of Independence, July 4, 1776, National Archives, archives.gov/founding-docs/declaration.

See Jeffrey Rosen, The Pursuit of Happiness: How Classical Writers on Virtue Inspired the Lives of the Founders and Defined America (2024).

Doctrine and Covenants 121:45 .

President McKay continued, “Those who follow that path are not long faced and sanctimonious, depriving themselves of the joys of existence” ( Pathways to Happiness , xi).

See 2 Nephi 2:25 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 82:14 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 97:8–9 .

The Apostle Paul wrote: “Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners. Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God” ( 1 Corinthians 15:33–34 ).

See Dallin H. Oaks, “ Alive in Christ ,” Liahona , May 2026, 85–87; Russell M. Nelson, “ Peacemakers Needed ,” Liahona , May 2023, 98–101.

John 3:16 ; see also Doctrine and Covenants 34:3 .

See John 3:17 ; see also 3 Nephi 9:21 .

Luke 6:46 .

Matthew 7:21 .

Philippians 4:8 ; see also Articles of Faith 1:13 .

See Doctrine and Covenants 121:46 .

See Joseph B. Wirthlin, “ Personal Integrity ,” Ensign , May 1990, 33.

See Psalm 26:11 .

His feelings resembled those described in 1 Nephi 8:12 .
