In my home country of South Africa, it is customary for parents to give their children names with special meaning. My name is Thabo. It means “joy.” My beloved wife’s middle name is Gadifele. It means “eternal or endless.” Put together, our names mean “eternal joy.” What an expectation!

But shortly after we were married, a discussion one evening unexpectedly turned into our first serious disagreement. It quickly escalated into an argument, and we went from being a cheerful, happy couple to giving each other the silent treatment in a selfish state of quiet desperation.

Many of us have experienced such moments when a conversation or discussion with a spouse, a child, a family member, a friend, a colleague, or a neighbor did not end as we hoped. In such moments, what may have begun as a simple exchange may leave us with feelings of anger, disappointment, frustration, or even regret.

Whilst I was pondering about what to do, the words Jesus Christ spoke when He appeared to the people of Nephi in the Book of Mormon came to mind. He taught:

“For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another.

“Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away” ( 3 Nephi 11:29–30 ; emphasis added).

These words from the scriptures enlightened my mind and helped me know how to resolve the challenge I was facing. This enlightenment comes from the Savior. In 3 Nephi 11:11 , the Savior said, “I am the light and the life of the world” (emphasis added). Through His Spirit, He enlightens our minds (see Doctrine and Covenants 6:15 ). His light is also revealed through His perfect life and teachings. He declared, “I am the light; I have set an example for you” ( 3 Nephi 18:16 ), and His words are “a light unto [our] path” ( Psalm 119:105 ).

Many of us may wonder how we can receive more of the Savior’s light as we navigate through the daily challenges and struggles in our lives. We may be concerned about becoming self-reliant; meeting the demands placed upon us at school or at work; feeling inadequacy, fear, and doubt; dealing with the loss of a loved one; or simply knowing what to do with our lives. Whatever concerns, challenges, and struggles we may have in our lives, the answer is always Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ can bring light in our moments of darkness and restore hope where there is hopelessness. He knows where we have been, where we are, and where we need to be. Through Him, today can be a new day and tomorrow can be a better day.

Here are some things we can do to increase the Savior’s light in our lives.

Having faith in Jesus Christ means trusting that He understands our daily difficulties and knows how to help us rise above them because He has experienced all our pains, afflictions, and infirmities (see Alma 7:11–12 ). We need to trust that He is always ready to help us as we remember to “look unto [Him] in every thought” and “doubt not, fear not” ( Doctrine and Covenants 6:36 ).

In the October 2024 general conference, President Dieter F. Uchtdorf taught: “Strong faith in Jesus Christ doesn’t happen overnight. No, in this mortal world, it’s the thorns and thistles of doubt that grow spontaneously. The healthy, fruitful tree of faith requires intentional effort” (“ Nourish the Roots, and the Branches Will Grow ,” Liahona , Nov. 2024, 102).

President Dallin H. Oaks in an address to BYU students taught that “strong faith requires more than strong desire. It means daily trying, one step at a time, with prayer and scripture study” (“ Coming Closer to Jesus Christ ” [Brigham Young University devotional, Feb. 10, 2026], 2, speeches.byu.edu).

In Preach My Gospel , we learn, “As people read and pray about the Book of Mormon, they will come to know the Savior better and experience His love” ( Preach My Gospel: A Guide to Sharing the Gospel of Jesus Christ [2023], 115).

There is no single right way to study the scriptures. We may choose to read chronologically, study by topic, focus on a particular question, or begin with a passage or verse that draws our attention. We may also choose a time that best fits our circumstances. Ultimately, the method, timing, and length of our scripture study matter less than the consistency and sincerity of our effort.

Whilst we were serving as mission leaders in our home country, one of our missionaries shared a story of a man they were teaching who, after reading the Book of Mormon, took a shovel, dug a hole in his garden, emptied a newly purchased large tin of coffee into it, and buried it. The man was enlightened by the Spirit on the changes he needed to make and acted upon it. We too can receive enlightenment as we study our scriptures.

Repentance means a change of mind and a turning of the heart to God. Let us ponder about the changes that we need to make in our lives, and these may include how we use our time, the things we watch or listen to, and the language and tone we use as we communicate with others. Perhaps we can begin by asking ourselves what is it that we need to change in our lives. It is important to remember that we do not need to go through this alone. The Savior is always ready to help because He sees the end from the beginning and understands our weaknesses perfectly; He is always ready “to succor his people according to their infirmities” ( Alma 7:12 ).

Sister Tamara W. Runia taught that “the invitation to repent is an expression of God’s love. Saying yes to that invitation is an expression of ours” (“ Your Repentance Doesn’t Burden Jesus Christ; It Brightens His Joy ,” Liahona , May 2025, 91).

I testify that today can be a new day and tomorrow will be a better day for all who come unto Jesus Christ and receive His light in their lives. He lovingly beckons, “Come unto me, … and I will give you rest” ( Matthew 11:28 ). In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
