GI: 221
Polyposis syndromes affecting the bowel
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)
• Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an 
autosomal-dominant syndrome featuring 
innumerable premalignant adenomatous 
polyps in the colon and to a lesser extent the 
small bowel. The risk of colon cancer is 100% 
with average onset of development at 39 
years. Prophylacti c colectomy is the standard 
of care to prevent colon cancer.
• Gastric polyps are also present, although the 
gastric polyps are hyperplasti c and are not 
premalignant.
• Gardner syndrome is a variant of FAP. In 
additi on to colon polyps, pati ents also have:
Desmoid tumors.
Osteomas.
Papillary thyroid cancer.
Epidermoid cysts.
Mnemonic: DOPE Gardner
• Turcot syndrome is another variant of FAP. In 
additi on to colon polyps, pati ents also have 
CNS tumors (gliomas and medulloblastomas).
Mnemonic: TURbans go over your head
FAP: Coronal CT image demonstrates fl uid-fi lled 
colon with innumerable polypoid enhancing lesions 
(arrows) seen throughout the ascending, transverse, 
descending, and sigmoid colon and into the rectum.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer syndrome (HNPCC) = Lynch syndrome
• Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) syndrome (also called Lynch syndrome) is an 
autosomal dominant polyposis syndrome caused by DNA mismatch repair, leading to colon 
cancer from microsatellite instability on a molecular level. Risk of colon cancer is less than 
with FAP. Similar to FAP, the colon polyps of HNPCC are adenomatous.
• HNPCC is associated with other cancers, including endometrial, gastric, small bowel, liver, 
and biliary malignancies.
Peutz-Jeghers
• Peutz-Jeghers is an autosomal dominant syndrome that features multi ple hamartomatous 
pedunculated polyps, usually in the small bowel. These polyps may act as lead points and 
cause intussuscepti on.
• Characteristi c skin manifestati ons include perioral mucocutaneous blue/brown pigmented 
spots on the lips and gums.
• Peutz-Jeghers is associated with gynecologic neoplasms as well as gastric, duodenal, and 
colonic malignancies.
Cowden syndrome
• Cowden syndrome is an autosomal dominant syndrome of multi ple hamartomatous polyps 
most commonly found in the skin and external mucous membranes, but also in the GI tract.
• Cowden syndrome is associated with an increased risk of thyroid cancer (usually follicular), 
as well as skin, oral, breast, and uterine malignancies.
