Characteristic Radiation (characteristic x- rays): Characteristic x-rays arc “ characteristic”
because they depend on the binding energy of the shell involved, and this binding energy is
different for different targets. So its unique... or “ characteristic.”
You may recall 1 mentioned (page 11) that the K shell is the inner most shell, and therefore has
the most energy. Yes there are lots of different letter named shells (L, M, N, etc...) but for the
purpose of medical imaging nobody gives a shit about those. K Shell is where it’s at.
When a vacancy in an inner shell is created, an electron in an outer shell promptly jumps in to fill
the vacancy. Energy released in this process is equal to the difference in binding energies
between the two shells. The energy may appear as an x-ray photon. Since the binding energies
have exact characteristic values, the emitted x-rays carry exact and discrete energies and are
called characteristic x-rays. The characteristic x-rays are depicted as two sharp peaks over the
Brcmsstrahlung continuum. The peaks noted on the figure correspond to the energy difference
between the inner vacated shell (secondary to the inner shell electron being ejected upon
collision with an incident high energy electron) and the outer shell which is vacated to fill the
inner shell.
Testable Point: The K-shell binding energy of
tungsten is -69.5 kcV.
Testable Trivia: “ No resultant (created)
photon can have more energy than the
incident electron”
Testable Trivia: K shell binding energy is
proportional to Z2-so lower Z gives lower
energy x-rays
>»
’
</>C0)
c
Characteristic
X-Rays
Bremsstruhlung Continuum
Wavelength
Auger Electrons: If the energy released from the
filling of an inner shell vacancy by an outer shell
electron is imparted to another electron (instead of
being emitted as a photon), which is then also ejected,
the second ejected electron is referred to as an Auger
electron. No x-rays are emitted in this process. In
general, heavy elements are likely to emit x-rays and
lighter elements are more likely to emit Auger
electrons.
100%
[ :O
O
cr:
o
(/)
d)
o
x:u
>
o
.o
O
OL
Atomic Number
Incident Particle Transferred Energy to Inner
Orbital Electron and Ejects the Sucka
r>
The Vacancy
Attracts An Outer
Electron To Drop
Instead of Releasing a
Characteristic Radiation -
Energy Is Given to an Outer
This Energy Results in
the Ejection of a
second Electron - An
“Auger” Electron
Secondary Ionization: Secondary ionization results when the electron which is ejected from
the atom has enough kinetic energy to cause additional ionization events (i.e. eject additional
electrons). The ejected electrons arc sometimes called “ delta rays."
