— Misc Vocab
Off-Focal Radiation: This is scatter from the anode outside the focal area. This leads to an
increase in patient exposure and blurring. This can be reduced with a small lead collimator
near the tube output. 'l ubes constructed with metal enclosures and/or with the anode at
electric ground potential will have less off -focal radiation (metal envelope attracts the
scattered electrons).
X-Ray Tube Insert: X-ray tube is sealed under high vacuum. This vacuum is needed to
prevent electrons from interacting with gas molecules. The x-ray port is necessary because
x-rays are produces in all directions. Only the x-rays heading towards the patient arc
“ useful.” The port is typically made of the same stuff as the housing (except with
mammography in where it’s made of beryllium to minimize low energy x-ray absorption).
Unwanted Radiation Vocab:
•
Leakage - X-rays that are transmitted though the housing
•
Secondary - Characteristic radiation that is made from electron interaction with materials
other than the target (glass, housing, etc.).
•
Scattered - X rays that are deflected in direction once they leave the tube
•
Stray - The sum total of leakage and scatter
Collimation: This is the process of restricting the size and shape of the x-ray beam emerging
from the port. It’s done to reduce both primary and secondary radiation. It improves image
quality (less fog). The tech can gauge how much they are collimating by using a beam of
light reflected by a mirror of low x-ray attenuation that mimics the x-ray beam. By order of
various regulatory bodies, the light field and x-ray field must closely align.
Trivia: The terms "beam restriction” and "collimation" are used interchangeable. They both
means the same thing - decreasing the size of the projected radiation field.
• Increasing Collimation = Decreasing Field Size
• Decreasing Collimation = Increasing f ield Size
Grid Controlled: This has nothing to do with an actual grid. Instead it refers to a way to
turn the tube on and off fast by using a little eup around the filament to “ suck electrons out.”
You are not actually shifting the big voltage across the tube, just diverting the electrons. This
is how pulse fluoro is done (page 92 for more details).
" If you will it, it is no dream ” - Theodor Herzl
