Low Yield Non-CIinical PhD Trivia
Remember back at the beginning of the chapter I said that x-rays interact with matter in 5 ways
and that only 3 occur at diagnostic ranges? Remember I said I couldn't rule out fuckery - with
regard to asking about the other random 2? Well the time to talk about those 2 has come.
Promise me that you will ( I ) not read this page more than once, (2) you will NO T take any notes
on it, and (3) if you are ever lost in the woods with only this book and you really have to crap -
that you use this page to wipe with first. After that... it’s every man for himself.
Diarrhea? Consider the mammo chapter.
Pair Production
I’m going to try and image a scenario where this could be practically asked on the exam. OK....
Got one. Colossus - the superhero from X-Mcn (and recently Deadpool) arrives to get an x-ray.
Because his body is a form of organic steel he has an unusually high Z. One that is much higher
than normally seen in human tissue.
Pair production occurs when a very high energy photon (at least 1.022 McV) is used on
something with a high Z. If it has a low Z (like human tissue) you'd need around 30 MeV to
make this the dominant process. Anyway - the very high energy photon will have enough juice
to shoot right past the electrons and interact directly with the nucleus. The result is complete
absorption of the photon and production of a “ pair.” This pair is I electron, and I positron. The
electron is gonna go off and do it’s thing. The positron is going to react just like it would in a
PET Scanner. It’s going to travel a very short distance, collide with an electron (the enemy of a
positron) and annihilate giving off two 511 keV photons 180 degrees apart.
So, you’d want to bombard Colossus with very high energy photons and image him in a PET
Scanner.
Photodisintegration
C reating a clinical scenario for this is even tougher.... Luckily thanks to my peyote Shaman I
was able to conjure one up.
Your department has run out of strontium for bone pain therapy. And even though it's not really
been used for that since the 1940s your Chairman still wants to “ add value" by keeping it around
in case f amily Medicine wants to try it again. You are planning a career in academics so you
think this is a good idea, and want to impress the Chairman in the hopes of one day getting a job
where you make half as much as a private practice radiologist. Using your book fund, you build
a rocket to take you to a supernova - where just prior to the formation of a white dwarf you
observe photons with extremely high energies (more than 10 McV) striking the nucleus of the
atoms and causing the ejection of alpha particles (a component of photodisintegration). You
also observe the process of supernova nucleosynthesis - and recover some strontium. On the
way home with your rocket full of Strontium 90 you remember that it's a beta omitter- and
realize that you've made a terrible terrible mistake.
