When does the P.E. Occur?
. Energy of interaction - You have to have an energy higher (or equal) to the inner shell
binding energy. Although (and I'll talk about this more on page 34) the peak energy for
P.E. is right around the binding energy for that shell. The probably of a P.E. interaction
actually starts to decline after that —
x-rays with a ton of juice just pass right through. The
function is inverse to the third power and that is testable.
• Atomic Number (Z) of the Absorber - Remember people aren't all made out of the same
shit. You have fat, water, bone, etc.. (Basically “ Soft Tissue” and “ Bone” ). The higher the
Z - the more likely you will have a photoelectric effect, and the change is significant -
because it’s also cubed (to the third power).
Why is this P.E. so important in Radiology?
It is the fundamental method for which contrast is developed, f or example, bone has a
higher Z than soft tissue. I ligher Z means more P.E. More P.E. means more absorbed
photons, so less hitting the imaging receptor. The end result? Bones arc white on an x-ray...
it’s science. More critical than that is the smaller differences between stuff is amplified
because it’s not 1:1 - its cubed. So a small change in Z is amplified. T his helps with soft
tissue delineation.
Using your practical understanding of bones being
white on an x-ray, I’m going to try and help you
remember the energy differences. Ever see an x-
ray that’s “ burnt out” or “ over exposed” ? The
reason it looks like shit is because the tech
selected a kVp that was too high. Remember that
photoelectric effect dominates at or around the
binding energy of the inner shell electron - and
above that it drops off rapidly. So, too much kVp
= not enough P.E. and therefore not enough
contrast (everything looks the same).
Why can’t Superman See what
color Lois Lane’s Underwear Are?
In the 1978 classic Superman movie -
Lois Lane interviews Superman on the
roof top during which she challenges
him to use his x-ray vision to tell her the
color of her underwear, but because she
is standing behind a lead flower pot he
can't see them. The reason he can’t see
them is because Lead has a High Z.
High Z = More Photoelectric Effect
(more absorption).
Key Points:
•
Probability of P.E. directly proportional to the
atomic number cubed: Z3
•
Probability of P.E. is inversely proportional to
the energy cubed: 1/ Z3
She then steps out from behind the pot...
and he tells her they are pink. Then like
a promiscuous girl she says “ do you like
pink?” Girl, I’m a freak you shouldn’t
say those things
Concept of the flower pot is the same
reason shields, gowns, gloves etc... made
to shield x-rays are made of lead. It s all
about the P.E.
