Modulation Transfer Function (MTF) - “ MTF” is a measurement of the ability of a system
to maintain the signal contrast as a function of spatial resolution. Spatial resolution is equal
to half of the "Nyquist frequency.” WIT' is Nyquist frequency ? - it’s essentially how little
you can sample something and still be able to tell what it is.
I do an animation explaining
this in my board review course at 'fitanRadioloav.com if you really need an explanation you
won’t find a better one than that.
*'ss
The way I remember this is that it’s harder
and harder to keep up the signal when you
want to look at smaller and smaller line
pairs.
Spatial Resolution (Frequency)
1.0
MTF
Detective Quantum Efficiency (DQE) - DQE is essentially an estimate of the required
exposure level that will be necessary to create an optimal image. In other words, it’s a
“ prediction of dose.” DQE is evaluated by comparing the image noise of a detector with that
of the “ ideal detector,” and in that way it is a measure of the efficiency of a detector in
converting x-ray energy into an image signal. People who like math calculate this by
comparing the signal to noise ratio at output with the signal to noise ratio at input as a
function of spatial frequency. In a perfect world you want this to be “ 1.0” (all radiation
energy is absorbed and converted to image), at any spatial resolution - but this isn’t what
happens. Factors that influence it are the radiation exposure, spatial frequency (resolution),
modular transfer function, detector material, kVp, and mAs.
The better your DQE the less radiation you need to maintain your signal.
• 1ligh DQE = Low Dose
• Low DQE = I ligh Dose
Here are some things to remember about DOE:
• It’s a measurement of efficiency
• DQE is directly proportional to MTF
• DQE is inversely proportional to the Signal to Noise Ratio
• DQE is better at low spatial resolution
• In general the DQE of DR is around 0.45, significantly better than that of CR or plain
films - which is around 0.25. ** more on this in the next chapter.
DOE and spatial resolution: DQE is inversely proportional to spatial resolution (frequency).
Why would that be? Just reason that you would need more dose (more photon density) to sec
fine details. If you arc asking the system to see more fine detail - then you arc going to need
more juice per square inch - therefore a lower DQE. Remember High DQE = Low Dose,
Low Dose = High DQE.
r
