Grid - Grids are used to reduce scatter. Scatter is a “ violation” of the most basic law of
radiography, because it doesn't originate in a straight line from the focal spot. Instead it is
the result of compton scatter in the body.
Scattering depends on:
( 1) The collimated field - less field = less scatter
(2) Thickness of the imaged body part
- thinner part = less scatter
(3) The energy that is chosen - compton dominates above
26 kVp in soft tissue, and above 35 kVp in bone.
Scatter
• Collimation
• “Thickness” of Patient
• Energy of the Beam
How does the Grid work? A grid is a
device that has multiple thin metallic
(usually lead) strips with interspersed
radiolucent spaces (holes). It is placed
behind the patient and in front of the
image receptor (I.R.). The prior action
of the grid is to block off angle
(presumed scattered) x-rays, and allow
the ones the are coming straight in to
contact the image receptor.
Patient
L
iiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiii Grid
"
~
•
11.R .
Off Angle
“Scatter” Is
\ Blocked
A
Grid Ratio: This is a term to describe how dense the grid is. It’s basically the ratio of the
height of the lead to the distance between them. The higher the ratio the less scatter and the
better the contrast.
What does the Grid do to Dose ? The tradeoff to using a grid is
that dose is increased (because the automatic brightness control
turns up the juice to compensate). A higher grid ratio will create a
larger increase in dose. There is a thing called the “ bucky factor”
which is basically the mAs required with the grid / mAs without the
grid. The most common bucky factor is around 2-3.
“ Bucky Grids ” - This is a moving grid. They wiggle back and forth rapidly - too fast to be
seen. If the grid motion fails (and it stops moving) you will end up with grid lines.
Grid Cut Off: This is a possible “ risk” of using a rid. Essentially what happens is that you
block so many photons that you cause a quantum mottle - or noisy image. This is
classically described as happening when the grid is aligned incorrectly (put on upside-down,
off level, off center, or off focus / at a bad source to image distance).
Dose Increases
(1) Using a Grid
(as opposed to
not using a Grid)
(2) Using a Higher
Grid Ratio
