— (3) Contrast (“ Contrast Resolution” )
I introduced the concept of contrast on page 34 by showing you 3 lions of different shades
standing next to caeh other. Remember the general idea is that it’s easier to tell two thing
apart if they arc totally different shades (black and white) and its more difficult to tell things
apart when they are close to the same shade (one shade of grey vs a slightly lighter shade of
grey). 'This is the idea of imaging contrast. More is good.
kVp - Remember that the kVp (kilovoltage peak) doesn't just play a role in how much the
beam penetrates but also plays a large role in image contrast because of the photoelectric
effect and k edge concepts discussed in prior chapters. Another way a person who writes
multiple choice questions may ask this is by using the term “ quality.” Remember that quality
is a kVp thing (where as quantity is a mAs thing ... and a kVp thing).
• Testable Point: Low kVp = High Contrast
• Testable Point: High kVp = Low Contrast
Scatter - Anything that increases scatter reduces contrast. So uses of a Grid and
Collimation (smaller field of view) reduces scatter, and improves contrast resolution.
Vocab “ Radiographic Contrast” - Radiographic contrast is a result of both "subject
contrast ” and “ image receptor contrast” (ox film contrast - if the year is 1973).
Vocab “ High v.v Low Subject Contrast” - Certain anatomy regions arc intrinsically referred
to as either “ 1ligh” or “ Low” contrast, f or example, the chest has bones and lung - two
things with very different density (and Z) resulting in big contrast difference - white bones
next to black lungs. The chest is a region of “ high subject contrast.” An example of “ low
subject contrast” would be the belly - where you have soft tissue organs, next to other soft
tissue organs and everything is a blob of grey.
Film contrast - This is controlled by the design and manufacturing of the film components.
“ Sensitometric curves” arc a thing that is used to describe the inherent quality of the film -
which compare changes in density and exposure etc... If 1 lived in rural Africa or the year
was 1973 then 1 might give a shit about this. Since neither of those things are true - 1 give
exactly zero shits and more importantly 1 think it’s very low yield for the test. Just know that
film and the subject play a role and they had curves to describe this quality in film.
