— (4) Brightness
Brightness can mean slightly different things depending on if you are talking about film or
digital. For film “ brightness” refers to how many x-rays are blocked. In other words, “ bones arc
bright.” White stuff = Bright Stuff.
Digital is a little more complicated. Well not really... for the purpose of multiple choice what
you need to know (or may not need to know) isn’t very fucking much. It’s like this much -
imagine me, a 7 foot tall red bearded man with steel blue eyes, holding up my hand with my
thumb and my index finger pretty close to each other. This much...
Q: Prometheus are you really 7 foot tall???
A: Of course I am! A short person could never write a physics review book this good!
I lerc is the idea - if you have managed to make a digital image then you arc gonna be reading it
on a monitor (not a stupid light box). When you are dealing with a monitor “ brightness ” refers
to the amount of luminance (light emission) of the display.
Digital imayiny provides a wider dynamic ratine them film screen. Because of this you have the
ability to adjust for exposure errors, to yield acceptable image densities - optimized for the
human eyeball. This process of optimizing is “ windowing.” Specifically the window level (or
center).
This lets you set a midpoint in the range of densities that arc visible on the image.
Setting the level (center) allows the image brightness to be increased or decreased throughout the
entire range of densities. Level Up (high pixel value) lets you see darker regions (like the lung)
better - by increasing the overall brightness. Level Down (lower pixel value) lets you sec lighter
regions better.
Frat Version / Trivia Summary:
• Digital imaging provides a wider dynamic range than film screen
• Window Level (or Center) = Thing you change for Brightness
• Widows Width = Thing you change for Contrast
• Level Up (higher pixel value) = For lookin' at dark stuff (lungs)
• Level Down (lower pixel value) = For lookin' at light stuff (bones)
r
Blank for Notes (or as a place to draw the car you are gonna buy when you pass this test, finish
training, and finally start getting compensated for 15+ years of horrible horrible sacrifice).
We're talking about unchecked aggression here, dude.
