Image Receptor Contrast - Digital
imaging has an advantage of film with
regard to contrast. I 'll touch on this
again in the next chapter - but it's worth
knowing the depth of the pixel is
determined by the number of bits (10.
12, 14 etc..). This determines the
number of shades of gray available for
imaging. More bits = more contrast
resolution.
Window Width - I’ll talk about this in more depth in the CT chapter - but 1 am going to touch
on it here too, because it’s an important contrast topic. You can adjust the radiographic
contrast - post processed - by adjusting the range of densities visible.
WTF is a “ Bit” ? Digital Transistors (like a Sith
Lord) only deal in absolutes, it’s either a zero (off)
or a one (on). Each 0 and 1 is called a bit and
refers to the computer’s basic unit of information.
These binary digits are used to display the
shades of gray in a digital image. The greater the
number of bits - the more shades of gray
available.
• Testable Point: A narrow (decreased) window width increases contrast,
• Testable Point: A wider (increased) window width decreases contrast.
• Testable Point: The center point (or midpoint) of the level is going to determine the brightness
Digital Imaging Specific Concept
(iThe LUTs” - A major difference between plain film and
digital is the primary factor influencing contrast. With plain film kVp is the primary factor.
With digital the primary factor influencing contrast is the Look-Up Table or “ LUT." WTF is a
“ LUT” ? The LUT is a histogram of known input intensities and corresponding grayscale. A
rescaling process allows for adjustment to present an optimal image (underexposed images are
scaled darker, overexposed images are scaled lighter). As a result it's less of a problem to adjust
the kVp to correct for dose when you are using digital - rather than plain film.
Key Points Regarding Digital Imaging / LUTs
• The primary factor influencing image contrast (in digital systems) is the LUT.
• The primary factor influencing image contrast (in film systems) is the kVp.
• kVp still influences contrast, but digital systems have a much wider dynamic range.
• Imaging-processing software is capable of producing an image with a specified level
of contrast even when higher kVp
• A higher kVp can be used (adjusted by the 15% rule) and a quality image still
produced.
