- CR - Computed Radiography or “ The Cassette Based System"
Storage Phosphors (CR) : These can work with a
conventional x-ray machine (just like a normal
cassette). The system uses a special phosphor
(Barium Fluorohalides) that does not emit the
absorbed energy as light after interaction with an x-
ray. Instead, the x-ray causes an electron in the
phosphor to change to a metastablc state (one that it
can hold for several days).
Essentially when the plate is exposed to x-rays some of electrons within the phosphor arc
removed. Those liberated electrons get trapped in a “conduction band.” A magical metal
called “europium” helps convince some of the liberated electrons to stay trapped in this
conduction band for hours.
The idea is that the storage phosphor is holding a “ latent” x-ray image.
When the cassette is returned back to a docking station a readout is performed. You can think
of this like developing the film. The process is called “ photostimulable luminescence” -
To read it out, the plate is exposed to a laser that sweeps back and forth. The red light of the
laser liberates the trapped electrons and they return to their shells. As they return they release
energy as blue-green light. The light is directed onto a photodetector which then amplifies the
light signal and converts it to an electronic signal . The signal is then digitalized and divided into
a matrix (a bunch of squares). Each one of these squares is called a “ pixel.” Remember the size
of the matrix is going to determine your spatial resolution (larger matrix = greater number of
pixels , because each pixel is smaller, = greater spatial resolution).
“ Sampling Pitch” is a vocab word that describes the distance between laser positions as it’s
reading out the plate. With direct systems (not CR) it means something slightly different - and
instead refers to the distance between adjacent DELs (Detector Elements).
“ Pixel Pitch" is a vocab word I’ve mentioned before that means the distance between adjacent
pixels. Remember this is also important for spatial resolution.
Testable Trivia:
i
•
I he amount of light detected is proportional to the intensity of the incident x-ray.
•
I he photostimulated phosphors have a wide detectable range, tolerating x-ray intensities
100 times higher and 100 times lower than the 5 micro Gy needed for an old school screen
film.
• The plate is reset by forceable exposure to bright white light - which erases it. If you forget
to do this you will get ghosting artifacts.
WTF is a “ Phosphor” ?
A phosphor is a substance
that can emit light when
excised to a radiation source.
“Luminescence” they call it.
