MQSA
Appropriate Target Range
for Medical Audit
Recall Rate
5-7%
Cancers/ 1000 Screened
3-8
Specific Tasks That You Should Memorize
Processor QC
Daily
Darkroom Cleanliness
Daily
Viewbox Conditions
Weekly
Phantom Evaluation
Weekly
Repeat Analysis
Quarterly
Compression Test
Semi-Annually
Darkroom Fog
Semi-Annually
Screen-Film Contrast
Semi-Annually
MQSA Rules for Male Residents
on the Mammography Service:
A tic must be worn (pink is the recommend
color - although not required).
General gaze should be in the downward
direction (submissive posture)
You will not speak unless spoken to first
Penis must be taped either down or to the side
Urination may only be performed in the
seated position
Misc MQSA Trivia:
• Places that do mammo have to be “ accredited and certified" i.c. pay money, every 3 years
• The FDA is the evil overlord behind the MQSA
Gaining the Privilege to Read a Mammogram:
• During the last two years of training you have to read 240 mammography examinations (during a 6
month period) - under “ direct supervision"
• You have to have 3 months of formal training
• You have to have 60 documented hours of mammo education
Spatial Resolution and the Line Pair Phantom:
•
RSNA says: 13 LP/mm in the Anode -Cathode Direction
•
RSNA says: 11 LP/mm in the left-right direction
•
Huda Says: MQSA requires a resolution of 12 line pairs per mm for screen-film, and manufacturer
specs for digital (~ 7 Ip/mm).
Mean Glandular Dose:
I he MQSA has some breast phantom which is suppose to be an “average breast." This thing is 4.2cm of
compressed breast that is 50% adipose and 50% glandular.
Testable Trivia: Dose under 300 niillirads (3 mGy). This required dose is ONLY for the phantom, not
a real human breast. This is measured Wi l l I A GRID. The dose limit without a grid jsj mGy. There is
no actual regulation for what a human breast can endure.
***Summary -Phantom (not human ) limit = 3 mGy with a grid, I mGy without a grid
Blank for Notes (or as a place to draw the house you are gonna buy when you pass this test, finish
training, and finally start getting compensated for /5+ years of horrible horrible sacrifice).
Calmer than you are dude
