PPV1 PPV2 and PPV3
In an attempt to make things overly complicated the ACR and MQSA set up guidelines for
data collection with sub categories for positive predictive value. Things with different types
or categories make great multiple choice questions.
First a quick refresher: “What is this positive predictive value” ? It’s the proportion of
people who have a positive study and actually have breast cancer.
Breast CA (+)
Breast CA (-)
Test (+)
Test (-)
Positive Exam
With Breast CA
Positive Exam
With NO CA
Negative Exam
With Breast CA
Negative Exam
With NO CA
PPV =
Positive Exam with Cancer
Positive Exam
with Cancer
+
PPV =
True Positives
All Positives
People like to group statistics in these boxes
sometimes labeled with letters. Letters are
confusing - and test writers can fuck with the
order, so don’t use the letters - just memorize
what goes in the boxes and their relationship.
Positive Predictive Value is
going to be the amount of
people with a positive test
and disease (a correct test)
over all the ones you called
positive (the ones you got
right + your overcalls).
Notice every thing is a
“positive” since it’s a positive
predictive value. The ones
you called positive and were
right, over all the ones you
called positive.
Positive Exams with
NO Cancer (“overcalls”)
Categories of PPV - Per Each Stage of the Workup:
PPVi - This refers to cases from positive screening (anything other than a
recommendation to return to screening). In other words, BR-0, BR-3, BR-4, BR-5. “Call
backs” - we call them. Benchmark for this is 4.4%
A screening only facility only obtains data as PPVi - because they don’t do call backs or
biopsy.
PPV2- This refers to cases where biopsy was recommended. In other words, times you
BR4 or BR5’d something. How many times you sent someone to the “room of tears” -
where you tell them they need a biopsy. Benchmark for this is 25.4%
PPV3 - This refers to the results of the biopsy. Some people call this the “ PBR’ or positive
biopsy rate. Other people will call it the “ biopsy yield of malignancy.”
What will your
examiner call it?... The most likely answer is the name you didn’t remember it was called -
so remember all of them. Benchmark for this is 31.0%
Synonyms: PPV3 = PBR = Biopsy Yield of Malignancy
