Image Intensifier:
This is the basic set up.
Image Intensifier
Grid
Patient
Ir
con
Collimated X-ray Beam
X-Ray Generator / Tube
Tube under the table.
Collimation occurs prior to reaching the patient.
Patient gets the juice - generates a bunch of
scatter.
Scatter gets rejected by the grid. Image
intensifier.
Is the tube always under the patient? Nope. It usually is (like in 95% of the systems).
I he
notably exception is with GU radiology' set ups which sometimes are set up with the bladder
close to the receptor (to reduce focal spot blur etc...). In those cases the source is ABOVE the
table.
Is there any trivia you need to know about Source ABOVE the table systems? Yup.
I he operator
(tech or radiologist) lens dose is higher.
Image Intensifier
Smaller than input- so it
Concentrates them
Electrons -> Light
"Minification Gain"
Accelerating Electrons,
Between voltage differences:
"Flux Gain"
Output
Phosphor
Focusing
Electrodes
Light -> Electrons
Captures X-rays,
Turns them to Light
Photo-
Cathode
lnuPUt
<vo o
Phosphor: Csl
X-Rays
y
The purpose of an image intensifier is to convert x-rays to light and then back to electrons.
Along the course of this conversion, the electron flux and energy arc amplified by the image
intensifier with the end result being a greater amount of light emerging from the output
phosphor. lo actually view the pictures, you must couple an image intensifier through lenses
to a TV camera.
Noticing the word “Gain” is showing up on that diagram? Yup - Lots of “ Gains” - all of
which would make good distractors for each other. Complete discussion to follow.
r
“ The Gains”
“ Flux Gain” This describes the increase in magnitude of light coming from the output
phosphor, relative to the input. This increase in magnitude is accomplished with a high
voltage between the photocathode and the output phosphor (25-35 kV). flic voltage causes
electrons to accelerate and yields a gain in energy.
“ Minification Gain'
1 - Electrons from the large photocathode
surface are concentrated on a small output phosphor. This
increases the number of electrons per unit area, and therefore
the energy per unit area.
Q: When you “ Mag’' something you are actually doing what?
A: Minifying it less
Q: Docs this make the image brighter?
A: Yes - because its the same number of electrons being
concentrated on a smaller surface area.
“ Brightness Gain" - This is an old term describing the ability of the 1.1 to convert x-ray
energy into light energy and then increase the brightness. Think about this as the increase in
emitted light from the I.l. compared to the amount of light you would have obtained if the 1.1.
was never invented (and you just directly exposed the phosphorescent screen).
Testable Point: Brightness Gain is due to the combined effects of Flux Gain and Minification
Gain.
•
BG = Flux Gain x Minification Gain
“ Conversion Gain” (Gx)- This is a term describing the efficiency of an I.l. in changing
incident x-rays into light at the output surface. This is considered to be a “ new term" that is
often used to replace brightness gain as an expression of efficiency. An important concept is
that the older an I.l. is, the more it sucks at this.
Summary
Flux Gain = Accelerating electrons between voltage differences. (Expressed as a
ratio of light at input to light at output).
Minification Gain = Electrons from large surface, concentrated on smaller
surface
Brightness Gain = Light increase from the acceleration and concentration
processes. Flux Gain x Minification Gain.
Conversion Gain: How good the I .l . is at turning the electrons back into light.
Output Phosphor
/
\/
X
/
\
/
A
\
//
Photocathode /
Input Phosphor
Dealing with the Elderly
Nothing is worse than having an elderly relative. It’s such a drag to have to try and keep
them from falling, and pooping everywhere. Now, obviously we still want them to be full
codes - even if they have metastatic cancer and end stage Alzheimers — gotta keep cashing
those social security checks. Hut 1 think we can all agree that it’s best if they are locked up in
old people jail (“ nursing homes” we call them).
Just like a human... the 1.1. also falls apart with advanced age and becomes a burden.
On the prior page, I mentioned the terms “ brightness gain” and “ conversion gain” as
measures of efficiency - which are sorta similar. Regardless of which term you arc using the
important trivia to remember is that the ability of the intensifier to increase brightness
deteriorates with the aue of the tube.
O: What are the consequences of this?
A: More and More Dose is Requiring to Produce the Same Level of Output Brightness.
Critical Point: Older 1.1. = More Dose.
So what do you do about this old 1.1. situation?
• Solution I: Use an aperture with a large hole in it. The down side to this is it increases the
image noise.
• Solution 2: Let the Automatic Brightness Control system do its job and crank up the juice
(use more radiation). The down side to this is it increases the dose.
• Solution 3: Put it in a nursing home (old person jail), then get another one. The general
rule for this is the Imauc Intensifier is usually replaced when the conversion eain falls to
50%. 1 he down side to this is that it costs money to replace things, but it’s ok you can
offset the cost by cutting the Resident’s benefits / salaiy....and hire a rnillion$/year VP or
chairman to oversee the cost savings transition.
