Artifacts (FPD):
Are artifacts seen with I./.s the same as FPDs? Nope. FPDs do NOT have pincushion,
S distortions, vignette, glare, or saturation artifacts
Bad Pixel- appear as either white or blaek spots. One method to correct for this (often built
into the system) is to interpolate in order to fill the data.
Lag Artifact (Ghosting) can also occur with FPD. This tends to occur if the exposure uses
very high radiation.
Spatial Resolution:
What limits of spatial resolution of an I./. fluoro system?-The television display system.
The resolution of a TV depends on raster (scan) lines, the bandwidth, and the FOV.
Does the display limit the spatial resolution of a FPD system? Nope, FPDs usually have
displays with the same matrix as the image receptor
Vertical Resolution is limited by? The number of raster lines that the display monitor uses.
You have to alternate white and blaek to reproduce a line pair image on the 1.1. or FPD, so the
max number of line pairs in the vertical direction is half the number of actual lines used.
Because the bars in the line pair pattern may not totally line up with the raster lines, it’s less
than that so you need to correct with the Kell Factor (Kell Factor is some derived factor: 0.7).
Vertical Resolution =
Raster Lines x Kell Factor
2 x FOV (mm)
So decreasing the FOV (mag mode) improves spatial resolution
If you measure spatial resolution at a diagonal (45 degrees to the raster lines) does it get
better or worse? Better- spatial resolution improves by a factor of \2 over the vertical or
horizontal resolution
Better pure spatial resolution FPD v.v I.I ? I.I. systems are better, and change with FOV.
Pulse Fluoro
r
With conventional fluoro we have a long very low continuous mA. Pulse fluoro is pulsed. In
other words, it's NOT continuous mA hut instead pulse of higher mA.
Sorta like this:
low
mAr
higher
mA fi
ii
uui
Regular Fluoro
Pulsed Fluoro
Now here is where the testable trivia, and potential trickery comes in. If you keep the rate at 30
pulses/second your dose is UNCHANGED. What?
1 thought pulse fluoro reduced dose? It
totally can, but doesn't have to. Ilerc is what is happening:
Regular Fluoro: Continuous low mA with higher “S" = mAs
Pulse Fluoro: Pulsed high mA with lower
%‘S" = mAs
Regular Fluoro mAs = Pulsed f luoro mAs.
So when does Pulse Fluoro reduce dose? If you drop the rate below 30 pulse/second. People
usually use 15 pulse/second as an example - and I'll show you why in a second. But first I want
you to look at this diagram and understand why the dose starts to drop below 30ish.
low
mA
f
higher
mA
30 F/ — <
higher
mA
15 F /
Cpp
OCv
I
II
II
i i
i i ir*
Throwing all the
dose in a
bucket
20 “units”
—
10 “units”
20 “units”
—
10 “units”
20 “units”
—
10 “units”
Same
Testable T rivia:
• Pulse Fluoro is good for moving patients (Wiggling Babies) - Gives you sharper images with
less motion blur
• Pulsed Fluoro can reduce dose - when the frame rate is below 30 frame /second
• People always use a drop of 30 to 15 frames per second as an example because that equals a
dose reduction of 30%. Math to get there isn't important, just understand it's not a direct I:l
thing. 50% reduction in pulse rate = 30 % reduction in dose.
• Be careful how the question is worded - because a lower frame rate will have more mA per
individual pulse - but the overall mAs will be decreased relative to regular fluoro below 30
frames per second.
Spatial Resolution is Limited By:
FPD systems are limited by?- Detector element size (around 2.5-3.0 Ip/mm)
LI systems are limited by? TV systems (1.0-2.0 lp/mm for GI, and 2.0-4.0 lp/mm for
angio)
8 Factors Affecting Spatial Resolution:
FOV-smaller FOV better resolution
Focal Sport Size- usually not an issue unless you get the anatomy away from the image
receptor
Image Receptor Limitations-detector clement for FPD and television for 1.1
Motion and Temporal Factors- motion creates ghosting
Dynamic Range-This is only an issue for 1.1 systems- with variability in very dense or
very transparent stuff
Pixel Binning- Binning increases pixel size- reduced spatial resolution (but improves
SNR)
Frame Averaging- increases SNR (less mottle), more susceptible to blur
Pulsed Fluoro- Dose is administered in pulses, instead of continuously. You get less
motion artifact (better spatial resolution in moving objects) and overall less dose (if less
them 30 frames per second).
QA
How is spatial resolution tested for?
Lead bar pattern
How is distortion checked for? - Use a mesh screen or plate. Look for straight lines (not
pincushion or S distortion).
Monkeying Around with the kVp
r
Depending on the study you are doing, you may need to monkey around with the kVp to
optimize the exam.
Barium MS Iodine:
In the next few pages I'm going to talk about fluoro in Angio, but I might as well introduce this
idea now. Remember this idea of a “ k-edge” ? It’s the energy where absorption (and therefore
image contrast) is maximized. Usually for a study using IV contrast (iodine) you are going to
pick a kV of around 70 - which will place the average energy around 35 - landing it flush on the
k-edge of Iodine (which is 33 keV).
But what about Barium? Most of fluoro is barium, and the k-edge of barium is pretty similar to
iodine (it’s like 37). So it’s gonna be the same right? Nope...when you do a barium exam the
amount of contrast you give is proportionally much higher than the dose of IV contrast. As a
result you don’t have a problem seeing it. Instead the problem is penetrating it. As a result you
need to pick a higher kV (like 100 or more).
Summary:
• kVp for Angio Study (Using low volume of Iodine) = 70 kV. Chosen to max out K-Edge
• kVp for Barium Study (Using higher volumes of Barium) = > lOOkV. Chosen to max of
penetration.
kVp and Dose
Earlier in the text I've mentioned that INCREASES in kVp result in LESS dose. This is a
subject of confusion. This is how I think about it - patient dose is related to the photoelectric
effect and to the amount of scatter that does not exit. If you increase the kVp you increase
average energy of photons - causing a drop in the photoelectric effect, and generally speaking
scatter that will exit the patient (which increases as the kVp does). This increase in kVp will
cause a greater risk for the tech (from scatter).
But Prometheus increasing kVp causes more overall x-ray production (ride of 15%) and more
overall x-rays (more bremstraahlung) - so more ionization ? True. Let me clarify - increased
kVp slightly INCREASES organ dose - as you have more scatter, and that scatter travels
further inside the body. BUT this is more than offset by reduced skin dose. So it depends on
the wording of the question. Also, this is why if it’s a CT dose question - an increase in kVp is
going to INCREASE dose - because you are rotating - dose spreading your skin dose.
Also, if you assume that if you increase kVp by 15%, and decrease mA by 50%- then for sure
you will have less dose.
Bottom Line: Increased kVp = less skin dose, slightly more organ dose. If you compensate for
the increased kVp with a drop in mA then dose decreases period. For CT questions: increased
kV = increased dose.
