Dose & Compensation For Geometric Mag:
So, if geometric mag is so bad - what do you do about it?
You can try and collimate. Collimation is electronically controlled with positioning changes
made to irradiate a small region of anatomy - you change to a smaller input surface. The trick
is that you are actually minifying the image less, as a smaller input surface is projected on the
same output surface.
Best Position of the I.I. and X-ray Tube? X- ray tube far away, with the 1.1. close.
Having the image intensifier as close to the
patient as possible does 3 things:
(1) Decreases patient dose.
•The ABC tries to make pretty pictures and
more incident x-rays are detected when the 1.1.
is close so the ABC doesn’t increase mA (to
increase the number of x-rays generated) to
make an adequate image.
(2) Decreases scatter to the operator.
•Less x-rays are made to scatter and less scatter
escapes to irradiate the operator.
(3) Increases image sharpness. Decreases focal
spot blur and magnification.
£
Image Intensifier |
6'*
f
&
^°>°
X-Ray Tube J
Raising the Imaging Receptor will ? Increases the dose- the machine will increase dose
to compensate for the “source to image’’ receptor distance
What is the general radiation change with each magnification?-Increases dose by 1.4-2.0
times-You get less light out, the ABC turns up the juice to maintain the picture
Where is the ideal place to stand? On the same side of the patient as the imaging intensifier-It
is preferable to position the C arm x-ray tube under the table
Double the distance from the tube does what to dose? Decreases it by a factor of 4 (inverse
square law).
r
A smaller field of view, does wliat to dose?
•
With 1.1. systems- increases it
•
With FPD system -also increases it (usually), but doesn't have to
Does the order of mA and kVp adjust matter with regard to dose? - yes
•
If mA is increased before kVp the dose gets higher
•
If kVp is increased first the dose goes up less
Effect of x-ray beam filtration on dose?
•
More filtration- less low energy x-rays = less dose
How does adding an “ Aperture” to an LI system affect dose?
•
An aperture with a smaller hole (larger F#) to block
more light from the output phosphor results in a
greater radiation dose rate to the patient compared
with a system with a smaller F#.
•
The idea is that, the size of the hole in the aperture
should balance the amount of Quantum Mottle to an
acceptable dose
How does kvp selection affect dose?
•
1ligher kVps result in more penetrating x-rays.
•
Higher kVp’s result in lower patient radiation doses* (skin doses)
How good are lead aprons? When should you wear one?
•
1mm of Pb stops about 90% of radiation (it’s not 100%)
•
If you are within 6 feet of a fluoroscope you should lead up
Techniques to reduce dose to patient?
•
Positioning away from the source
•
Using the smallest field of view by collimating (this also improves resolution)
•
Avoiding magnification
WTF is the FU ?
F# =focal lcngth/lens diameter
Lower F# = more light, faster
lens, less pt radiation exposure
Into the Weeds with Electronic Mag and Dose
r
To touch on the next bit ot'fluoro related dose trivia 1 need to briefly introduce the idea of
KERMA and Kcrma Area Product (KAP). I'll cover it in more depth on page 251.
KERMA = Kinetic Energy Release per unit MAss.
The best way to understand KERMA is to think of it as the TOTAL amount of energy deposited
from the ionizing radiation. With that TOTAL amount divided by a unit of mass to give it a more
quantifiable dose. Why did I capitalize TOTAL? Because when the radiation strikes a unit mass it
will not only create some movement of particles (kinetic energy), but also some amount of heat.
Radiation Strikes a
“Unit Mass”
,P
i
Also Gives off
Heat
Creates Kinetic Energy in Electrons
Just measuring what goes on with the electrons is not the TOTAL amount of energy (there is also
that heat). As a result some smart people figured out that the best way to measure both of these
components was to measure it at the moment just before energy was transferred. Which brings us
to the concept of “ AIR KERMA"- which is an estimation of how many photons arc in a unit of
air prior to the energy striking the skin. The idea is that you are estimating the peak skin dose
based on the potential transfer of energy.
Kerma-Area Product (KAP) - Is the amount of Kerma
(potential dose) multiplied by the cross sectional area of the x-
ray beam. This provides a better way to measure the total
radiation potentially incident on the patient. Think of it more
as a measurement of total radiation used in the exam. more
than the actual dose in the patient.
KAP = Dose x Cross Sectional Area
Conceptually understand that if you increase the juice, but
concentrated it in a smaller area that you might not change
your KAP (even though you increased the juice).
Kerma at a Cross
Section of Air
/
Now that I 've got that out of the way - the testable trivia related to mag and fluoro:
• Electronic Mag increases the Air Kerma (and therefore skin dose). Why? Should be
intuitive - you turned the juice up. More juice concentrated on a smaller spot.
• Electronic Mag does NOT increase the KAP. Why? Because even though you increased the
juice you also decreased the cross sectional area. They cancel out - keeping the KAP the same.
High Level Control
The US Government has one solution to all problems: Regulation - and not the fun kind of
regulation Warren G used to talk about (when he hooked a left on Two One and Lewis, some
brothers shootin’ dice so he said "let’s do this” ).
Along those lines the US Gov has set regulations to limit Air Kerma rates - to minimize peak
skin doses. That regulation is 87 mGy per min . WTF would they pick 87 and not 90 or 100?
Seems pretty random. Well... as is expected government bureaucracy continues to lag about 30
years behind reality so they choose their official exposure limit at 10 “ Roentgens” per min -
which then coverts to about 87 mGy/min. Just remember 87 mGy.
• 8.7 mGy or Air Kerma is about 1 Roentgen of Exposure.
But what if your patient is getting disability payments because he/she is too fat to get out of bed?
In that situation even an entrance dose of 100 mGy/min (over the line!) would still likely result
in an inadequate image. Fluoro machines have what is called “ high level control
' which allows
you to turn up the juice on these fat cows. Uncle Sam allows this HLC up to 20 Rocntgens/mins
(176 mGy/min).
Testable Points:
• Normal Air Kerma Limit = 87 mGy/min (10 Roentgens per min)
• High Level Control (Really Fat Level Control) = 176 mGy/min (20 Roentgens per min)
• In “ high level mode ”, you must have audible or visual alarms (in addition to the normal time
alarm used in normal fluoroscopy.)
Gamesmanship - Watch your units!!! It’s the oldest trick in the book to change up units and keep
the numbers the same. Don’t just memorize numbers - you gotta have those units on there.
