Previously I mentioned that there were two different types of fluoro systems:
( 1 ) The dinosaur one “ Image Intensifies ", and
(2) The new one “ Flat Panel Detector. ”
I ve completed my discussion of the dinosaur one (the 1.1.). Now lets turn our attention to the modern
type - the Flat Panel Detector
cpDSVste<in
Grid
X-Rays
Entrance Surface of FPD
"Carbon Fiber-to protect components
Csl Needles- act as a phosphor, _____—
Take photons turn them to light
Photodiode Array
—— —
*"
- Absorbs light and converts to electrons
Read Out Element (transistors and gates)
Determine charges of elements in
photodiode array and construct image
No television camera is needed in FPD
system
As you can see all that 1.1. stuff doesn '1 happen with the modern system (oh, don '1 worry you
will still get tested on it).
Vocab:
“ Pitch”
There is a thing ealled piteh. Essentially it is the linear dimension of a detcetor element.
This is different than the “ pitch'’ you think about with CT (more on that later).
“ Fill Factor”
There is a thing called fill factor. The system isn't 100% efficient, only a portion
is actual sensitive to light. The ratio of the sensitive area over total area is the fill factor.
U
•a.
i
"Pitch"
*
Sensitive Area
Fill Factor =
Pitch2
As the detector element gets smaller you get better spatial resolution, but the ‘'till factor
decreases. In other words, a smaller detector element will have superior resolution but will
require more radiation.
“ Matrix” - The matrix is the number of detector elements (or pixels) on the surface of the FPD -
in each dimension (horizontal and vertical).
1 Detector Element = / Pixel
Math problem: If the matrix size is 1100 x 1100, and the FOV is 25cm, what is the pixel size (or
detector element)?
the formula is: Pixel = FOV / Matrix.
But, 1 was trying to get sneaky with the units (a very common trick): 25cm = 250mm.
250 / 1100 = 0.23mm
Binning: There is a thing called binning. Taking several detector elements (DHLs) and
making a large DEL. The idea is the you reduce the amount of'data (and reduce Quantum
Mottle- less variation in x-ray photons from pixel to pixel).
oooo
oooo
oooo
oooo
4 Pixels x 4 Pixels
2 Pixels x 2 Pixels
lPixels x 1Pixels
*No Binning
*2x2 Binning
*4x4 Binning
OO
oo
OO
oo
oo
oooo
oo
oooo
oooo
oooo
oooo
•
Less Mottle means you can reduce radiation and keep the same noise.
•
Larger DEL does reduce the spatial resolution
When is " Binning” especially useful? -With large FOV (when there arc too many pixels in the
image)
If there is no “ binning” the spatial resolution changes in what way from different fields of view
(in a FPD system)? No change. ITyou have binning, large FOVs will have less spatial
resolution (but can use less radiation to maintain the noise level). Remember “ binning” is a FPD
thing, not an 1.1. thing
What usually happens (without employing binning) with smaller FOVs? Dose is increased to
reduce quantum mottle. If you employ binning, dose can be reduced. For example. If you
combine 4 DEL you can reduce dose by 50%
“ Frame Averaging (Recursive Filtration)" - This is an image process feature that adds several
images together with different weight factors.
Pro: It’s done to reduce quantum mottle and increase the signal. SNR improves.
Cons: It increases the susceptibility to motion artifact and ghosting.
