Patient Dose
•
Most IR systems use a pulsed fluoro (helps reduce dose).
•
50% of the dose is delivered in the superficial 3-5 cm of skin/fat
•
The depth of this 50% depends on the kVp and filtration (higher kVp + Copper Filtration
more penetration)
•
For a body (or body part) measuring less than 10cm (a baby for example)- the grid
should be off
•
A thicker (fatter) patient gets more skin dose. This is because automatic brightness
control secs less penetration - then cranks up the dose.
•
Additional high dose situations: lateral and oblique views
•
Patient and operator dose doubles with a lateral view (compared to PA)
•
The typical dose is about 0.3- 0.5 mGy per frame at the entrance skin position ( 1 Ox
20x more per image than fluoro)
•
Total Dose = (dose per frame) x (frame rate) x (duration x number of runs)
“ Source to Skin Distance” (SSD) = how close the patient is relative to the x-ray source. If
you arc using under the table positioning the SSD depends on table height.
Small SSI) = High Dose
Short Angiographers should stand on a platform (or on the backs of a kneeling trainee) so
that the source to image receptor distance is kept at 100cm or more.
“ Dose Spreading” The idea here is to change the angle of the gantry (especially in a long
case) in order to spread the skin dose over a broader area-decreasing the skin dose to any
specific location.
“ Best Place to Stand” You should try and stand / work on the image receptor side of the
patient. You are trying to avoid the large amount of Compton scatter radiation produced
where the beam enters the patient.
Image Receptor
Source
Most of the Dose
(close to the source)
Image Receptor
Angiographer
-Standing in the
Correct Spot
Source
Angiographer
-Standing in the
WRONG Spot
Most of
the Dose
(close to
the source)
Dose Area Product (Kerrna Area Product) This measures the radiation dose to air in mGy
multiplied by the collimator area- then reported in mGy/cm. The measurement is
independent of beam location. It’s true that as you move the beam away from the patient
the intensity decreases- BUT, the beam spreads out more. These two things occur in equal
amounts so the DAP (KAP) is NOT dependent on location.
DAP (KAP): Low Dose to Large Skin Area = High Dose to Small Skin Area
Magnification- will increase Air Kerma, hut NOT KAP
Obviously this doesn’t help you grade risk of a skin burn. Instead it is used to estimate total
energy deposited in patient, effective dose, and cancer risk. If something reduces the DAP
(KAP) it probably also reduces the scatter and the patient's dose.
Interventional Reference Point (IRP)- This describes the use of an ionization chamber with
a set reference point (15cm closer to the source than the isocenter of the IR system) to
measure radiation emitted from the source. Skin dose can be above or below this point.
Because IRP ignores geometry, table attenuation, and back scatter, it probably over or
underestimates patient’s skin dose every time- but it is currently the best thing available.
Testable Trivia: The dose (outside lead) standing 1 meter from the patient is about 1/1000 of
the dose received by the patient.
