The Hounsfield Unit:
CT scanners generate a picture based on attenuation data (how many x-rays arc blocked), but the
important think to understand is that the data acquired is all relative. The standard density of water is
used as a zero point. Anything less dense than water is a negative number, and anything more dense
than water is a positive number.
The formula used to calculate IIU is:
HU = 1000 x (attenuation of material-attenuation of water) / attenuation of water.
What is the relationship between HU and X-ray attenuation? When I IU increases by 10 I IU, x-ray
attenuation increases by 1%
Does changing the keV mess with the HU? Yup
Why? I thought values were zero'd to water, and standard etc...? Number are based on attenuation
(blockage / absorption) ol x-rays. Remember that change in the photoelectric interaction are going to
change x-ray absorption. In general - since the P.E. dominates at lower energy, low keV will create a
higher H.U. Obviously the closer you approach the k-edge of a given substance the more impressive
the increase in attenuation (and therefore I I.U.) will be. For example, IV contrast will have a HU of
around 100 HU at 140 kV, with will increased markedly to 400 IIU at 80 kV (where the average
energy is going to land flush on its k-edge).
Will filtration change the HUs? It can. Remember filtration will change the “ quality" of the beam -
the average energy etc. In other words, it can be thought of as changing the kV. So if you have
significant “ hardening" of the beam - via removal of the lower energy portions, that will increase the
average energy and in general lower your I lUs. This is the genesis of the “ cupping artifact" described
later in the chapter.
Testable Trivia Summary:
• Density is relative
• Water is used as a standard - the density of water is set to zero I IU
• An increased in 10 HU is typically a 1% increase in attenuation
•
I IU will change with keV - typically becoming larger with lower keV (because you are getting
more attenuation via photoelectric interactions, k-edge etc...)
• Filtration / Beam I lardcning can alter the I I.U. measurements. Classic example is the “cupping
artifact" where things appear less dense in the center, and more dense along the periphery.
