Scatter Reduction:
•
A collimator is used both at the x-ray tube, as well as the detector, with the purpose of
shaping the x-ray beam ( " Defines the section thickness on a single slice ” ). l he collimator
also reduces some scatter.
•
Additional scatter reduction is further accomplished with “ anti-scatter septa.’" Which arc
grids, but you don't call them grids- they are “ septa!”
•
Along those lines - don’t call it a comeback (I’ve been here for years)
The CT fires off x-rays as it spins. The table moves the patient
through. The detectors (highly efficient scintillation
detectors) have a lot of information- which looks like a wavy
mess (Sinogram). Then a bunch of math takes place (filter
back projection), and you get a picture.
Modern set ups use an “ iterative reconstruction” math program that allows more noise, so you
can have less dose at the same diagnostic quality... or at least thats the idea.
Detector Types:
There arc two types of detectors; Scintillation Detectors (the modern type), and Gas Filled
Detectors (the ones used back when dinosaurs roamed the earth). The Scintillator detectors are
way more efficient and easier to produce.
3rd Generation Multi-slice vs Single Slice:
For multi-slice systems the number of detectors in the Z direction (head to toe) determines the
number of slices that can be simultaneously acquired. The MDCT can acquire images with
“ isotropic resolution,” - which means they can do non-axial reconstructions without
stretching pixels.
High Yield Point: Minimal slice thickness is determined by detector clement aperture width
in a modern CT.
“ Filtered" in Filtered
Back Projection refers
to “Sharpening of the
projection data prior to
back projection.”
Fixed and Variable mA
Long ago when dinosaurs roamed the Harth, the scanners had fixed kvp and mA. Basically
they just had an on button.
New scanners can adjust dose via two methods
•
(1 ) Scout image-They actually use the data in the scout to estimate density, and adjust
the juice accordingly.
•
(2) On the fly - as the scan is happening “ flow with the go” - with continuous modulation
r
