Under Sampling: An insufficient number of projections used to reconstruct the CT can
diminish quality, and result in mis-registration artifacts. There are two main types.
View Aliasing: This is when you have under sampling between projections. You see line
stripes radiating from the edge (but at a distance from) a dense object. This is fixed by
acquiring the largest possible number of projects per rotation - slowing the rotation speed.
Ray Aliasing: This is when you have under sampling within a projection. You sec strips
appearing close to the structure. This is fixed by using specialized high resolution
techniques - manufacturer employed.
Metal Artifact: Metal causes streak artifact. It does this through several mechanisms: beam
hardening, partial volume, aliasing, and having density ranges higher than what can be
handled by the computer. Testable trivia is that metals with high Z (Iron, Platinum) tend to
have more artifacts than those with lower Z (Titanium).
Fixing Metal Artifact: Tell the patient to remove it. Increase the kVp (sometimes works).
Use thinner slices. Certain interpolation software can help.
Patient Motion: Motion can cause
misregistration - which manifests as shading or
streaking, especially on reconstructions.
Fixing Motion Artifact: Tie the crazy patients
down. Use a modern (fast) scanner. Align the
scanner in the primary direction of motion
(vertically above or below a chest scan - for
breathing). “ Over scanning” an extra 10% on
the 360 rotation, with the repeated portion
averaged. Gating - like in cardiac.
Incomplete Projection - If parts of the patient are hanging outside the field, but still
attenuating x-rays this messes with the computer’s math. Examples include, arms hanging
down or having the IV contrast on or near the patient.
Fixing incomplete projections: Position the patient correctly.
Over-Scanning vs Over-Ranging
Over-Scanning - Essentially having a
pitch < 1.
Over-Ranging - Scanning above and
below the target, to collect additional
data for a helical scan.
