Signal to Noise
Remember that noise is “ Data that contributes nothing useful to the image." People often make the
mistake of thinking that Quantum Mottle = Noise. It's true that Quantum Mottle (essentially a lack of
photons) is the major contributor to noise - but it is not the only contributor. Scatter is also going to
contribute “ nothing useful to the image,” and therefore is a factor.
Why do I bring this up? Because it will make understanding how increasing the number of x-rays does
not lead to a 1: 1 improvement in signal to noise. It 's also a Poisson distribution thing - but I think that is
harder to conceptualize.
Signal to Noise is a better way to think about “ noise". Remember this is a quantitative method for
comparing the signal (stuff that contributes to the image) vs the noise (stuff that doesn't contribute to the
image). If your signal is really strong - you can tolerate more noise. If your signal is weak - even a little
bit of noise can wreck your image.
fhc bottom line is:
Signal changes directly with increased x-ray flux. Twice the x-rays, Twice the Signal
Noise changes by a factor of VN. In other words. Twice the x-rays, V2 or 1.4 the Noise.
Example I: If mA goes from 200 -> 400 mA, SNR = 2/root 2 or 2/1.4 - so 40% increase in SNR
Example 2: If mA goes from 200 -> 800 mA, SNR = 4/root 4 or 4/2
- so double the SNR
*notice you needed 4x the photon flux to double the SNR
All of the following will INCREASE Signal to Noise:
• HighermA,
• Longer rotation time,
• IligherkVp,
• Larger slice thickness.
•
I.arge pixel (Pixel Size = Field of View / Matrix Size)
• Decreased pitch (having the patient move through the gantry slower)
Why not just crank all that shit up to the max ? Because your dose would be through the roof. It's a trade
oil between burning the patient and having a diagnostic exam. Personally I prefer my exams to be
diagnostic (and the patients extra-crispy) - but the ACR just won’t go for that. For multiple choice - the
answer is always dose “as low as reasonably achievable"- which means a grainy mess is best.
Repetition - Rehashing Fillers - As mentioned previously, how noticeable the noise is depends on the
reconstruction filter; using a sharp, high- resolution or “ edge enhancement filter” will worsening noise
(although spatial resolution improves). A smoothing filter, which is actually called a “ noise reduction
filter" by some will make the noise less noticeable (at the expense of spatial resolution).
