Spatial Resolution
Spatial Resolution ( frequency) -This is the ability to distinguish small objects that are close
together (tell that they are separate). Practically a bar pattern is used to measure this (line pairs
per mm). Line pair resolution for CT is typically 0.5 to 1 Lp/mm - which is shit compared to
mammo (remember that was like 11 Lp/mm).
Factors that affect spatial resolution:
Focal Spot Size
•
A larger focal spot, means the object details arc spread out
over several detectors. Phis degrades and blurs the image
•
Smaller focal spot = better spatial resolution
Magnification
•
More magnification blurs the image
Detector Aperture Size
•
As the detector size is reduced the cranial-caudal resolution (z-axis) increases
•
The in plane “ x-y axis” is NOT affected by aperture size.
Number of Projections
•
More projections, more data. Better Resolution
Reconstruction Slice Thickness
•
1 he thinner the detector element aperture, the better the spatial resolution in the X
direction
Spatial Resolution as a function of pixel size and display field of view:
•
"Display Field of View” (DFOV) = Space defined by the user based on the anatomy size
to be displayed. It is always less than (or equal to) scan field of view.
•
Remember that Pixel Size = DFOV / Matrix Size. So increasing the matrix size or
decreasing the DFOV will make your pixel size smaller. Smaller pixels = Better Spatial
Resolution.
Spatial Resolution
Take Home
Focal Spot (Smaller =
Better) : Determines
Spatial Resolution in the
X-Y Plane... sided to side.
Detector Size (Smaller =
Better) : Determines
Spatial Resolution in the Z
Plane (the long axis or
Cranial Caudal direction)
Spatial Resolution as a function of Pilch:
•
As pitch increases, so does the width of the slice sensitivity profile (SSP).
•
As the SSP widens the slice thickness increases. Thicker slices = Less Spatial Resolution.
Patient Motion
•
Voluntary and involuntary movement leads to blurring. Blurring = reduced image
resolution
Spatial Resolution Related to Filters:
•
Sharp Filter = Better Spatial Resolution (trade off is more noise)
•
Smooth Filter = Crappy Spatial Resolution (trade off is less noise)
Pixel Size (Spatial Resolution v.v Contrast Resolution):
•
1lolding matrix size constant and decreasing FOV will decrease pixel size.
1 his increases
spatial resolution but decreases contrast resolution (less photons per box)
•
I lolding matrix size constant and increasing FOV will increase pixel size.
1 his decreases
spatial resolution but increases contrast resolution (more photons per box).
Factors That Affect Spatial Resolution
Factors That Affect Contrast Resolution
Focal Spot (smaller spot = better)
Number of X-Rays (mAs, kV, pitch). More
dose (less mottle) will improve contrast
resolution.
Detector Width (smaller detector = better)
Slice Thickness
(thicker = more x-ray quanta = less noise).
Nyquist Limitations
“ Sampling” (Oversampling = better)
Reconstruction Method
(Iterative > Filtered Back)
Reconstruction Filter (example- bone
“ sharp” algorithm gives a higher spatial
resolution)
Reconstruction Filter (Soft tissue > Bone)
