Ring Artifact: A calibration error or defective detector on a
third generation scanner will cause errors in angular position -
resulting in a circular artifact.
Fixing Ring Artifact - Recalibrate your dinosaur detector, or
replace the broken part.
Helical Artifact in the Axial Plane: Single Section
v
^ *
/
V
V
Ring Artifact
You get the same artifacts with helical scanning modes plus you get some additional artifact from
helical interpolation. The main place you see this is around the top of the skull (anatomy
changing rapidly in the Z direction). The higher the pitch the worse this is. To minimize
these artifacts you have to reduce the variation in the Z direction - use a low pitch, use 180
degree instead of 360 when possible, and using thin sections instead of thick. Testable trivia -
this is why head CTs arc still commonly done with axial scanning over helical.
Helical Artifact in Multi-Section
Distortion is more complicated on multi-section scanners, with a classic “ windmill” appearance
where several rows of detectors intersect. It worsens with increased helical pitch. A “ Z-Filter” is
done to reduce the severity of windmill artifacts.
Stair Step Artifact: This is seen as a “stair
step” on the edges of a multi-planar
reformatted image, when you have a wide
collimation of non-overlapping intervals. It's
less severe with a helical scanner - where you
arc getting some overlap. It's fixed by
making thin slices.
Hi- ctf
-
HKv. /V
r
Stair Step Artifact
Zebra Artifact: This is another reformat artifact, which can occur from helical data - secondary
to the helical interpolation process (increases noise along the Z axis). The effect manifests as
stripes (like a zebra) most pronounced on a 3D image. The effect is most significant away from
the axis of rotation - noise is worst off axis.
Blank for Notes (or as a place to draw what your girlfriend and/or spouse will look like after all the
plastic surgery you 're going to buy them when you pass this test, finish training, and finally start getting
compensated for 15+ years of horrible horrible sacrifice).
You murk that frame an 8. and you're entering a world of pain
