Artifacts:
Ultrasound display equipment relies on multiple assumptions to assign the location and intensity
of each received echo. When these assumptions are violated you get an artifact.
Assumptions:
•
All echoes originate from within the main beam
•
All echoes return to the transducer after a single reflection
•
The amount of time an echo takes to return to the probe directly reflects on the object depth.
•
The speed of sound in human tissue is constant - 1540 m/s
•
The sound beam and its echo travel in a straight path
•
Acoustic energy is uniformly attenuated
Beam Related Artifacts:
As stated above, there is an assumption that the detected echoes originate from within the
main US beam.
Side Lobe Artifact: The normal US beam looks like a bowtie, with a central main beam and
off axis low energy beams on the side. These off axis beams are the “side lobes.” You get
these side lobes from radial expansion of piezoelectric crystals, which happens more in linear
arrays. If you have a strong enough reflector it could bounce back this low energy side lobe,
which will be received by the transducer. This will violate the assumption that echoes
originate from the main beam - and it will be incorrectly placed as if it did. This artifact is
typically seen when the incorrectly placed echoes overlap an aneehoie structure (Bladder or
GB). Some people refer to this as “ pseudo sludge” when it’s seen over the gallbladder.
Testable Point: Side lobe energy is seen more with linear array transducers.
n
Strong Reflector
Cystic Structure
Beam Width Artifact: I'he US beam first exits the transducer with the same width as the
transducer. It then narrows to the focal zone and then begins to diverge in the far Held. The
beam will eventually diverge out past the original margins of the transducer. If this diverged
beam encounters a strong reflector, it could send a signal back - which will be assumed to be
from the main beam (within the normal width of the transducer) and will be erroneously
displaced as such.
The bladder is the classic place to show this, with peripheral echoes. A good “ next step"
question would be to show this artifact and have you improve it by (1) adjusting the focal
zone to the level of interest and (2) placing the transducer at the center of the image.
