Ultrasound Transducers and Related Trivia
Ultrasound is produced and received with a transdueer. The device works by taking electricity
and running it through a crystal (which vibrates) for conversion into mechanical energy
(ultrasound waves). On the way back, the waves (mechanical energy) vibrate the crystal
turning back into electricity so they can be recorded. Or something like that... close enough for
what you need to know.
Back in the stone ages these things had a single element resonance crystal, now they have a
broadband transducer array of hundreds of individual elements.
Piezoelectric Materials: This is a crystal (or
ceramic) and is the functional component of the
transducer. It could be quart/., but is usually lcad-
zinc-titanate (PZT). The magic to the material is a
well-defined molecular arrangement of electrical
dipoles. When mechanically compressed their
normally organized alignment gets disturbed from
equilibrium; this can be measured and recorded.
Damping Layer
Crystal
Matching Layer
Resonance Transducers: These arc made to operate in a “ resonance" mode, where short
durations of voltage (usually 150 V) arc applied, causing the PZT to vibrate at a natural
resonance frequency.
High Yield Trivia: The operating frequency is determined from the speed of sound in and the
thickness ol the piezoelectric material. The only way to change frequency is to change the
probe. ^Wavelength changes to accommodate changing velocity in different media.
High Y icld Trivia: The thickness of the transducer is equal to /2 the wavelength. Tower
frequency is seen with thicker crystals and higher frequency is seen with thinner crystals.
Dampening Block:
This thing sits behind the crystal and absorbs the backward directed US energy. It also
dampens the transducer vibration to create a pulse with a short spatial pulse length- needed to
preserve detail along the beam axis (axial resolution). 1'he process of dampening introduces a
broadband frequency spectrum.
What you need to know about dampening blocks:
The differences in a thin block and a fat block easily lend themselves to multiple choice
questions.
Thin Block
"Ding
//
• Called a "Light
Damping"
• Called a "High Q"
• Has a Long Spatial
Pulse Length
• Has a Narrow
Bandwidth
Thick Block
'Thud
• Called a "Heavy
Damping"
• Called a "Low Q"
• Has a Short Spatial
Pulse Length
• Has a Broad
/
Bandwidth
L
High Yield Trivia:
•
Low Damping (high Q) - Narrow Bandwidth- For Doppler, to preserve velocity
information.
•
Heavy Damping (low Q)- Broad Bandwidth - Gives you high spatial (axial)
resolution *fewer interference effects and therefore more uniformity
Matching Layer - The matching layer gives the transducer an interface between the transducer
element and the tissue. The key testable point is that it - minimizes the acoustic impedance
differences between the transducer and the patient. It’s made of stuff that has an acoustic
impedance intermediate to soft tissue and the transducer material.
Testable Point: The optimal matching layer thickness is equal to l/4th the wavelength.
