Interactions of Ultrasound with Matter
Ultrasound interacts with matter by:
•
Reflection
•
Refraction
•
Scattering
•
Absorption
Reflection:
Ultrasound energy gets reflected at a
boundary between two tissues because of the
differences in the acoustic impedances of the
two tissues. A large difference in “ stiffness”
results in a large reflection of energy.
Impedance: This is defined as: Z= Density
x speed of sound. People like to compare
this to the compressibility of a spring.
At a muscle-air interface, nearly 100% of
incident intensity is reflected, ever noticed
how air has some serious shadowing? This is
why gel must be used between the transducer
and the skin to eliminate air pockets.
Sound Wave Reaches an
Interface between two
similar tissues.
Small Difference in
“Impedance” Results in a
Small Reflection
Sound Wave Reaches an
Interface between two
different tissues.
Large Difference in
“Impedance” Results in a
Large Reflection
Refraction:
Handing of the sound wave caused by a change in speed
This is the change in direction of transmitted ultrasound energy at a tissue boundary when the
beam is not perpendicular to said boundary. Remember the frequency doesn't change, but
the speed might.
What influences refraction ? Two Things: ( 1 ) Speed Change - which is based on tissue
compression, and (2) the Angle of Incidence.
This was described by some dude named Snell:
No refraction occurs if the speed of sound is the
same in the two media or with perpendicular
incidence. In other words if one side of the equation
(the angle side or the speed side) is 1/1 there will be
no change.
Sin Angle 1
Speed 2
Sin Angle 2
Speed 1
c2 > c1
Cl > c2
If it hits straight on, part of the beam will bounce straight back and part of it goes straight
through. If it strikes at an angle, part will be reflected and the other part will be refracted -
with the severity of this refraction depending on the speed difference of the two media.
Trivia: “ Total Reflection” It is possible to have
complete reflection if the speed dilfcrence, and
angle of incidence is great enough (exceeds the
“ Critical Angle” ).
Clinical Example of Refraction: As sound
passes from the tissue to fluid - there is a
change in speed (because of the different
compressive abilities of the tissues). T his speed
change creates a “ bending” of the beam. You
see this a lot along the edges of fluid filled
structures (like the gallbladder).
•.
Refraction
Scattering: There are two main categories of
reflectors:
•
Specular (smooth)-The rcilector dimensions
are much larger than the wavelength of the
incident. *Slrenglh of reflection is highly angle
dependent.
/
>
•
Non-specular (diffuse)-The scattering surfaces
arc about the size of a wavelength or smaller.
*Angle has no effect on strength
Smooth Reflectors:
Will Reflect Depending on
the Angle of Incidence
With higher frequency ultrasound beams, the
wavelength becomes smaller and the boundary no
longer appears smooth from the perspective of the
small wavelength. In this case, returning echoes are
diffusely scattered leaving only a small fraction of the
incident intensity returning to the source. Truly
smooth reflections arc relatively independent of
frequency.
Non-Specular:
Will Scatter Everywhere -
Not giving a fuck about the
Angle of Incidence
Breaking it Down:
1 ligh f requency = Small wavelength = Surfaces appear more rough = More Scatter.
So Higher Frequency = More Scatter.
Differences in Scatter Amplitude: The difference in amplitude of the returning echoes from
one region to another corresponds with brightness changes on the ultrasound display
(essentially the number of scatterers per unit volume).
•
1lypereehoic = 1 ligh Scatter Amplitude - relative to average background
•
I lypoechoic = Lower Scatter Amplitude- relative to average background
Absorption: Sound energy gets turned into heat. This inereases with frequency.
“ Attenuation” is the loss of intensity of the ultrasound beam from both absorption and
scattering in the medium. The degree of attenuation varies widely depending on the type of
tissue involved. To quantify the degree of attenuation, people who like math decided to
express it in dB as proportional to frequency.
If you are forced into a math problem, the rule of thumb for "soft tissue" is 0.5 dB per cm
per MHz or 0.5 (dB/cm)/MHz.
It is proportional:
•
A 2-MHz ultrasound beam will have twice the attenuation of a 1-MI Iz beam;
•
A 10-MHz beam will have ten times the attenuation per unit distance.
It is logarithmic:
•
fhe beam intensity is exponentially attenuated with distance.
Testable Point: I Ialf value thickness (1 IVT): This is the thickness of tissue necessary to
attenuate the incident intensity by 50%, which is equal to a 3-dB reduction in intensity. As
the frequency increases, the HVT decreases.
Think it Through: You always use the high frequency probe for superficial stuff right? This
is why. The higher the frequency the more the sound gets attenuated, so the depth sucks. If
you need to see a deeper structure then you have to use a lower frequency probe.
Review Time
What determines the strength of the
echoes?
Angle and Impedance
What is Impedance?
The degree of stiffness in a tissue. The
differences in tissue impedance
(stiffness) determines the strength of
surface reflection.
What is the unit used for impedance?
The Rayl
You will get a big reflection if?
There is a large difference in
impedance. Example skin and air -
thats why you gotta lube it up (gel)
otherwise you can’t transmit any
sound.
Is the speed of sound constant in
tissue?
Nope - changes (via wavelength)
depending on the compressibility of
the tissue (slow in air, fast in bone).
Thats why you have “ hearing bones”
in your middle ear.
How does the machine know what
the speed is in the various tissues the
sound has traveled through?
It doesn’t. It just assumes it’s always
1540m/s - which can lead to artifacts.
What makes the sound have “ bend” ?
Changes in the speed of sound - which
occur as it travels through different
media - creating a “ bending” or
“ refraction” as described by Snells
Law.
More or Less Scatter with High
Frequency Probes?
More - smaller wavelength makes
surfaces look rougher (non-specular).
Causes scatter
More of Less Attenuation with High
Frequency Probes?
More
