Beam Properties
There are two distinct beam components: a
converging beam, which narrows out to a
distance determined by the geometry and
frequency of the transducer (near field), and
a diverging beam (far field).
Focal Zone
Near Zone
(Fresnel)
Far Zone
(Fr3unhofer)
The Near Field (Fresnel Zone): The convergence of the near field occurs because of the
multiple constructive and destructive interference patterns.
Beam intensity varies from: MAX-to-min-
to-MAX in a converging beam.
The near field length is dependent on:
Transducer Frequency and Transducer
Diameter.
Testable Point:
•Higher Transducer Frequency
Longer Near Field
•Larger Diameter Element = Longer
Near Field
nNormal” Probe
High Frequency; Large Probe
longer Near
Divergence
The Far Field (Fraunhofer Zone) - This is where the beam diverges. As the beam diverges the
ability to distinguish two objects close to one another is reduced. The divergence is less with a
high frequency big probe and more with a low frequency small probe. Ultrasound intensity in the
far field gradually decreases with distance.
Intensity- The intensity of the beam is the power (measured in watts) flowing through a unit
area. The power of the beam is not uniform along its length or width. T his is caused by a variety
of factors.
•
The beam lacks clearly defined edges and the intensity will decrease from the
center
outward - sometimes called “ beam spread"
•
The maximum sound pressure is always found along the acoustic axis (centerline)
•
Divergence of the beam in the far field causes the power to be spread over a larger area.
•
Interference occurs from numerous point sources interacting in the near field. *Lcss with a
broadband transducer
Focal Depth / Zone - I he point at which the beam is at its narrowest and the area of
maximum intensity. It's the spot between the converging and diverging beams. You get your
best echoes here and you get your best lateral resolution here.
i
If you tried to image this round lesion in
the far field - you would get shitty
resolution because your field is diverging.
If you stick the round lesion in the focal zone
- you are going to maximize your beam
density and get your best “lateral resolution"
or “side-to-side” resolution.
“ Focusing” - I his is a concept where you try and converge / narrow the ultrasound beam,
again with the goal of improving the lateral resolution. Your two main strategies for focusing
arc (1) Mechanical, and (2) Electronic.
Mechanical - By using a concave face you can set a fixed local depth / zone. You do the same
thing by slapping a concave acoustic lens on the front.
Electronic - A shallow focus can be achieved by firing the inner transducers in a symmetrical
pattern. A longer focus can be achieved by reducing the delay time differences among the
transducers elements (resulting in more distal beam convergence). Lastly you imply multiple
focal zones. All of these are phased array tricks.
-i
r
The “ Stand Off Pad”
Scanning very superficial things is made much easier with a “stand off pad.”
WTF is a “ stand off pad” ? - It’s basically a block of ultrasound gel - or something
with low impedance that you can scan through. As a rare piece of practical
knowledge (low yield for boards) if you have a burn patient or someone with very
painful skin you can submerge their hand / foot in water and use the water as a
standoff pad. That way you don’t have to touch their sensitive skin / wound with
the ultrasound probe. Also works great in Peds - even sick kids like water. Try that
shit sometime - tell your attending you thought of it and blow their mind - they will
probably be so impressed that they will have you write it up (with their name on it
of course).
Why does it work? It works by moving things in the superficial region (the near
zone) into the focal zone. Remember lateral resolution is shitty in the near zone
(and in the far zone) — it maximizes right at the focal zone, so that’s where you
want to put stuff.
Superficial nodule
- in the near zone
Stand Off Pad
