Artifacts Associated with Multiple Echoes:
These artifacts violate the assumption that an echo returns to the transducer after a single
reflection and that the depth of the object is related to the time for the round trip.
Reverberation Artifact: If the sound wave encounters two parallel highly reflective surfaces,
the echoes generated from a primary ultrasound beam may be repeatedly reflected back and
forth (like a game of pong) before eventually returning to the transducer for detection.
1 his is
recorded and displayed as multiple echoes, with the echoes that return after a single
reflection being displayed appropriately and sequential echoes (which take longer to return to
the transducer), erroneously placed at an increased distance from the transducer. T his looks
like multiple equidistantly spaced linear reflections.
Comet Tail Artifact: A form of reverberation. This time our two parallel highly reflective
surfaces are closer together which means the sequential echoes are closely spaced.
I he space
between them may be less than ‘/2 the spatial pulse length (SPL) - which as mentioned above
was the minimal distance needed for axial resolution. As a result, the displayed echoes will
look like a triangle, instead of linear lines.
Why a triangle and not a square ? The later echoes get attenuated and have decreased
amplitude. T his decreased amplitude is manifested on the display as decreased width. So you
get a tapering triangle (or comet tail).
Ring Down Artifact: The mechanism for this one is slightly different. Instead of
encountering two parallel highly reflective surfaces, our sound wave encounters fluid trapped
between a tetrahedron of air bubbles. The vibrations create a nearly continuous sound wave
transmitted back to the probe. You see this as a line or series of parallel bands extending
posterior to a collection of gas.
Mirror Image Artifact: Like other artifact
in this category, this is created hy the false
assumption that an echo returns to the
transducer after a single reflection. In this
situation the ultrasound beam passes through
a highly reflective surface, then gets
repeatedly reflected between the back side of
the reflector and the adjacent structure. This
is displayed as a duplication equidistant from
but deep to the strongly reflective interface.
A
V
-
;
Mirror Image Artifact
The classic location is along the liver / lung interface as shown - with liver parenchyma where
you should have lung.
Artifacts from Multiple Echoes
Reverberation
Two parallel highly reflective
surfaces -
Multiple equidistantly
spaced linear reflections.
Comet Tail
Two parallel highly reflective
surfaces - closer together (< 1/2 SPL)
Triangle (comet) shaped
Ring Down
Artifact
f luid trapped between a tetrahedron
of air bubbles
Parallel band extending
posterior to a collection of
gas
Mirror Image
Trapped behind a strong reflector
This is almost always shown
with the liver on lung.
