Ultrasound
PROMETHEUS LIONHART, M.D.
Sound is not light. Sound requires a medium to travel in. It's best to think of sound as a
mechanical energy that produces vibrations when propagating through material. These
vibrations produce alternating areas of: High Pressure (compression) and Low Pressure
(Rarefaction).
OO
IO°o
ooo
ooogo8°
oo
/ \
ogo8°
uo
High Pressure
(Compression)
Low Pressure
(Rarefaction)
OOogo8°
ooo
8°8°
Frequency: This is the rate of change between compression and rarefaction - given in Hertz.
In other words, its the number of times the wave oscillates through a cycle each second.
Wavelength: The distance between areas of compression.
Remember this from general chemistry? Speed
Wavelength x Frequency
Wavelength
Frequency
Speed is thought of as being constant (in a particular medium), so that an increase in
frequency decreases the wavelength - and vice versa.
Speed in Different Materials: This is based on the compressibility of something. Things that
are very compressible (air) will have a very low speed. Things that are not very compressible
(bone) will have a very fast speed. The ultrasound machine is stupid - and just assumes
everything travels at 1540 m/s in tissue. The fact that the machine thinks speed is constant
is a source of artifacts (discussed later).
Speeds effect on frequency- None. The frequency is the same, irrelevant of the sound speed in
various media. Therefore the wavelength changes in media.
Wave Interference Patterns: Modern ultrasound machines make a bunch of different sound
beams. These sound beams can either have “ constructive effects” and help each other
increase the amplitude, “ destructive effects” and hurt each other-decrease the amplitude, or
complex effects and be complex. These interactions are important in shaping and steering the
beam.
* A
i
i ^
n
s
n
A
a
Q
As the waves collide they build each other up, or tear each other down, in a pattern that can
be manipulated (lots of math) giving the probe the ability to steer the direction of the wave.
