Safety
Two acoustic output parameters arc used as indicators of the potential for biologic cllcct.
•Thermal Index - this is the maximum temperature rise in tissue secondary to energy
absorption. T his is based on a homogeneous tissue model with certain instrument
parameters.
•Mechanical Index-this is how likely it is that cavitation will occur considering peak
rarefaction pressure and frequency. This index is the indicator of mechanical bioeffccts
(streaming and cavitation). This matters the most with contrast enhanced US.
Cavitation - Sonically generated activity in compressible bodies composed of gas and/or
vapor. T his can be sub-classified as either stable or transient.
•Stable Cavitation - Micro bubbles are already present in the media. They expand and
contract as the waves cycle (responding to pressure). T his occurs at low and intermediate
ultrasound intensities (as used clinically). The MI is an estimate for producing cavitation.
•Transient Cavitation-“ The violent one” - Bubble oscillations become so large that the
bubbles collapse. This collapse results in shock waves rippling through tissue planes
causing tissue damage.
Testable Trivia: The rate of energy absorption increases with frequency. Eventually the rise
in temperature slows secondary to conduction and perfusion with an eventual steady state.
Testable Trivia: Thermal induced damage is a threshold phenomenon (you get no tissue
damage until a certain temperature is reached).
Testable Trivia: Cavitation is most likely to occur with low frequency and high pressure.
Testable Trivia: Spectral Doppler deposits more heat compared to gray-scale ultrasound.
Testable Trivia: Per the NCRP - a risk-benefit decision when the TI exceeds a value of 1.0
and the MI exceeds a value of 0.5.
Obstetrics:
I he bottom line is ultrasound has been around for fucking ever, and there has never ever ever
been a single case of a human fetus injured by it. 1 laving said that. Radiologists arc massive
cowards so caution is still advised.
Since temperature rises arc most likely at bone surfaces and adjacent soft tissues, a baby with
increasing mineralization (2nd and 3rd trimester) has the theoretical risk of the possibility of
heating sensitive tissues such as brain and spinal cord.
Testable Trivia: There are actually different “ thermal indexes” for soft tissue, bone, and
cranium. “ Soft tissue Index” should be used in early gestation, “ Bone index” should be used
after 10 weeks (2nd and 3rd Trimester), when bone ossification is evident.
General Recommendations (not at all evidenced based) for 1st Trimester:
- Pulsed dopplcr (spectral, power, and color) should NOT be routinely used
- M-mode US is recommended instead of spectral Dopplcr US to document heart rate
- Keep the TI under 1.0 (some sources say 0.7).
- Scanning maternal uterine arteries with dopplcr is probably ok (as long as the Ictus is
outside the beam)
Thermal Index:
-Below 0.7 - for OB imaging
-Between 1.0 - 1.5 - US should NOT exceed 30 mins
-Between 2.5 - 3.0 - US should NOT exceed 1 min
-Greater than 3.0 - US should NOT be used.
Blank for Notes (or you could use this page to list all the exotic places you are going to vacation when
you pass this test. finish training, and finally start getting compensated for 15 + years of horrible horrible
sacrifice).
“ Hell, I can get you a toe by 3 o clock this afternoon
with nail polish ”
