Doppler Artifacts:
Aliasing - Super high velocities are displayed as low (negative). On a spectral system it looks
like the spectrum is cut off and “ wrapped around the baseline", reappearing on the opposite
end.
Testable Trivia: This artifact occurs when the doppler shift is greater than a threshold called the
“ Nyquist frequency”
Nyquist limit (kHz) = 1/2 x pulse repetition frequency (PRF)
Example: A frequency shift of 3.5 kHz requires a PRF of 7 kHz to avoid aliasing.
Aliasing can be reduced or eliminated by:
•
Decreasing Doppler shift - by either using a lower frequency transducer or using a doppler
angle closer to 90 (increasing the angle)
•
Increasing the Pulse Repetition Frequency (which will increase your Nyquist) or selecting
a sample volume at a lesser depth or increasing the scale.
Tissue Vibration: T his occurs secondary to turbulent blood How. The doppler shows a mixture
of red and blue colors. The classic example is a A-V Fistula in a kidney post biopsy.
Mirror Image: Just like the gray scale version, this occurs secondary to a vessel adjacent to a
highly reflective surface, such as the lung. This results in the duplication of the structure being
evaluated. The classic locations arc the subdiaphragmatic region of the liver and the
supraclavicular region.
Twinkle Artifact: This occurs behind strongly reflecting surfaces such as calcifications. It
manifests as a noisy spectrum with rapid fluctuation of red and blue colors.
Testable Trivia: This artifact has a greater sensitivity for detection of small stones than acoustic
shadowing.
Testable Trivia: T his is highly dependent on machine settings and how round the reflecting
surface is (more rough = more twinkle).
Pseudoflow (Pseudoblood) Artifact: Things that move like blood but aren 't. The classic
example is ureteral jets.
Plash Artifact: This is a burst of color filling the screen. It's secondary to transducer or patient
motion. The classic example is the “ fetal kick!”
Color Bleed - This looks like color extending beyond the vessel wall. It can decrease sensitivity
to thrombus or stenosis.
Making it better: Decrease the color gain.
