Beta Minus Decay: The solution to the
problem is to take one of your neutrons
(you've got extra) and turn it into a
proton.
This change from a neutron to a proton
results in the emission of a "beta
particle” from the nucleus.
WTF is a “ Beta Particle ” ? - It’s
basically an electron. Why not just call it
an electron? Because “ Real Electrons”
don't come from the nucleus. This pansy
ass electron is a “ beta male” electron -
being omitted from the nucleus.
Why is an electron (beta particle) being ejected? There are two reasons. (1) You need to change
the charge of a neutron from neutral to positive. It's best to think about neutrons as being 1/2
negative and 1/2 positive. If you eject the negative part, then you become all positive. The
second reason (2) is to balance out the energy loss - going from a neutron to proton. In this task
the positron doesn’t always get it done, so you have to emit a massless piece of shit called a
“ neutrino” just to balance out the energy.
What kind of a process is this (what fancy general chemistry vocabulary word) ? I his process is
a ISOBARIC transition. WTF does that mean? It means that the MASS DID NOT CHANGE.
Yes, the atomic number changed (it increased - since you gained a proton), but because the mass
of a neutron and proton are about the same (and the mass of an electron is pretty much nothing)
the mass number remained constant.
Is Beta Minus Good For Imaging? No... it’s shit. But it can cause some damage.
If you had a Beta Emitter in a syringe would you want a lead shield or a plastic shield to block
those beta particles (electrons) ? You want plastic - because plastic has a low Z. Lead’s high Z
will actually result in Brcmmstahlung x-rays (remember that’s one of the reasons why 1 ungsten
is used as a target - high Z).
N
G«°
£
.' /
—
rthless
-
just u
z
Situation 2: “ Lots of Protons, Not Enough Neutrons”
r
There are two situations that can occur when you have too many protons and not enough
neutrons, and just like in real life your choices depend on how much money you have.
