“ The Rich Guy” - Beta Positive Decay
It’s no big deal for the Rich Guy to buy a Ferrari or take an expensive vacation. It’s also no big
deal for him to undergo beta positive decay. Why? Because he has 1.02 MeV and has no
problem blowing it. Why docs he have no problem blowing it? Because he didn’t work for it -
his Daddy gave it to him.
So here is how it goes down: A positively
charged proton is converted into a neutral
neutron. How does it do that? By giving up
it’s positive charge in the form of a
“ position.” Just like in beta minus decay an
addition POS neutrino is also emitted just to
keep the energy balanced.
*
v
N
N
r
\
y er>er9y)
What is this “ Positron” ? It’s basically an “ anti-electron” or the bizarro superman (his exact
opposite). It makes sense if you think about the proton needing to strip it’s positive charge away
to become neutral.
Is that the end of the story? Nope
The Positron travels a
Very Short Distance -
Then it meets it’s arch
nemesis, a real electron
$.0,0
w\£
T
$.o.o
\\>.
They fight and all our cold war
fears are realized as they
mutually annihilate each other.
y
The result is the product of
TWO 511 keV photons
emitted exactly 180
degrees apart from each
Where does this “ 511 ” number come from? Remember the 1.02 MeV need to be considered a
“ rich guy” ? Well 511 keV + 511 keV = 1022 (or 1.02 MeV ). Basically they divided the money
up and each photon got half. Positron emission is ALWAYS 511 keV and thats why.
Situation 2: “ Lots of Protons, Not Enough Neutrons”
“ The Poor Guy” - Electron Capture
If you weren't born with a silver spoon in your mouth it may be necessary to steal (capture) to be
happy.
Remember you are trying to change a
positively charged proton into a neutral
neutron. The rich guy had enough money
(1.02 MeV) to bribe the positively charged
part of the proton to leave. The poor guy
doesn’t have that option. So instead of
subtracting a positive from a positive to make
a neutral - the strategy here is to ADD a
negative to a positive to make a neutral.
How do you pull this off? An electron is lured
into the nucleus from the K shell. I imagine
the Nucleus says something like "do you like
candy?... I have some in the nucleus.”
©
z
What kind of a process is this (what fancy general chemistry vocabulary word) ? This process is
a ISOBARIC transition. Remember just like Beta Minus, and Beta Plus the MASS DOES NO I
Cl1ANGE. Yes, the atomic number changed (it decreased - since you lost a proton), but because
the mass number remained constant.
Is electron capture good for imaging? Yes - it’s excellent because it’s often coupled to a process
referred to as “ isometric transition,” which results in the emission of a characteristic gamma
photons that can be imaged under a gamma camera.
