Fell Me More About this “ Isometric Transition”
After undergoing an isobaric transition (beta emission, positron emission, or electron capture),
there is often left over energy. This energy needs to be emitted prior to achieving final stability.
One process for achieving this ilnal stability is isomeric transition - i.c. emitting energy and
dropping to the ground state.
Gamma Emission: In most isomeric transitions, a nucleus will emit its excess energy in the
form of a gamma photon. The energy of these photons is variable and depends on the energy
differences between the intermediate and final states of the nucleus undergoing isomeric
transition. Although the TOTAL energy emission for a gives nuclei of a specific nuclide is the
same - many times you have more than one intermediate state - with multiple different energy
gamma photons.. This is why you sec multiple peaks for different tracers (like Gallium has 4,
Indium has 2, etc...).
Indium 111 49
Electron Capture
(Isobaric Transition)
o
\
171 keV
bP
%
171 kev
245 keV
Isometric Transition
245 keV
Cd 111 48 - Stable
Long vs Short - “ Metastable” - In most cases the time spent in the intermediate state is very
short. The transition from isobaric to isometric transitions is like “ bam-bam.”
I lowever, there is
a situation where the intermediate state is prolonged - a so called ‘"metastable state.” Ever notice
that Technetium is called "99m" ? Well that "m" stands for metastable. The main value of this
is the ability to separate out the electron radiation (bad) and the photon radiation (good).
Therefore by using a nuclide that has already undergone an isobaric (election emitting) transition
- you can only exposure the body to the useful gamma emissions from the isometric transition.
Mo 99
Ic 99m
Tc99
t
\
\
Isobaric Transition via
Beta Minus Decay
'emission of a beta particle
(electron)
Isometric Transition
*emission of 140keV
photons
Hanging Out in
“metastable” limbo
for a couple of hours
Tell Me More About this “ Isometric Transition” - Continued
Nemesis - Internal Conversion
Gamma emission has an arch nemesis called “ Internal Conversion” .
The details of this
probably aren’t super important so I won’t go into excruciating detail just know that under
certain conditions, the energy you would normally get rid of via gamma emission can be
transferred to an electron within the atom. This transfer of energy is more than the binding
energy and will expel the electron. The vacancy will lead to a downward cascade from a
higher level - and cither the emission of a characteristic x-ray or an Auger electron.
P
Characteristic X-Ray Emission
Bad because you are
emitting particles - which
can cause harm, not
imaginable gamma
photons which contribute
to the study.
Augur Electron Emission
Alpha Decay
For Completeness - Alpha Decay = This tends to occur in heavier unstable atoms. Alpha
particles are basically 1Iclium nuclei (2 protons, 2 neutrons). Alpha particles are slow7 and
fat. They can’t even penetrate a piece of paper, and are worthless for imaging.1hey can
however fuck stulT up that is within close proximity - and therefore can be used in treatment
situations (i.e. bone pain cancer mets via Radium 223).
