Device
nn • •
I nvia
Personal Dosimeters
Pocket Ionization Detector" - uses a miniature
ionization chamber. They give you real-time estimated
dose, but must be charged and zero'd prior to use. These
are not used anymore - which makes them high yield.
"Solid State Dosimeter ” - Accumulated dose or rate can
be read real time with LCD display.
"Film Badge” - Uses a thin metallic filter with a
radiosensitive film. The degree oTdarkening (relative
optic density) corresponds with dose. They can be
damaged by temperature, humidity, etc...
"Optically Stimulated Dosimeter" - Replaced the film
badge. Chips / Strips arc placed under a filter.
“ Thermo-luminescent Dosimeter” - The ring badge.
Should be worn under a glove, with the label facing the
palm (target).
Survey Meters
G-M and Ionization Detectors - discussed above
Well Counter
Basically a small gamma camera, with one PMT.
Susceptible to “ dead time” at counts over 5000 per
second. Good for urine and blood samples. Good for
“ wipe test” samples.
Dose Calibration and
Automated Dose Injection
Systems
Used to measure radiopharmaccuticals.
Thyroid Uptake Probe
Compares counts from region over the thyroid to a
calibrated capsule of the same radionuclide. The probe is
a cylindrical scintillator detector attached to a PM T. A
positioning guide keeps the distance constant
Intra-operative Probes
Used for lymphoscintigraphy
r
Q/A on the Dose Calibrator (Ionizing Chamber): Readout of activity is made in mCi. The
range of most devices is 30 mieroCi to 2 Ci. Dose should be within 5% of computed
activity, and this should be checked daily.
•
Consistency- should be within 5% of computed activity. Checked with reference
sources (checked Daily)
•
Linearity- accurate readout for activities over the whole range of potentially
encountered activities-checked with a large activity of Tc (around 200mCi) and
decaying it down to less than the smallest activity you would measure for use. Or
the easy way- use a Calieheck© or Lincator© kit (which contains sheets of varied
thickness of lead, simulating decay over time), (checked quarterly).
•
Accuracy- Standard measurements of radiotracers measured and compared to what
the activity should be (performed at installation of the device and annually).
•
Geometry- Correction for different positioning and size (different volumes of liquids)
of the sample (performed at installation and any time you move the device)
Regulations:
No bureaucracy is complete without lots of rules and regulations (and of course agencies to
police such regulations). The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) is where you will want to
look for all your rules and regulations. Specifically part 19 (inspections), part 20 (radiation
protection), and part 35 (human use of radioisotopes) . The “ NRC” is the governing body that
has been charged with the task of enforcing all these various directives. It is possible for
individual states to reach an agreement with the Federal Government to enforce these rules on
their own. These are called “ Agreement States” , and the main thing to know is that they can
be more strict, but not less strict than the national agency.
Radiation Safety / Contamination
Accidents happen. Rules to know for answering questions about spills:
First Things First - is it a MAJOR spill or a MINOR spill ? (HIGH YIELD SECTION)
Major Spills
•
Activity level greater than 100 mCi of Tc-99m is considered a major spill.
•
Activity level greater than 100 mCi of TI-201 is considered a major spill.
•
Activity level greater than 10 mCi of In-111, is considered to represent a major spill.
•
Activity level greater than 10 mCi of Ga-67, is considered to represent a major spill.
•
Activity level greater than 1 mCi of 1-131 is considered to constitute a major spill.
