Minor Spill = You Clean It Up
Radiation Safety Officer needs to be notified
immediately when a major spill occurs, to direct
Major Spin= Dorpt clean it Up, Can
the decontamination process.
the Radiation Safety Officer
Minor Spills
(1) Protect the Patient: If a spill occurs while a patient is in distress, address the patient
first. Once he/shc is stable then address the spill.
(2) Confine the Spill / Limit the Spread: Secure the area and make sure people aren’t
tracking it all over the place.
(3) Clean Up the Spill: Use gloves (wear shoes), and all other personal protective
equipment including a radiation badge. If possible tongs or forceps are even better for
grabbing stuff. Use a damp absorbent material to clean the spill (working from the
outside to the center).
(4) Survey Cleanup Items: Anything used in the clean up needs to be surveyed or
presumed contaminated (held until they decay to safe levels- rule is 10 half lives).
(5) Survey Cleanup People: People also need to be surveyed by the radiation safety
officer (in a different area - to avoid count interference).
Major Spill- what do I do ???
1. Clear area.
2. Cover spill with absorbent paper. Do NOT clean it up.
3. Clearly indicate boundaries of spill area. Limit movement of contaminated persons
4. Shield source if possible
5. Notify the Radiation Safety Officer immediately
6. Decontaminate persons
What ifs:
What if it gets on my clothes ? Take them off
they are contaminated. Clothes will he
held by the RSO until activity has decayed to safe levels.
What if it gets on my skin ? Wash with soap and water (don i scrub so hard you break
your skin).
*
What if there is a Xenon leak?
*
Without alarming the patient, instruct all individuals to leave room as quickly as
possible. Close the door.
•
Testable Trivia = The wipe test does NOT work on xenon contamination.
Obviously il is best if the Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) is involved and doing all that stuff.
In the real world that is what will happen. But the ABR feels that on an intermediate level test
you should be able to perform the tasks of doctor, tech, radiation safety officer, and janitor
(while receiving the salary equivalent of the janitor).
