Star Artifact:
If you have very focal intense energy
you can sometimes sec a star artifact,
caused by septal penetration of the
hexagonal collimator holes. This is
typically seen in the thyroid bed after a
high therapeutic dose (using a medium
energy collimator, instead of high).
V
ft
u
o
c
f j
o
v>
Star Artifact - From Septal Penetration
*Star Pattern is seen if collimator holes are
arranges in a hexagonal pattern
Quality Control for Gamma Cameras
Possibly the most dreaded portion of radiology multiple choice exams (right up there with safety,
and mamma MQSA ). Daily, weekly, and quarterly tests are done on the camera ( BY A TECH!
NOT A RADIOLOGIST!!!) to make sure it’s functioning properly. Four parameters arc usually
tested for: field uniformity, window setting, image linearity and spatial resolution, and Center of
Rotation (COR).
Field Uniformity: So the photo multiplier tubes can have subtle variability in what voltage they
assign to a given photon of light. Additionally, the crystal isn’t totally uniform, and has subtle
variations in thickness. For exam purposes, you want to try and keep these two things as
uniform as possible. A 2%-5% non-uniformity is allowed (1% if SPECT).
The test is known as a “ Flood” , and is used to see if the camera can produce a uniform
image along the entire crystal surface. It's done two ways: ( 1 ) cxtrinsically (with a
collimator), and (2) intrinsically (with NO collimator). You can use either a Na99mTc( )j source or
a Consource to perform the Hood. The recommended counts for both extrinsic and intrinsic
range somewhere between 5-10 Million (Siemens recommends 10 Million).
Extrinsic (Wi l l 1 Collimator)- is done daily. This tests the collimator and crystals.
*
Intrinsic (Wi l l(OUT Collimator)
- is done weekly.
A computer will check to make sure the
field is uniform. You can also visually
inspect the test images, to see if there is
an obvious problem like a bunch of
bullseyes, or a segmental region of failed
PMTs.
Normal
“Flood” - For Field
Bull’s Eye
Appearance of Tubes
Indicates a Problem
Energy Window: The correct window needs to be used prior to each study, therelorc this test
should he performed daily . The most common approach to testing this is to use a symmetric
window centered at the peak energy used in the imaging test. The source can be a syringe, a
vial, or if absolutely necessary the patient. For Tc you would use a 20% window centered at
140keV.
Image Linearity and Spatial Resolution: Lead
bar phantoms with parallel lines, placed between
the collimator and a 57Co sheet, are used to test
image resolution and linearity. This only needs to
be done weekly. Resolution is defined by the
ability to differentiate between two distinct points
(can you tell the bars are separate). Linearity is
tested by looking to see if all the bars are straight
(some distortion at the edges is ok). The bars
should NOT look wavy.
Bar Phantom
— Lines should be straight (NOT WAVY)
Center of Rotation: Gamma cameras that arc used for SPECT have to be routinely monitored
for alignment olTset at the COR (Center of Rotation). The test is done with 5 small 99mTc
point sources along the axis of rotation. The axis should be straight, with minimal
deviation. This is performed weekly.
Lead Aprons / Film Badges / Ring Badges
Why don '1 nuclear medicine techs were lead?
Two reasons: ( 1) Thin lead doesn't stop gamma rays. To stop them it would have to be so
heavy you couldn't move. (2) When high energy gamma rays collide with a dense material
that is not thick enough to stop them (lead apron) they rapidly slow down and lose energy
which turns them into deeply penetrating Bremsstrahlung x-rays- which actually makes the
dose worse.
Correct Positioning on the Film Badge and Ring Badge
*
Film Badge: Should be worn on the collar at the chest / neck level
*
Ring Badge: Worn on dominant hand, index finger, label in towards source
(usually this means towards the palm), under a glove (to avoid contamination)
