Safety:
This is also an excruciating topic for Radiologists to learn about. As previously stated nukes
is full of random trivia, and let’s be honest academic nuclear medicine tends to attract
eccentric personalities... and they arc writing the questions.
Instruments:
•
Sodium Iodine Well Counter-This is basically a small
gamma camera, with just one PMT. There is a hole in the
block of Nal crystal into which the sample is placed (so it’s
surrounding the sample). So this gives you great efficiency
in detection, but has a problem with being overwhelmed. If
the sample exceeds 5000 counts per second (a lot less than a
micro curie), it will be under reported. It’s good for in-vitro
blood or urine samples. It’s good for “ wipe test” samples.
*
Thyroid Probe-This is a modified version of the Nal well counter. Its primary use
is to calculate thyroid uptake values. The device has shielding, with a small opening
that is pointed at the patient, at a precise distance. Dose is compared to a calibrated
capsule of the same radionuclide.
Na I Crystal
PMT
Shielding
Well Counter
*
Geiger-Muller Counter- this is a device used to detect small amounts of radioactive
contamination. The device has a gas filled chamber, which when it comes in contact with
radiation becomes ioni/.cd and creates some voltage between a cathode and an anode -
lots of beeping and clicking occurs. There arc two ways that questions about this device
are classically asked; (1) by just showing you a picture of one and saying “ what is this” ,
(2) by testing the concept of “ dead time.”
What is this “ dead time” ? Although the device is very sensitive, it is also vulnerable to
being overloaded by a large dose of radiation. Then you have “ dead time” as the
ionization must dissipate before it can respond again. The maximum dose it can handle is
about lOOmR/h. So if the device clicks once and stops it might be because of “ dead
time” (it might also be “ dead time” for you).
Trivia - The GM Counter can NOT provide info on radiation type
Ion Chamber- This is what is used when higher doses arc expected. You don't have
the dead time problem, for reasons that don't matter. Ion chambers can be used to detect
exposure rates from 0.1 to lOOR/h (note the unit change ). The dose calibrator used in
most nuclear medicine departments is actually an ionizing chamber.
\
Geiger Muller
- With pancake probe
- Detects ionizing radiation
(alpha, beta, and gamma)
Ion Chamber
- For measuring dose rate
- Used with higher rates
Geiger - Muller Counter
Ionizing Chamber
Very Sensitive
Lower Sensitivity
Great for Low-Level Radioactive Survey
Stable across a wide voltage range -
Excellent for accurate estimates (or
exposure).
Terrible for Very High Radiation Fields
(“ Dead Time” )
