SPECT
What is this SPECT? - The simple way to think about it is like this. CT is to plain film, and
SPECT is the Planar. Basically you take a gamma camera(s) (pretty damn similar to the one
you use for planar) and rotate them around the patient. What this does it give you a 3D look
instead of a 2D look (like you get with planar). SPECT is a single photon system - unlike
PET which uses two photons (from a positron annihilation event).
Just like a regular planar scan, SPECT is not fast. Each projection takes like 30 seconds and
the total scan is around 15 mins. The matrix size is usually around 128 x 128 (for things that
are not cardiac). The scan uses iterative reconstruction to make a picture. Because the data is
isotropic volume, reconstruction in 3 planes is possible. Sensitivity is depth dependent, with
radiation from different tissue origins attenuated to different degrees. Special collimators
with longer holes are used to help improve the collection of photons.
Testable Point: The big advantage SPECT has over planar is improved contrast from
overlapping structures.
Testable Point: SPECT is depth dependent (PET is not).
Tuning Fork Artifact: Cardiac SPECT uses a 180 orbit. When a point source is imaged, it
should look like a point source. If there is an error with the center of rotation (misregistration
error) then is will look like a tuning fork (two lines in one direction and one line in the other).
The same appearance can be seen with motion.
r
Remember, there are two situations that can occur when you have
too many protons and not enough neutrons. The “ Rich Guy"
situation - where you have 1.02 MeV to blow results in the
emission of a positron during the conversion of a proton to a
neutron.
\W
o
.0
A
+
T.o
.o
This positron is going to travel a very short distance (less than
2mm) before it meets it’s arch nemesis the electron. The two fight to
a draw mutually annihilating each other. The annexation event splits
that 1.02 MeV in half creating two 511 keV photons where are
emitted exactly 180 degrees from each other.
y
e<*
PET scanners work by detecting this 511 photon pairs - doing lots of
math to determine their location of origin.
SPECT v.v PET - There are a few differences.
( 1 ) SPECT is a few cameras rotating around the patient. PET is a set of complete rings/
detectors surrounding the patient.
(2) SPECT is set up to detect medium-ish energy photons. PET is set up to detect a very high
energy photon (511). Remember that Iodine 131 - which is considered “ high energy’ in the
planar world has an energy of around 365. So 511 is HOT. The main difference here is the
scintillation crystal used. Just like in a regular planar camera SPECT used Nal systems -
whereas PET tends to use a thicker more robust crystal type (Bismuth Germinate (BGO),
Lutetium Oxyorthosilicate (ESQ), or Lutetium Ytrium Oxyorthosilicate - LYSO )
