Scintillation Crystal- Once the photon emerges from the collimator, it impacts on the crystal.
1 he crystal is made of sodium iodine doped with thallium. The crystal has the property that
when struck with a photon it produces a pulse of light.
The thicker the crystal the less photons will be wasted (just pass through). On this same
principal, thin crystals will let more photons through (without generating light). Energy of the
photons themselves also plays a similar role. 1ligher energy photons will pass right through the
crystal (lower ones won’t). A thicker crystal is obviously better for high energy photons. So
why not just make all the crystals super thick? Apparently you sacrifice spatial resolution with
a thick crystal, because with a thinner crystal the photomultiplier tubes can sit closer to the
event and more accurately localize it.
Thick crystal = Better Sensitivity, But Worse Spatial Resolution
Thin crystal = Better Spatial Resolution, hut Worse Sensitivity
Photomultiplier Tubes (PMT)- The PMTs detect the light and convert it into an electric
signal or measurable magnitude. The more PMTs you have, the more light you pick up and the
greater the resolution. The PMTs record two things: (a) location - on x and y axis, and (b)
signal intensity “ Z.” The X and Y coordinates go straight to the computer. The Signal
Intensity (Z) goes to this gadget called a pulse height analyzer (discussed next).
Pulse Height Analyzer-The function of this thing is to discard background crap, and only
look at the photons from the tracer you are looking for. The background crap can come from
multiple sources (compton scatter, iodine escape from the crystal itself, backscatter).
The texts make a point in distinguishing the difference of background from a point source
versus background from a person. Basically you should know that the Compton scatter in a
person is a lot closer to the energy you want to image, but really degrades the images.
FROM A POINT SOURCE
Tc photon ( p
p
R
FROM A PERSON
Tc Photon Energy Peak
i
Compton Edge
Compton Scatter
°v^
Crap You Want To Exclude
You can set a window that will exclude all that crap higher or lower to the desired peak. Some
cameras allow you to record multiple peaks (great for things like 67Ga and mIn which have
multiple peaks or dual tracer studies).
r
Key Concept: “ Downscatter”- There is a thing ealled downscatter, whieh is super super high
yield. Essentially high energy photons ean spill into the window of a low energy emitter,
mainly resulting from Compton scatter effects.
Tc Photo Peak
«
Example 1: You arc doing a V/Q scan using 133Xe and""’Tc. Xe has an energy of 81keV,
whereas Tc has an energy of 140kcV. The Tc Compton scatter is gonna range down from about
135 to 90 (as in the above diagram “ from a
person’'). So if you inject the Tc first and
image that will turn out just fine. But when
you give the patient the Xc they will still
have the Tc on board so you will be getting
Xe peaks at 81, with a bunch of Tc
Compton scatter all over it. So you totally
hosed yourself, because the Pulse Height
Analyzer can't tell what is Compton scatter
from the Tc and what is signal from the Xc.
The solution is to image with the Xc first,
because the 81 keV and downstream
Compton effects from the Xc would not
affect the peak at Tc (140) at all. 1fopefully
that makes sense. Otherwise just
remember. LOWER PHOTON ENERGY
TRACERS MUST BE USED FIRST.
Xe Photo Peak
Example 2: If you are using"mTc and 67Ga for a bone scan of the spine looking for
osteomyelitis. Gallium has a bunch of photopeaks (93. 184. 300, 393) and an effective half life
of 50 hours. You have to give the Tc first and image, otherwise you'd end up waiting 50 hours.
SPECTand Matrix:
Gamma camera imaging can be “ static’’ or “ dynamic.” When improved spatial resolution is
needed “ SPHCT” ean be performed by rotating a camera 180 or 360 degrees around the
patient. The longer you image on SPHCT the better it looks, but patients just can't hold still
forever-and movement degrades the images. Another thing to consider is matrix size.
Matrix size: Size matters in most things in life, matrix being no different. A matrix size of
128x128 has superior resolution to 64x64. However, a larger matrix size means longer
acquisition time (which patients hate), and reduced count density per pixel (whieh impacts
image contrast)
