Scatter
There are three types of events detected by a PET scanner: ( 1) True, (2) Scattered, and (3)
Random.
True Coincidence - Two 511 photons resulting from
an annihilation reaction are detected in the same
coincident window.
Scatter Coincidence - One of the photons has a
compton interaction and is deflected, but still hits the
detector within the coincident time window (just not
in the calculated location).
Random Coincidence: Two photons, from different
annihilation reactions just so happen to land within
the same coincident window - creating the false
calculation that they occurred from the same event.
Testable Trivia: The number of random events
increases with the dose of administered activity.
'\
\
(
H
\
/
/
True Coincidence
Scatter Coincidence
i
Random Coincidence
Rejecting Scatter:
As mentioned above, you can reject scatter based on the incident time on the detector. Another
way you can also reject scatter is based on photon energy. In the perfect world, both photons
should measure 511. If the photon undergoes scatter it will lose energy, so you can exclude
scatter by saying you will only keep a photon at 510 kev or above. 1lowcvcr, if you exclude
things that are just barely off of the 511 mark you will exclude a ton of true events as well. So, it
turns into a balance of sensitivity and specificity. A tighter window gives you a more specific
exam, but you are going to lose a lot of normal counts (and decrease your sensitivity).
1 he
opposite is obviously true as well.
2D vs 3D
21) Systems - These employ lead (or tungsten) septa to bloek unwanted scatter radiation. The
down side to this is that you arc also decreasing your sensitivity for un-scattered photons (you
excluded so “ good guys” too).
31) Systems - These systems do NOT use septa . This results in a large increase in sensitivity,
and allows for you to decrease the amount of tracer you are giving. Why can you decrease the
dose of tracer? Because 2D systems arc blocking a ton a activity with those septa (both good and
bad). To pull off the 3D imaging you need faster coincidence detector. The classic spots you sec
3D done is with CNS imaging (small object - lots of activity) and PEDs (also small object).
Potential Disadvantages to 3D
• Dead Time - It is possible to overwhelm (and temporarily
paralyze) the detectors if you have counts rates that arc
very high. Another reason a dose decrease is sometimes a
good idea.
• More Random Events - 1 mentioned before that random
events increase as your counts increase. The increased
sensitivity of this mode can lead to more of these
detections and a resulting low level background noise.
• Scatter - Without those septa you are getting a lot of
scatter. So, your coincidence detection has to bring it's
“ A” game.
“ PET Dead Time”
When a photon strikes a detector the
scintillation ciystal produces a light
flash which is collected by one or
more photomultiplier tubes. The
photomultipliers tubes determine the
spatial position and energy of the
event. After that the coincidence
processing occurs. During the total
time required to complete all of
these tasks - the system will not
respond to new events. This is
“ dead time.”
Reducing Dead Time: You can use
crystals with faster scintillation
times - LSO or you can add more
PMTs
Time of Flight
1 lere is the idea, lets say you have a cancer in the anterior most part of your liver. The FDG
uptake and resulting positron emission / annihilation event is going to take place in a location
that is not in the center of the scanning bore. So one of the photons is going to reach the detector
earlier than the other (which will have to travel through a farther distance). TOP uses very quick
detection which helps estimate the actual point of annihilation. The best situation to use TOF is
large objects with low contrast (less background noise - to confuse the math). TOF results in
improved spatial resolution and image contrast — especially in “ heavier” patients.
Trivia - SUV measurements with TOF images are higher than those on standard PET.
r
