Truncation Artifact:
This lias to do with differences in the field of view (FOV) from PET and CT. 1 he classic
example is a giant monster fat person who is so fat that they have several feet ol blubber
outside the CT FOV (and therefore not providing data for attenuation correction). The PET
FOV is larger than the CT so it picks up the blubber but the eventual SUV calculation will
be fucked because of the mismatch between CT and PET.
r
A
o0 V
I
A
,-V
AH
>
Fat Ass in CT Scanner
-Lesion hanging half out of the FOV
Same Fat Ass Now in PET Scanner
-Lesion now seen within FOV
-Attenuation artifact / lack there of results
in the lesion appearing artificially HOT at
the margin, and artificially cold outside of
the CTFOV
Lesions that arc on the margin of the FOV in the CT scanner may appear hotter than they
really are from attenuation over-correction. Lesions that arc outside of the CI FOV - but
are seen on the PET scanner may seem artificially cold because they reviewed little or now
attenuation correction.
Bottom line = Giant Fat People can have artificially lower (or higher) SUV on peripheral
lesions - secondary to FOV differences between CT and PET.
Pre FDG PET prep:
Diet- Fasting for 4 hours prior to the test is the typical recommendation. If they
just ate, they will spike their insulin and drive all the FDG into their muscles.
Minimizing cardiac activity (you might want to do if you have a thoracic cancer)
can be done with a 12 hour fast, and a low carb/ high protein & fat diet for 24 hours.
Hydration- Oral hydration, and frequent voiding decreases the dose to the bladder
and improves urinary visualization.
Muscle Uptake- There are a couple of causes for diffuse muscle uptake; exercise
(most places discourage this for 24-48 hours prior to the exam), eating or insulin
use. More focal uptake (classic forearms from stress gripping) can also be seen.
Insulin- If you have to have insulin, long acting insulins arc better to avoid diffuse
muscle uptake. Metformin is ok — it won't mess with the muscles.
Brown Fat- Excessive brown fat uptake can be distracting. You can decrease it by
(1) making the room warm, (2) giving drugs- with the big two being propranolol
and diazepam (valium).
