Coincidence Detection
So I mentioned before that PET has a complete ring(s) around the
patient. As the 511 pairs fire off they arc going to land on
opposite sides of the ring - 180 degrees apart. A system used in
PET to help localize events and reject scatter is this idea of
coincidence detection. In the simplest terms, for these two 511
photons to be considered a "pmr sharing a single origin point
they need to land on the detects around the same time (within
nanoseconds) or they are not counted.
Inherent Limitation
There are multiple inherent limitation to PET:
• Crystal Thickness (number of detectors) - The thick crystals you need to use to contain those
super high energy 511 photons arc going to result in decreased spatial resolution. This is
actually the primary limiting factor that determines the spatial resolution of PET. The smaller
the crystal used - the more detectors you can have, and the more detectors you have the better
your spatial resolution is.
• Positron Range - The positron travels a little bit prior to the annihilation event. The detectors
arc tracking the position of the event - not the original location of emission. So you arc always
going to be slightly off. How off you are depends on the energy of the photon. F-18 (used for
traditional FDG PET) has a maximum range of around 1mm in soft tissue. Rb-82 - used in
cardiac PET tends to have a little more energy and can travel slightly longer (still only a few
millimeters).
• Angulation - Remember when I said the two 511 keV photons are 180 degrees apart. T his is
only sorta true. Because there is a little tiny explosion when the positron and electron collide
sometimes there is some extra kinetic energy left over which wobbles the takeoff. Usually
these things go around 1-3 +/- degrees from 180. So 180 is a generalization. But if you are
setting the detectors up to think 180. and it was actually 180.5 then you will he off a little hit
in your localization.
• Scatter - The detectors try' really hard to not get fooled - by having coincidence detection - but
sometimes even the best of us make a mistake (or occasional typo). **Sec next page for details.
©
r
