Attenuation Correction:
The CT part of PET-CT is performed for two main reasons: (1) so that you can sec where things
are and (2) for attenuation correction.
Attenuation correction is a correction for the different levels of attenuation a photon might
undergo as it tries to get out of the body to the detector. Think about traveling through bone vs
traveling through lung. The classic trick is the pacemaker (metal) making something appear
really really hot- when attenuation is corrected for. This is why you always look at the
uncorrected data, when reading a PET.
Which one is the uncorrected?
A sneaky trick is to ask you to distinguish between corrected and uncorrccted PET. The secret is
to look at (1) the skin- which will be hot on uncorrccted, and (2) the lungs- which will also be
hot on uncorrected.
Uncorrected
-
Dark Skin
-
Dark Lungs
Corrected
-
Light Skin
-
Light Lungs
Testable Point: Attenuation in PET is depth independent.
Calculation of Standard Uptake Value (SUV):
SUVs are not like H.U. (calibrated to water). There are multiple factors which go into the
calculation of the SUVs, and essentially make it highly variable from institution to institution
and even patient to patient.
The calculation is this:
SUV =
Tissue Radioactivity Concentration at Time Point 1 x Patient Weight
injected dose activity
Fat vs Skinny: Fat has a low FDG uptake. So, it’s actually more accurate to use the patients
lean body mass instead of weight (this is why the value is different from patient to patient).
SUVs in fat people are overestimated (there is more sugar around for the tumor)- this can be
corrected for my using lean body mass.
Timing: The longer you wait between FDG administration and imaging the more FDG uptake
you get. At first the uptake of FDG in the tumor is rapid (rapid in first 2 hours), then it goes up
slower. In other words, if you did “‘delays” you would get higher FDG values. Another point
is that if scan (1) is done after an hour, and scan (2) is done after 2 hours, then scan 2 will
falsely appear to have increased SUV. Basically, you need to do the scan at the same time
interval after F'DG administration if you want to compare apples to apples.
Glucose Levels: This is one of those competitive kinetics things. The more non-labeled
glucose is floating around, the less FDG the tumor can drink. High glucose = Lower SUV.
Size Matters: There is a size threshold for PET (usually lcm). Anything smaller than 1cm, will
be subjected to partial volume effects, and give a false low SUV. Smaller than lcm = Lower
SUV.
Dose Extravasation: FDG is given IV (most things are- except xenon you breath and Iodine
you eat). If you put all your FDG in the soft tissues of the arm, you have less circulating and
get lower SUV. Dose Extravasation = Lower SUV.
Reconstruction Type: Iterative reconstruction can mess with the SUVs. The more iterations
the higher the SUV.
Attenuation Correction: Attenuation correction with CT, also makes an adjustment for SUVs
(the positrons have to go through denser stuff too). The method used for the computer to
calculate attenuation correction also varies and can make comparing SUVs difficult.
