What is this T2?
Remember I said the RF pulse caused the protons to synch up and preccss in phase (which
establishes a transverse magnetization). As time progresses the protons will slowly fall out of
synch and start doing their own thing again. This is the T2 Transverse relaxation.
Time Elapses
Plotting the time vs transverse magnetization creates the T2 curve - which resembles the
downward portion of a ski slope. I like this analogy because it helps me remember that T2Js
shorter than '11 (takes less time to go down a hill than up it).
100%
rocD)
O)
50%
37%
T2 - Decay of Transverse Magnetization
0%
T2
time (ms)
1 ransversc magnetization decay is also described by an exponential curve with 12 representing
the time at which the signal has decayed to 37% of its original value of transverse magnetization
(63% of it has decayed ). Another term often used to describe T2 is " spin-spin relaxation” ’
What causes protons to lose their transverse sync (T2 relaxation) '?
There arc two main reasons ( 1) inhomogeneities in the external field, and (2) inhomogcncitics in
the local magnetic tiled - within the actual tissues & tissue spin interactions. Pure things (water)
take longer to decay their transverse magnetization, and are therefore bright (the opposite is true
of impure liquids).
# 72 v.y 7’2* ?
The signal of 12 decays faster than various PhDs would predict based on tissue spin interactions
alone. The reason for this is that math falsely assumes the main external field is absolutely
homogeneous —
it is not. This heterogeneous field creates additional interaction which further
speeds decay. It is because of this that T2* decay is ALWAYS faster than '12.
T2* = Tissue Spin Interaction + Field Inhomogeneity; "random + fixed causes
T2 = Tissue Spin Interaction ; “ random causes only"
Is there a way to“ Fix” T2* and make it T2? Yes - but let me define a few things first.
[Z M f J
77j
Or “ Time to Repetition” is the time between the initiation of two successive RF pulses
RF Pulse
RF Pulse
RF Pulse
RF Pulse
RF Pulse
RF Pulse
<
»
TR
“ Free Induction Decay" -FID - Alter you give a RF pulse
the protons sync up and you start getting a signal. As time
lapses this signal becomes less and less - decay via T2*
(“ random + fixed causes” )
Technically a FID will be created by a RF pulse with
any flip angle (90 degree as in spin echo or less than
90 degree as in gradient echo).
1 guess an exception would be a 180 as it only inverts
the longitudinal magnetization and doesn't directly
generate a transfer component - so pure 180 RF
no
FID, but otherwise all Flip Angles cause them
T2
> •
t tFree Induction Decay”
/ thought you were going to tel! me how to“ fix” this T2* thing? Alright this is how it’s done.
Remember how we talked about T2 signal “ decaying” to a “ dephased” state over time? Well if
you wait until it's halfway through the dephasing process and hit it with a 180 degree pulse (the
regular RF pulse we’ve been talking about before were 90 pulses), you can spin it all the way
around and essentially restart the process. If you will accomplish two things (1) you will clear
out those inhomogeneities in the field making T2* turn into T2, and (2) you will create an
“echo.”00QIC)©©
-
=>
Immediately
Time is passing
h
Immediately
Things start to
after 90 Degree
- starting to
after 180
return to phase
RF Pulse -
everything is
lined up in sync
decay a little bit
©
180 Degree RF
"Refocusing” Pulse
Degree RF
Pulse -
everything is
flipped to the
other side
