What is this coordinate system
MRI employs a “coordinate system” - to describe
which direction the proton(s) are pointing. A point
worth making is that when you see an arrow pointing
up or down or sideways - this does not represent a
single proton,but instead the addition of all the
protons as a “ vector” . Protons aligned in the direction
of the external magnet field are called “longitudinal
magnetization.” This is the “default setting” when
someone is in the magnet.If they are aligned
perpen(hcu|ar to the Z axis, then they are considered
“ transverse magnetization.”
What is this“RF Pulse” ?
"Z" Longitudinal
<-
-»
"X-Y" Transverse
In my overview I said that you could“slap down” the protons and then time how fast they
bounce back up or “ recover.” (Using the word “ recover” makes you sound smart).The
“slapping” is done by a RF pulse. The pulse is a radio wave.
What? A“Radio-wave” ? Yup —
Remember this thing?
k.
Increasing Frequency (Energy)
r
Radio-waves
Microwaves
Infrared
Visible Light
UV
X-Rays /
Gamma Rays
Non-Ionizing
Ionizing
“Radio-waves” are just low energy particle waves - with much longer wavelengths (less
frequency) than an X-ray. An important (testable) point is that they are NOT Ionizing.
“Knocking the protons down,” is done with a push. Pushing protons that are spinning in a
magnet is a lot like trying to push your 5 year old on a swing. You have to wait until he’s
swinging back at you and you push him as he is moving forward, in other words,you have to
time it just right. Another way to think about this is if you wanted to hand someone something
but they were running. You would need to run at the same speed as them to be able to hand it to
them. It’s an energy transfer.
So how do you know how ‘fast to run” , or “ when to push” ?
There is this thing called the I,armor Kquation.
(Do = yB0
Written in English: Precession Frequency = Gyromagnctic Radio x Field Strength in Tesla
•
(Do is the precession frequency
•
Bo is the external magnetic field strength given in Tesla.
•
y is a proportionality constant called the gyromagnctic ratio
The Larmor equation describes the precession frequency of a nuclear magnetic moment and
resonant frequency of a nucleus, and relates these aspects to the magnetic field strength, ft
basically says the precession frequency yets higher as the field strength increases. The kid
swings faster.
