Spatial Encoding - How do you localize the signal from within the body?
jjfcj Localization of signal requires three steps:
( 1 ) Select the desired slice
(2) Encode spatial information along the rows
(3) Encode spatial information along the columns
The localizing gradients have identical properties they are just
applied at different times and different directions. Because you
have three gradients in three planes you can localize anything in
the body.
— >
(1) Selecting the Desired Slice: The use of a slice selection gradient (SSG) is used to select the
area of interest. This gradient is placed perpendicular to the desired slice plane. The slice
selection gradient determines the view (axial, coronal, sagittal, even oblique).
<2 Selective Pulse: On top of this gradient,
an RF pulse is applied - at the same
frequency as the protons in the slice
plane you want to sample. That way
only the protons in this plane will be
affected. This pulse is called a selective
pulse.
Slice Selection
Gradient
Bo
RF Pulse at the
Desired Slice
“ Selective Pulse
yy
This vs That
Localization Gradients
can be turned on or off.
Superconducting
“ main” magnet is
always on.
Dealing with the ISO degree refocusing pulse: In a spin echo sequence you apply a 180 RF pulse
after your 90 degree pulse. Apparently this jacks up your nice field (especially along the edges).
To deal with this, before and after the 180 degree RF you place two identical gradients (which
cancel each other out) and correct for errors around the edges.
r
(2) Encoding Spatial Information in Vertical
Direction (Phase Encoding): This is the second step in
the process. This gradient is applied causing protons in
the same row perpendicular to the gradient to have the
same phase. All protons at this point will have the same
frequency.
Phase encoding is much longer than frequency
encoding - this is why it’s done on the thinner portion. They don’t want to lose time including
the tip of the nose on phase encoding - this is why it’s side to side in the head. The opposite is
true in the abdomen, where it’s front to back. Breast is an exception to this rule (I’ll touch on that
later).
Contribution to duration of study: The number of phase encoding steps contributes to the
duration ofa 2D imaging sequence.
Duration = TR x Npy x Nex
•••
•OO
/
Phase Encoding
Gradient
TR
Repetition Time
NPy
Number of phase encoding steps
Nex = Number of excitations
(2) Encoding Spatial Information in the horizontal
direction (Frequency Encoding): This gradient is
applied perpendicular to the phasc-ene direction, which
results in the modification of Larmor freqs over the
duration of its application. The end result is column of
protons which have identical frequencies.
Testable Trivia: This is encoding gradient is applied at
the same time as the readout.
ooo
00©
Frequency Encoding
Gradient
Pulling it together
Lets walk through the steps of a basic “ spin echo" type of sequence.
Spin Echo Sequence
TR
RF
SSG
PEG
FEG
Echo
A
A
E
/
7/
//
//
//— %
(1) Slice Selection: This SSG is applied the same time as the 90 degree RF pulse (called a
selective pulse).
(2) Phase encoding and frequency encoding gradients are applied.
(3) Next a 180 refocusing RF pulse is given. Before and after this 180 pulse two identical SS
gradient lobes are applied to help correct undesired spin on the edge ot the slice.
(4) Lastly a second FEG is applied at the same time as the read out echo.
This process is repeated for as many phase encoding steps you do.
r
