(1) Table Time
(2) Spatial Resolution
(3) Signal to Noise
$ Table Time $
Stunna' Island Money unci the Power
There are a variety of things that can subtly mess with table time. However, for the
purpose of multiple choice - all things being equal, this is the formula I want you to use.
TIME = TR x Phase Matrix x NEX
(£) TR = TR is the time between each RF pulse (usually measured in milliseconds)
Phase Matrix = The is the data the system collects from each phase encoding step
NEX = The number of times each set of phase encoding steps is repeated. Often referred
to as "The Number of Excitations ”
$ Table Time $ — Continued
What about slice thickness ? Thinner slices is more time right? Ugh.... Maybe, but this is
exactly the kind of thinking you need to avoid. Stop trying to understand it and just
memorize the fucking formula! It’s probably true that using a narrower RF pulse
bandwidth will take longer to excite, which may result in a slightly longer scan. BUT for
the purpose of multiple choice (assuming it’s a 2D standard sequence) I only want you to
consider the big 3; TR, Phase Matrix, and NEX.
But wouldn’t thinner slices mean more Phase
Encoding Steps? Don’t think about it like that.
Think about it as “ phase matrix.” If you are
going to eat the entire block of cheese, making
30 thin slices vs 10 thick slices doesn't change
the calories - it's still the same block of cheese.
Same Block of Cheese = Same Calories
Are there any situations when the “ Big 3” Formula doesn t hold up? Yes (2).
The first one is Fast Spin Echo. For reasons that will be explained on page 219 . Fast
Spine Echo acquisition time is approximately proportional to 1/Echo Train Length
The second one is 31) Imaging. Prior to this everything I’ve been talking about has been
2D.and unless they specifically tell you that it’s 3D you should assume that it’s 3D.
In 3D Volume imaging you are acquiring
information in blocks instead of slices. This
has the advantage of improving spatial
resolution (you can really shrink your slice
thickness) plus there is no slice gap. 3D
imaging also offers improved SNR plus the
ability to manipulate the angle of obliquity
(great for rectal and cervix cancer staging).
So why not do 3D all the time? The scan times are long - which means money gets lost...
which means the hospital administrator (non-MD) can't afford a second Rolls Royce.
Because what’s better than 1 Rolls? You guessed it... 2 Rolls.
Take Home Point:
2D: TIME =TR x Phase Matrix x NEX
3D: TIME = TR x Phase Matrix x NEX x # Slices
mmmmmmimi
5i
O')c
O
IK U
oc
LU
i IP
&
<D
4 f
.o
w
S'
CO
O'
-C
CL
<0
2D
3D
So
t
(
I
t
t
