GRF> Sequences
Gradient echo sequences are different than
spin echo sequences because they ( 1 ) use a
flip angle less than 90 and (2) do NOT have
a 180 pulse.
feThc advantage to this low Hip angle is faster
recovery, shorter TR/TE times, and a faster
scan. The Hip angle is used to determine
how much transverse and how much
longitudinal magnetization is going to be
used.
Testable Point: Because there is no 180 pulse you are dealing with T2* (not 12). For the
same reason GRE is more susceptible to susceptibility artifacts.
Testable Point: Gradient sequences have a lower Specific Absorption Rate (less heating).
—
f If there is no I HO pulse, how do you create an echo? A bipolar readout gradient (basically a
frequency encoding gradient) is used.
Vocah: An echo in gradient is called a “ Field Echo”
If gradient is so fast and has a nice low SAR, why don '1 we use it for everything? The signal
to noise ratio isn't that great. Plus, you get more susceptibility artifacts.
“ Steady State ” Because the TR is shortened in GRE you can get stuck with permanent
residual transverse magnetization - where the magnetization never completely goes away.
What is often the case is that the TR is shorter than the T1 and T2 of the tissues, so T2*
dephasing dominates. The two main flavors in GRE imaging are classified depending on how
this residual transverse magnetization is handled.
Spoiled (incoherent) GRE: Gradients and/or RF pulses are used to get rid of the transverse
magnetization (T2) that is persisting in the steady state.
Refocused (coherent) GRE: The steady state is preserved by using a “ Rewind gradient.”
Therefore these sequences are T2* weighted. These refocused sequences can be partial or full.
An example of the full refocus is the SSFP (steady-state free precession) which is used in
cardiac imaging to provide a fast sequence with high signal to noise.
TR
Alpha
RF
SSG
PEG
»=
t
FEG
Echo
Alpha
—-fr—
.
EG (FID)
EG (FID)
Spoiled (Incoherent) = Basically T1
Refocused (Coherent) = Basically T2
Echo-Plannar Imaging (EPI ) “ The Noisy One”
!
RF
SSG
Spin-Echo- Echo Planar Imaging
JV
PEG
FEG
Echo
-•
M > M » 1 1
n
f~l n
)
i
i
I
E1
£2
E3
«
E7
E5
E6
E4
EPI can be done with spin echo (90 + 180) or gradient echo (90 + a bunch of gradients). EPI is
MRI’s fastest acquisition method, on the order of 100 ms/slice. One RF pulse is used to
acquire data for an image (aka single shot).
The sequence works by turning the phase encoding and frequency encoding gradients on and
off very rapidly - causing a very fast filling of k space.
(•? Compared to a regular GRE: The sequence is more vulnerable to magnetic susceptibility,
gives you better tissue contrast, and is faster.
(£ Artifacts linked to EPI:
*
Magnetic Susceptibility - can be improved with segmented sequences (instead of single
shots)
*
Ghosting - Gradient imperfections mess with spatial encoding
*
Chemical Shift - A narrow readout bandwidth is used. As mentioned before, a fat readout
bandwidth improves chemical shift (lets a bigger range in), a narrow one does the
opposite.
Testable Trivia:
•
Echo-planar' isthe technique of choice for Diffusion Weighted Imaging
•
Echo-planar is highly vulnerable to magnetic susceptibility (even more than normal
gradient sequences)
r
Diffusion
The base scquenee is either a fast GRE or an eeho planar. Generally speaking, diffusion
weighted imaging works by using two very strong and symmetric MR gradients. The
acquisition is repeated in each of the 3 dimensions in space with b-faetors of 0 and b-faetors
of 1000. The signal differences are based on mobility and direction of water.
Scenario 1 (no net movement): The first gradient fires dephasing the spins. The molecules do
not move. The second gradient fires rephasing the same molecules - giving you high signal.
Scenario 2 (net movement): The first gradient fires dephasing the spins. The molecules move
out of the way. The second gradient fires missing the original protons - gives you low signal.
®Vocab: 1 he direction of diffusion is described as isotropic (movement in all spatial directions)
and anisotropic (movement in a single direction).
“ B-Factor” - The best way to think about “ B-Factors” & Diffusion is to
consider it a type of tissue weighting-just like TE and TR - which as
we've discussed are the factors that determine it you produce a T2, T1, or
PD. The “ B-Factor” controls how much a tissues apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) contributes to the study. The higher the “ B-Factor” the
greater the diffusion weighting.
• >?% i
B500
B Zero = If you set the contribution of diffusion to zero, and assuming
your I'R and TE are long - which they usually are - then you basically
have a T2. T his is why people call the B Zero a “ poor mans 12.” In other
words - if there is something with high signal it’s because it has a long T2
time.
B 500 or 100 = With an increase in “ B-Factor” - usually to 500 and then
1000 - the image weighting changes from T2 - to become more and more
diffusion. In other words - if there is something with high signal it's
because it has a low apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC).
s
v-
L
B1000
/
Aft
\.
y
ADC (Apparent Diffusion Coefficient); - As I’m sure you know an ADC is needed to read
diffusion correctly. The ADC map is calculated by obtaining (a) set of images without a
diffusion gradient (B0 “ poor mans 12” ), and (b) set of images with the diffusion gradient
(B500-B1000). A negative logarithm of the ratios is performed. Low signal is true restriction,
high signal is T2 shine through.
wm
