Signal to Noise X
Noise is random variation in the signal that leads to its degradation. In MR1 the
primary source of this noise is the patient’s body. Overall the SNR depends on voxel
sj^
C-lbiggcr is better), field strength, and some random sequence parameters.
Voxel Size: Anything that makes your voxel bigger improves your SNR (the opposite
of spatial resolution).
•
Thicker slices = Higher SNR
•
Increased Transmit RF Pulse
•
Decreased Slice Selection Gradient
•
Larger FOV = More SNR
•
Smaller Matrix = More SNR
Field Strength: A stronger field gets you more signal. Greater Field Strength =
Greater SNR.
RF Coils: Smaller surface coils improve your signal (increased SNR) compared to a
coil within the scanner.
Number of Excitations per Slice (number of averages): The more excitation you
perform the more signal you get (increased SNR). The main trade off is a prolonged
imaging time.
Receiver Bandwidth: A fat bandwidth gives you a rapid sampling of data, a narrow
bandwidth gives you slow sampling of data. Since noise is constant, the fatter band
will pick up more noise. So. fat bandwidth = decrease SNR. narrow bandwidth =
increased SNR.
(§)Maximizing TR (long) and Minimizing TE (short) - Peaks your signal.
<^
>
Summary - Better SNR If:
Stronger Magnet
Long TR,
Big FOV,
Large Slices,
Shallow (Small) Slice Selection Gradient, and Thick Transmit Bandwidth
More NEX,
Short TE
Small Matrix.
Small Receiver Bandwidth
Appropriate Coil Size
Potential Fuckery -
Receiver Bandwidth vs Transmit Bandwidth
Don’t confuse these terms - they sound similar and would make good distraetors.
Fat Receiver Bandwidth = Decrease SNR,
Fat Transmit Bandwidth = Large Slice = Increased SNR
Narrow Receiver Bandwidth = Increased SNR.
Narrow Transmit Bandwidth- T hin Slice = Decreased SNR
Proton Density - Signal to Noise Specialist
If you ask a MSK guy the utility of Proton Density he/she may tell you “ I like it for the
meniscus." If you ask a Neuro guy the utility of Proton Density hc/she may tell you “ 1 like
it for MS Plaques in the Posterior Fossa." If you ask a physicist the utility of Proton
Density he/she may tell you “ it has a good signal to noise ratio." All of them are correct -
for the same reason. Proton density has excellent signal to noise.
Why?
• Remember the ways you increase SNR ?
• Long TR. Big FOV, Large Slices, more NEX,
• Short TE and Small Matrix.
• Remember how you make a Proton Density? Long TR and Short TE.
See? - Proton Density is basically designed to have excellent SNR
Tradeoffs: Things to Think About:
• Thicker slices will improve SNR.
• Thinner Slices are needed for Spatial Resolution.
• Thinner Slices arc Noisier
• More Field Strength = Better SNR - but more field strength increases tissue T1 times
(and therefore acquisition time via TR).
• Signal Can directly be improved by increasing the NEX - but increasing NF2X from two
to four, doubles the scan time, but increases the signal by only the square root of two.
• Shortening TE will improve your SNR - and it doesn’t mess with table time. BU T for
reasons I’m not going to explain increasing the TE or shortening TR decreases the
number of slices that can be obtained with one pulse sequence.
• Larger receiver bandwidths may decrease SNR but they also decreases mismatch
artifacts like chemical shift or magnetic susceptibility. Thinner receiver bandwidths may
increase SNR but they also increase mismatch artifacts like chemical shift or magnetic
susceptibility.
A
r
