Additional Sequences - Mentioned For Completeness:
Perfusion imaging
•
Perfusion MRI quantitates cerebral micro-vascularization parameters. These parameters
include regional blood flow and blood volume and mean transit time.
Functional MRI (fMRI)
•
The basics underlying fMRI are increased blood flow to local vasculature that
accompanies neural activity resulting in local reduction of deoxyhemoglobin.
®-*
Deoxyhcmoglohin acts as a contrast agent because it is paramagnetic (thus alters T2* MR
signal). Take home point
fMRI depends on '12* effects.
•
In fMRI procedures: First the patient performs a task, then Blood Oxygen Level
Dependent (BOLD) imaging is done before and after the task. The pre and post task
images are then subtracted and overlaid on a gray-scale brain image to localize the signal
origin.
Angiography: 2D time of flight (TOF) MRA, 3D-TOF MRA, Phase contrast MRA
•
2D-TOFMRA: Uses a gradient echo sequence where a saturation pulse is employed to
null venous or arterial blood How. I las a SMALL VOXEL SIZE.
•
3D-TOFMRA: Is collected as a 3D volume, as opposed to slices, and allows for smaller
voxels than 2D. 3D-TOF is well-suited for high flow arterial systems like the Circle of
Willis. Benefits include a higher SNR than 2D. a shorter imaging time, more smooth
vessel contours, and better saturation (which limits venous circulation).
•
Phase contrast MRA: Uses bipolar gradients to create contrast from tlow. I ligh velocity
encoding time (VENC) is needed for arterial imaging, and low VENC for veins and
sinuses. Phase contrast MRA is a quantitative image and can measure mean blood How
velocity and direction.
•
In general: TOF MRA is faster and less sensitive to signal loss from turbulent vessels
than Phase Contrast MRA. Phase contrast MRA has advantages in increased background
suppression and decreased sensitivity to intravoxel dephasing.
r
^ Fat Saturation Techniques yfr
V There are two broad categories.
^
•Inversion Sequences (STIR) that are based on the inversion time “ T.I.” of fat
©•Those that exploit the resonance difference between fat and water protons.
STIR - As described previously, this is a short inversion sequence (180. followed by a well
timed 90). It does great with metal artifact. You can NO T use Gd with it.
J
Selective Pulse: Remember one of the limitation of STIR is that you can’t give Gd with it -
so this is the method used most commonly for contrast enhanced studies.
Unlike STIR which works by capitalizing on the differences in
inversion times. Selective saturation works by capitalizing on the
resonance difference between protons within their respective
microenvironment. For example, protons in fat process about 74 I Iz
slower than water at 0.5 I Iz. This precession difference gets more
exaggerated with a stronger magnet - per that Larmor equation
which I mentioned near the beginning of the chapter (Precession
Frequency = Gyromagnctic Radio x Field Strength in Tesla).
Water
Fat
1.5 T
Water
Fat
3.0 T
l he fat saturation is a 3 step process.
(1) Preparatory Pulse - This is done by
dropping a very narrow RF pulse
just at the resonance of fat.
Only Fat Peak Selected
RF Pulse Sent at
Fat Flipped
the Specific
Water NOj
Resonance of Fat
(2) Spoiler Gradient - This results in dephasing of the protons
primed by the predatory pulse - eliminating their ability to
produce a signal. The remaining protons (the one’s that aren’t
fat) will be the only ones left able to give signal.
I
|
Dephasing “Spoiler" Gradient -
(3) Proceed with the scan as normal - sending the first RF pulse immediately after the spoiler
gradient.
Trivia: This requires excellent field homogeneity
Trivia: This is NOT typically done with very low field strength magnets (less that 1 ,0'f )
because you can’t accurately separate the peaks between fat and water.
Fat Related Topics:
Tf
In Phase and Out of Phase: The chemical environments of fat and water arc different for
protons. This causes these protons to process at different rates, lo create "in and ouUd
phase” images a spoiled CiRK is performed when the protons are spinning with each other
(about 4.4 msec at 1 ,5T) and directly out of phase of each other (2.2 msec at 1.5 1 ).
-> x
Think about this like two runners on a track. At the beginning of the race they arc lined up
together. The faster of the two (water) will get out to a lead - and at 2.2msec (assuming a 1.5 1
magnet) will be directly across the track from the slow one (fat) - this is when they are
“ opposed.” At this point in time their signal will cancel out. As the race continues eventually
the fast one (water) will begin to lap the slow one (fat) - and at 4.4msec will have gone all the
way around and cut him. At this point they arc in phase. The cycle repeats every 2.2msec
(assuming a 1.5T).
N
*
N
N
\
N
N
\
hi
4.4 msec l
s
s
\
M
\
6.6 msec
2.2msec
\
\
\
s
*
s
N
''
/
''
V
^
Out of Phase -Signal Lost
in Phase -
Out of Phase -Signal Lost
Cp-'
The idea is that microscopic fat
will drop out on the out of phase.
Out - Signal Loss
In - Signal Normal Out - Signal Loss
From Fat Liver
From Fat Liver
From Fat Liver
What if it’s a 3T magnet?
Then the changes occur twice as fast.
1.5 T: Out of Phase 2.2 msec, In Phase 4.4 msec. Out of Phase 6.6 msec. In Phase 8.8 msec
3.0 T: Out of Phase 1.1 msec, In Phase 2.2 msec. Out of Phase 3.3 msec, In Phase 4.4 msec
r
Does it matter when (chronologically) you obtain the out of phase sequence? In other words in
you obtain out of phase at 2.2 msec, and in phase at 4.4 msec is that the same as getting out of
phase at 6.6 msec and in phase at 4.4 msec ? Yes/No - But ultimately yes.
The A’o - If you are looking for Hepatic Steatosis. then it docs NOT matter. If the liver is fatty
you will sec signal loss on out of phase no matter when you get it. Out of phase is out of phase,
and the reason out of phase is out of phase is because of the precision differences in fat and
water. The water is lapping the fat on the track.
The Yes - What about Hemochromatosis? The iron liver. Remember way back to the beginning
of this masterpiece of a chapter when I talked about T2*? The quick refresher is basically loss of
signal occurs faster when you have an inhomogeneous field. The 180 degree pulse of Spin Echo
is used to try and smooth things out. Remember in and out of phase is a GRE sequence - so no
180 degree refocusing pulse. Therefore T2* is alive and well.
Think about iron as a “ magnet within a magnet” - and that iron liver magnet is going to fuck the
field up in that local area. So you end up having T2* effects that are even more pronounced.
That is why signal is lost with Iron. Totally different mechanism than the fat. In other words,
Signal is lost as a function of time. The longer
you wait the darker it gets. Whatever you
obtain second will look darker than the thing
you obtained first.
2.2 msec
4.4 msec
6.6msec
-Signal OK
-Signal Struggling
-Signal Lost
Consequences - Let me show you what happens if you don’t obtain the out of phase at 2.2msec
(or 1.1msec on a 3T).
A
Cb
Mb M
!
—
i
; 2.2 msec - Out
4.4 msec - Ini 6.6 msec - Out
:
&
B
2.2 msec - Out
4.4 msec - In
6.6 msec - Out
The Correct Way - Here we didn't wait and
obtained out of phase at 2.2msec, and in phase at
4.4 msec.
Patient A - has signal loss on out of phase = FAT
Patient B - has signal loss on In phase = IRON
The Wrong Way - I lere the tech was distracted by
Facebook and missed the out of phase at 2.2msec, did
get the in phase at 4.4 msec, and then snagged the out of
phase at 6.6 msec - thinking no big deal.
Patient A - has signal loss on out of phase = FAT
Patient B - also appears to have signal loss on out of
phase = FAT? * you see if you wait - you can't tell why
the signal loss happen, and could falsely assume its from
fat drop out
