Chemical Shift Artifact (The Fat Artifact): This will be mentioned again when 1 talk about
artifacts, but I want to just touch on it briefly as it's related to fat. Again, because ol the
difference in proton environments between fat and water precession differences cause an
artifact in the read out (frequency encoding) dTrectiom
(&There are two subtypes.
Type I: T his one manifestation is a bright rim on one side and a dark rim on the other. 1 his can
occur on cither Spin Echo or GE sequences.
^® Testable Trivia: Chemical shift increases with field strength (it’s not seen below 1 T)
^
Testable Trivia: Chemical shift decreases with increased gradient strcniUh
tF Testable Trivia: Chemical shift decreases with a wider read out bandwidth
Type 1Chemical Shift Artifact
ca
e,
o
as
o
Nr
Frequency Encoding Direction
Type 2: India Ink Artifact (Black Boundary) - This
type of chemical shift artifact shows a black line in all
directions of the fat-water interface. On Gradient Echo
sequences, if a voxel has about 50% fat and 50% water
the signals will cancel out - leaving this black line.
Testable Trivia: Using Spin Echo sequences will get
rid of the India Ink, but NOT the Chemical Shift.
Type 2 Chemical Shift Artifact
"India Ink"
MR Contrast (Gd+)
Broadly speaking MRI contrast can be grouped into either “ positive agents’' which cause bright
T1 signal (shortens Tl), or “ negative agents” which produce magnetic inhomogcncity from
susceptibility leading the T2 shortening.
Gadolinium: This is a highly toxic metal that can cause all kinds of badness even in small doses
- including liver necrosis. To solve this issue, Gd is complexcd with a chelate. The toxicity,
clearance routes, bio-distribution, and relaxation properties arc all attributes to the chelating
agent (DTPA).
How do Gd+3 cause a Tl shortening? Gd *3 has seven unpaired electrons, and the interaction of
these ELECTRONS causes augmentation of the external magnetic Held. The field of the
electrons is very short so the contrast agent needs to be right next to the tissue to have an cfTect
on it.
What about T2 effects ? At weak
concentration the T2 effect is essentially
nothing. 1 lowever, at high concentration
(classically seen as a “ pseudolayer” the
bladder) T2 effects dominate.
MRI
Perfusion techniques use this T2 effect by
using a concentrated bolus in the first
intravascular passage - causing a drop in both
T2* and T2 signal.
Tl Shortening = Bright
T2 Shortening = Dark
Pseudo-Layer
From T2
Shortening at
HighGd*3
Concentration
i*
-
Hr/
I
Extracellular Agents: These are the most clinically used agents that have a brief vascular phase,
followed by an equilibrium in the extracellular space. All of these agents are very hydrophilic.
Blood Pool Agents: Keeping the agent in the blood can be done two ways (1) by using a large
Gd ligand, or (2) by binding the Gd to a big sugar or protein molecule
Pharacokinetics:
•Gd cannot pass through a normal (intact) blood brain barrier
•Elimination is primarily renal
•Some agents (Gd-BOPTA and Gd-EOB-DTPA) have more excretion in the bile
