MRI Artifacts
Image Process Artifacts: These include aliasing,
chemical shift, truncation, and partial volume.
Aliasing: This error occurs when an area is under
sampled. You get wrapping of anatomy from under
sampled portions. T his occurs in the phase encoding
direction. You can correct for it by (1) increasing the
field of view, or (2) changing the phase encoding
direction. If you are dealing with aliasing in a 3D
sequence then you can add slices or increase coverage
to cover your field of view.
a n
t
v
mm
Aliasing - Nose Wrapped Around
Chemical Shift: As discussed above, the protons of different molecules process at different
frequencies. The difference between water and fat is around 220 Hz at 1.5 T (even worse at 3
I ).
This shift in the Larmor frequency is the so called ''chemical shift." The type 1 error occurs in
the frequency encoding direction (opposite of most of artifacts which are P.E.).
ri
Type1
Type 2-India Ink
:
Truncation / Gibbs: The transformation of K space through inverse fouricr transform ideally
(but never) resulting in a block of data. Ripples in this data - especially at abrupt intense tissue
changes result in the appearance of lines. You classically see these at high contrast interlaces
(skull -brain, Cord-CSF, and meniscus/fluid). The CSF-Cord interface is the most classic -
mimicking a syrinx.
If prompted 1 would say the cause is limited sampling of free induction
decay. It cun be seen in both the frequency encoding and phase encoding directions but is more
commonly seen in the phase encoding because many times a phase encoding matrix that is
smaller than the readout matrix is selected to reduce time.
Gamesmanship: The classic way to show this is sagittal view of the spine - looking like a syrinx.
Making it belter: Short answer = more matrix. Long answer = Decreasing the bandwidth or
decreasing pixel size (more PE steps, less FOV, more matrix).
Improvement penalty: Increased acquisition time and reduced pcr-pixel signal to noise.
k
*
X '
Gibbsat the Skull -Brain
Gibbs- Mimickinga Syrinx
Partial Volume:
1'his is just like in CT. You have different signal intensities in different adjacent
structures. If they overlap in a signal voxel - you get averaging. This can result in an
intermediate signal from mixing of high and low intensities.
Making il better: Make your pixels smaller. More slices in the /.-direction.
Patient Related Artifacts: These include Motion and Magic Angle
Motion: 'This can be seen with both voluntary and involuntary (cardiac, respiratory) movements.
Motion creates difference between frequency encoding (which is fast) and phase encoding
(which is slow). You will see ghosting or smearing - primarily in the phase encoding direction.
You can also see the classic pulsation artifact from the aorta.
Making it Better:
•
Perform Breath I lolding / i laving the Patient 1lold Still - T his is the best method
•
Respiratory Gating (increases acquisition time)
•
ROPE (Respiratory Ordered Phase Encoding) - Phase encoding steps are ordered with
respiration
•
Breathing Navigator - An echo from the diagram determines its position, then timing and
acquisition are based oilthis.
•
Apply a fat sat band across the abdomen
•
Switch the phase encoding direction.
•...
i
V
/
*
*
A
n* L' Z*
i A
5W-
I
A
n
\
Pulsation - From the Aorta
Breathing Artifact
r
Flow:
I his is a type of motion artifact, related to blood How. Blood How causes ghosting in the
phase encoding direction. GRE sequences are more susceptible to this than SK sequences.
SE Sequences - Flow looks dark. Moving blood that got hit with the 90 pulse, moves out of
the way prior to getting the 180 pulse. Therefore, it doesn’t have any signal.
GRE Sequences: In flowing blood looks bright.
Making it better:
•
Apply a saturation band adjacent to the imaging section - 90 pulse followed by crusher
gradient.
What Makes A Flow Void?
The dark hole of a patent vessel is called a “ flow void.” This is generally a spin echo
imaging finding (as stated above - flow looks dark on SE).
Why does this happen? To make an echo, the proton must be exposed to both a 90 pulse
and a 180 pulse pulse. If the blood is flowing fast it will get hit with the 90 degree, but
then miss the 180 degree pulse. This means no echo, and thus no signal.
90+ 180
/
//*
No Echo
*
No Flow, gets
90 & 180 -
makes an Echo
Slow Flow, gets
some 90 & 180 -
makes an Echo
Fast Flow, gets
90 but misses
180 - No Echo
Magic Angle: This is an MSK artifact seen with tendons. You see this with short echo time ( IT)
sequences where the focus forms an angle of 55 degrees with the main magnetic field (magic
angle phenomenon). T his will NOT be seen in T2 sequences (with long TE). This phenomenon,
is reduced at higher field strengths due to greater shortening of T2 relaxation times.
i
a
%Y
a
*
V
>
aft
» *
i
j
/
/
T2FS
GRE
T1
Magic Angle: You see it on short TE sequences (Tl, PD, GRE).
It goes away on T2.
RF Related: These include Cross talk and Zipper Artifacts
Cross Talk: RF and FT pulses arc not perfectly rectangular. So if they arc placed close enough
together then you get excitation of neighboring section more than once in a single repetition.
These lead to partial saturation and lower signal. So all sections (except the ones on the ends
will be subjected to this).
Making it better: Increasing the gap between
sections. Interleave slices (all odds, then all
evens).
Testable trivia: The 3D images are not
susceptible to this artifact because the entire
volume undergoes excitation with sections
within the volume acquired with gradients.
\
Cross Talk- Overlap in pulses
