Misc Heating / Burning Issues:
Touching The Bore - Nonconducting pads arc used to provide separation between the skin
and the side of the magnet bore, which usually contains both radiofrequency and gradient
coils. Touching the bore = possible burn. Way to prevent? Pad the skin.
Cables, Jewelry, and even Medicated Patches can heat up and burn the patient. Remove
them prior to the scan.
- Douchey silvery shirts - i.e.“ Affliction” shirts , shouldn't be worn into the magnet - they
can heat up and burn. 1lospital gown in the safe thing to put the patient in.
- Closed Loops - It’s possible that a burn causing loop can be formed between one extremity
touching another (hand on leg, leg on leg). The solution is to pad the area between the
knees.
-
"Antenna Effect ” - occurs when an electric field resonant coupling with a wire. When can
that happen? Abandoned Intracardiac Pacemaker Lead - are at risk for this and therefore
contraindicated. Temporary Epicardial Leads are supposedly safe.
Contrast agent safety issues
The concern with Gadolinium contrast agents is Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis. It’s rare as
hell - but is a real thing.
Critical Point = GFR must be > 30 to administer Gadolinium.
Critical Point = “ On Dialysis” doesn't make it ok. You can't dialyze the Gadolinium out.
Accreditation, quality control (QC) and quality improvement
•
Weekly QC for accredited MR scanners (per ACR and performed by MR technologist):
Center Frequency, table positioning, setup and scanning, geometric accuracy, high
contrast resolution (verified by phantom), low contrast resolution, artifact analysis, film
quality control, and visual checklist.
•
Annual QC for accredited MR scanners (per ACR and performed by medical physicist or
MR scientist) includes: Magnetic field homogeneity, slice position accuracy, slice
thickness accuracy, radiofrequency coil check, display monitor cheek
MRI“Zones”:
What arc the 4 zones?
Zone I: No restriction. 1'his is basically outside the building.
Zone II: No restriction. This is the waiting room and the dressing room. This is where
you can screen patients and control access to Zone 3 and 4.
Zone HI: Restricted Room. 1'his is typically the control room, where the MRI tech does
his/her thing. There should be some kind of a lock on the door between zone 2 and 3.
Zone IV: Restricted Room. This is the actual MRI scanner room (the same room as the
magnet).
Zone 1:
Outside the Building
Zone 2:
Dressing Room
Zone 2:
Reception / Waiting Room
Zone 3:
Control Room
Zone 4:
\
r--i
- r'>
J
MRI Zone Trivia:
Are there any exceptions for entry into restricted access zones? Access is restricted to zone 3
and 4 (without filling out the screening forms ect...). There arc NO exceptions to the
guidelines restricting entry to zone 3 and 4. Even if the patient codes in the scanner there
arc no exceptions {per the Kanal article cited below ). The MRI techs should start CPR on the
patient in the room (zone 4), stabilize the patient then get them out of zone 4 —
preferably into
zone 2 for the code team. Depending on who you ask or what you read - it might be ok to code
them in zone 3 (never zone 4). The cleanest answer would be code them in zone 2.
If there is a code in the scanner should you quench the magnet? No!. The magnetic field
will still be around for a minute or two. Plus, that is really expensive and the bean counters
who run the hospital will be pissed. Instead, do CPR then bring them out of Zone 3 and 4.
MRI Screening begins with? A focused history to identify patients who may have metal in
them.
What if the Patient is insane, unconscious, or has terrible body odor and you can V initiate
the screening process with him / her ? You will need to ask family members, consult the
medical record, and possibly do screening x-rays (orbits etc...) as needed.
Kanal. Emanuel, et al. "ACR guidance document for safe MR practices: 2007." American .Journal of
Roentgenology 188.6 (2007): 1447-1474.
You’re out of your element Donny
r
Blank for Notes (or you could make a list of all the irrelevant shit your academic Attendings make you
put in the report - that you are NEVER going to mention again once you pass this test and finish training.
I 'll start you off - "small fat continuing inguinal hernias are present bilaterally")
