Translational Force
If a magnetic object is within the field of the MR unit - that object is subject to translational force
(getting pulled into the magnet). This is the oxygen tank firing across the room. Wheel chair
flying across the room. Stretch flying across the room.
Things to remember:
(1) Don’t bring the oxygen tank into /.one 4 (room with the magnet).
(2) Translational force has NO'l'I UNO TO DO WITI 1 TI IE 5 G LINE!
Potential Safety Risks - There are 3 main categories broken down by the primary systems
involved. (1) Main Magnet, (2) Gradient Set, and (3) RE Transmit-Receivc.
Gradient Sct-
Noise: MRIs arc noisy, and they can be very noisy depending on the sequences you run.
1 he
noise (most of it anyway) actually originates from the gradient coils - secondary to rapid
changes in current.
Testable Trivia: Gradient Intensive Sequences - such as echo-planar imaging are the loudest.
Remember dilTusion is an example of echo-planar.
Testable Trivia: The FDA sets a maximum of 140 dB for MR (99dB for patients with hearing
protection).
Testable Trivia: Damage to the fetal ossicles is part of the theoretical (complete bullshit)
reason fetal MRI / pregnancy MR1 is considered possibly dangerous. The real reason is
Radiologists tend to be dickless weenies (present company excluded of course).
Neurostimulation: Not as fun as it sounds... What we are talking about here are induced
electrical currents leading to painful neurostimulation. You typically here people complain
about this in the arms and legs, where the gradient magnetic field is changing most rapidly.
Trivia: High-bandwidth readouts and rapid gradient switching (echo-planar imaging) are the
usual culprits.
Trivia: Reducing the risk - ( 1 ) Reduce readout bandwidth, (2) Increased the TR
T
Potential Safety Risks - There are 3 main categories broken down by the primary systems
involved. ( 1 ) Main Magnet, (2) Gradient Set, and (3) RF Transmit-Rcceive.
RF Transmit - Receive
SAR - I his brings us to a discussion on SAR. SAR stands for Specific Absorption Rate -
which is basically describes the ability to cook (heat) a patient via the energy of the RF pulse.
The scientific quantification of this is measured in watts/kg
Let's look at the formula - only for understanding some possible questions.
SAR = Bo2 x Alpha2 x Duty Cycle
Let me explain it - because it’s written in “ math talk.”
Bo2 'The strength of the magnet. The Important Relationship is the “ 2.” So if you double the
field strength from 1 ,5T to 3.O f then you doubled your SAR.
Alpha2 'Alpha is the “ Flip Angle.” Again the Important Relationship is the “ 2.” So if you
double the flip angle from 15 to 30 then you doubled your SAR. You can infer that spin echo -
with a 90 degree flip is going to have more SAR than a GRL with flips less than 90.
Duty Cycle - I like to think about this as the “ cool down.” The longer your TR - the more cool
down you get. So increasing your TR, will decrease your Duty Cycle. It’s a little confusing, but
just remember the concept of letting the tissue cool down. Also notice it’s a 1 :1. So Double the
TR - will half the Duty Cycle. 1lalf the Duty Cycle will I lalf your SAR.
Potential ways you could ask a question about this:
( 1 ) If you double the Bn, you do what to the SAR ? It Quadruples
(2) If you double the blip Angle (example 5 to 30), you do what to the SAR ? It Quadruples
(2) If you double the Duty Cycle (make the TR 1/2), you do what to the SAR? It Doubles
(4) Which has a higher SAR, Spin Echo or Gradient? Spin Echo (they have higher flip
angles - especially inversions).
(5) What are the limits? Standards stipulate that no tissue shall endure a temperature increase
of greater than 1 degree C. FDA limits are 4 W/kg over 15 minutes and 3 W/kg over 10
minutes.
