I want you to think about MRI safety in two basic categories:
(1) Potential Safety Risk of the Magnet Systems (of which there are 3 categories)
(2) Patient Exposure Limits (set by the PDA).
Potential Safety Risks - There arc 3 main categories broken down by the primary systems
involved. (1) Main Magnet, (2) Gradient Set, and (3) RF Transmit-Receive.
Main Magnet -
Quick overview into how the magnet works: The magnet is basically a large coil ol wire,
wrapped around the bore of the magnet. When you apply an electric current through the wire
you generate a magnetic field. Obviously the magnet is a very strong magnet so it requires a
shit ton of juice (100s of Amps). To put that much juice through a coil of wires requires you
to maintain a very low temperature (helps reduce resistance). MR scanner keep the wires cold
by submerging the coil (within a canister) in liquid helium.
When the scanner is first installed they ramp it up very slowly (hours). Shutting the magnet
down safely requires a similar procedure. As I’ve mentioned before the magnet is always on.
Mainly because it’s such a pain in the ass to ramp it down and back up again.
Emergency Shutdown
What if you have to shut it down fast? There is a process called a “ quench.”
1 he “ quench
works by venting all the liquid helium out of the room (via a pipe system - to the outside).
Without the super cold liquid helium the resistance in the wire increases rapidly and the
magnet fails.
Two scenarios when (the medical student) should push the button:
1 .
If the patient or a tech is pinned by a wheel chair, stretcher, oxygen tank etc... (med
students and residents will have to wail for a slow ramp down - quenching is expensive)
2.
A fire in the room which endangers the life of the patient or tech (med students and
residents will report to the burn unit at the end of their call shift)
Emergency Shutdown - Cont
Real life advice - Always have someone else push the button- preferably a tech or medical
student. It costs the hospital a TON of money - and they will want your balls if you touch that
button. Have the med student do it - tell him it’s required for the rotation. Then when hospital
administration comes after you - do what your attending would do to you - deny you ever told
him to do it. No one will believe him - especially when he’s wearing one of those dorky short
white coats.
Quench - If the hospital administrators don’t kill you, the actual quench might. The process
alone can be dangerous. Remember it works by venting all that liquid helium out of the room
(and building) through a pipe. Well.... what if there is a hole in the pipe? Have you seen the
maintenance workers at your hospital? Those are the guys putting the pipe in. One little crack in
that thing and the room will be flooded (under pressure) with helium. This is really bad for a few
reasons (1) it will displace the oxygen , (2) the pressure will pin the door closed , making escape
impossible.
Protocol to avoid death:
(1) Have the tech or medical student push the button
(2) Get the fuck out of the room before the quench starts. No one should be in that room - other
than the trapped patient (or staff member). I’m serious - if there is a hole in that pipe your
ass is deader than fried chicken.
(3) If the hospital administration investigates why the button was pushed - blame everything on
the techs and medical students.
Gamesmanship - A code in the scanner is NOT a reason to quench the magnet.
The 5 G Line
If you’ve gone into the room with the magnet (zone 4)
before - you may have noticed a line drawn around the
magnet with “ 5G” written on it.
T his is the 5 - Gauss Exclusion Zone. Essentially
outside of this line the magnetism from the field won't
fuck up you pacemaker, insulin pump, or vagus nerve
stimulator. It’s a risk to implanted devices line.
Important Point: This docs NOT mean translational
force (pulling) can’t occur. 5G has nothing to do with that.
5G
