Kerma
Kerma is a confusing topic, so I’m going to try my best and provide you with (a) some
conceptual understanding, and (b) trivia regarding how questions might be asked.
To start out with KKRMA - stands for “ kinetic energy released per unit mass.”
I know that’s not
at all helpful for understanding it - but I just want you to realize it stands for something.
The concept is this - KERMA is a measurement someone invented to help estimate how much
PRIMARY energy actually gets transferred when you expose a person to x-rays (or any type of
radiation). Why did I write PRIMARY in caps and underline it? Well because I want you to
imagine that I yelled that word at you. So WTFdo I mean hy "PRIMARY” ? What I’m trying to
say is we are talking about the energy transfer from the primary interaction of photons on tissue
atoms. NOT the secondary production of scatter electrons which also contribute to the overall
dose.
What is this "Air Kerma " ? Remember the entire point is to not count all the secondary scatter
etc... II you measure KERMA in the body you arc going to have a hard time separating all the
secondary stuff. Plus you arc going to have trouble estimating the kinetic energy lost as heat. So
someone smarter than me figured out that you should/could estimate KERMA in the air prior to
it interacting with tissue as a “ pure” measurement of energy. If you measured the KERMA right
before it entered the body you might call it Entrance Air Kerma.
Kerma based on photon energy':
Low Energy (The Jeb Bush Photon): If you are dealing with a low energy photon, then Kerma is
going to be the same as the absorbed dose. All the dose gets absorbed - P.E. Domination.
1Iigh Energy: If you are dealing with a high energy photon, then Kerma is going to be MORE
than the absorbed dose. This is because you are going to have photons shooting right through -
not contributing to dose - although these will still be counted in Kerma.
Tissue Dose Vs Kerma:
Remember the whole point of KERMA is to estimate dose. So how well docs it hold up? In
general, tissue doses are higher than air kerma (usually around 10%). Why is that? Because
x-ray interaction with tissue is going to create scatter and secondary electrons which will
contribute to dose - but by definition not be included in KERMA.
What is “ Kerma-Area Product (KAP)” also called “ Dose
Area Product” ?- This the amount of Kerma (potential
dose) multiplied by the cross sectional area of the x-ray
beam. 1'his provides a better way to measure the total
radiation potentially incident on the patient. Think of it
more as a measurement of total radiation used in the exam.
more than the actual dose in the patient.
