Charged Particle Tracks:
When radiation crashes into a biologic material, energy is deposited along the tract. The
pattern of this deposited energy depends on the type of radiation involved.
X-Rays / Gamma Rays: X-ray ionization density is low along the track
Neutrons. Protons, and Alpha Particles: Ionization events occur much more frequently.
Electron Scattering, tends to have a length
greater than it's range / depth.
o *
>
Heavy Particles, tends to have a linear
path that is equal to it's range
Concepts / Vocabulary:
Linear Energy Transfer (LET) - This is the average amount of energy' deposited per unit
path length of the incident radiation. LET is important for assessing the potential tissue and
organ damage. LET comes in two flavors:
•
High LET: Neutrons, Protons, Alpha Particles, and Heavy Ions. These arc MUCH
MORE DAMAGING (“ has a higher quality factor” ).
•
Low LET: Photons, Gamma Rays, Electrons, and Positrons
Relative Biologic Effectiveness (RBE) - T his is the relative capability of radiation with
differing LETs to produce a particular biologic reaction.
RUE = Dose of 250 kV \-rays / Dose in Gy of Test Radiation
Example Problem: A reaction is produced by 5 Gy of test radiation. It takes 10 Gy of 250
kVp x-rays to produce the same reaction. What is the RBE ?
10 / 5 = 2 ; In this example the test radiation is 2 times as effective in producing this biologic
reaction than the “ standard” 250 kVp x-rays.
The “ Kill Effect”
As LET increases, RBE will increase... to a certain point.
Above 100 keV/micrometer of tissue, RBE decreases with increasing LET - because the
maximum potential damage has already been done - additional increase in LET is wasted
dose.
Oxygen Enhancement Ratio (OER) - This is the relative effectiveness of radiation to produce
damage at different oxygen levels. The idea is that biologic tissue is more sensitive to radiation
in an oxygenated state. A testable piece of trivia is that OER really only matters for low LET
radiation. With high LET radiation the OER is often 1 (biologic damage without oxygen =
biologic damage with oxygen).
Direct v.v Indirect Ionizing Radiation: Actions, arc called “ direct” if they act “ directly on the
DNA.” Actions are called “ indirect” if they act on water. The majority of irradiation in living
cells is the result of indirect action on water (your body is 70% water and < 1% DNA). This
indirect action on water creates a free radical which then jacks the DNA.
