Making People Miserable - Lean
If the QA Officer had his way he would run the hospital just like a Japanese car factory (“ LEAN”
is the workflow style developed by Toyota).
Testable Point- This overall strategy involves “engaging” the workforce. *Not just thinking
problems arc solved at the management level.
Huh? Basically- the techs, reading room coordinators, and even the lowest of the low (the
residents) understand the inefficiencies in the process and can have great insight in improvement
of the process.
Testable Point - LEAN = PULL. Memory strategy; Meat Heads (who are big not lean) only do
bench press (a Pushing exercise). Real athletes do power cleans and snatch - bench is for idiots.
WTF is “ PULL ” ?
This vs That: PUSH vs PULL
PUSH = This is really something that happens in industry and not really in the hospital. But it’s
a vocab word so it’s potentially testable. The basic idea is that you make something even if no
one is buying it. On January 1- the board of directors got together and said we are going to
make 500 cars a month. Even if no one is buying them, we arc still going to PUSH 500 cars off
the assembly line into the warehouse. Why? Cuz that was the plan. This seems stupid right?
On January lsl the Chairman says we are going to take 300 chest x-rays a day. Regardless of the
number ordered or the number of patients in the hospital, 300 chest x-rays are getting done.
Makes no sense... so this isn’t the one to pick on the test.
PULL = This is the idea that you PULI, resources to match the demand. The floor orders 10
portables, one tech can handle that and one resident can read that. The floor orders 100 portables
- gotta PULL a tech into help, and bring in another resident to help read.
“ Kandan”
Another “ Getting Lean” Concept, that basically means don't let your supplies run out,
otherwise you can’t do the next case and you have to wait around. So, when supplies run low
you get a refill.
Memory Tool- Kandan = Kan Dan. Dan is the guy who gets you more supplies before you nin
out. Hey Dan... Kan you restock the PICC Lines? We only have 2 left, and 1 usually drop at
least one on the floor per case. If anyone Kan.... Kan-Dan. Dan Kan get you more supplies.
