This vs That: QC, QA, and QI
fhe terms QC, QA, and QI are often used interchangeable to describe the various evil deeds of the QA
officer. I lowever, there are differences and those differences arc potentially testable.
QC - Quality Control
As a resident you are responsible for doing all the work in the department. You can think about the
work you do as "‘generating a product.’
* The product you are making is a radiology report. That
product (your report) is checked for quality to see if it meets certain requirements. 1'his “ checking for
quality" is quality control.
Example 1
"The Readout" -The attending performing a readout is doing the QC. Your product (the
shoulder MR read) is checked by your attending to make sure it meets acceptable parameters. Note that
this happens multiple time a day.
Example 2 “ Berating the Tech"- You (the Resident) may find it therapeutic to periodically yell at the
Tech- For example, your attending disagrees with you on that shoulder MR read. You said the labral
tear was 270 degrees and he thinks it's 290 degrees.
I le makes a big deal about this and embarrasses
you in front of the med student who wants to do ortho and thinks he's learning something by watching
the readout. To make yourself feel better you decide to yell at the l ech. The next case that comes
through is a chest x-ray on a 500 pound vented ICU patient. You notice the right costophrenic angle is
partially clipped. You immediate call the tech room and berate them for their poor quality. You mention
the phrase ‘"patient care" a lot to really make them feel bad. You don't let up until the tech begins to cry.
You like the way it makes you feel and decide that a career in academics is right for you. This process
of checking the film for quality is an example of QC.
Example 3 " Bean Counting"- Bean Counters checks your ultrasound reports to make sure you
mention all the stuff you need, so medicare will pay.
""Can you put an addendum on that and mention
the 1VC???” The process of checking your reports for the I VC is an example of QC.
QA - Quality Assurance
This is a set of activities for checking quality in the processes by which products arc created.
Example- Lead lech trains the other techs to position the patient’s arms up during the body CT
scan. The Lead l ech (an overweight man with a mustache) periodically gets olTfacebook (he is
an avid farmville player) and pokes his head in the scanner room to make sure the patient's arms
are up. If they aren’t up then he has to hold a training session, which means less time for
Farmville, which means he gets PISSED!
The point is to “ prevent” a defect in the product. This prevention is typically done with periodic
audits of the operations of the system.
Quality Control
Quality Assurance
Product Oriented
Process Oriented
Focus on Identifiaction
Focus on Prevention
Indentiifaction occurs AFTER the product was
developed, but BEFORE it’s release
Processes are monitored and tested so that
defects do not arise when the product is being
developed
Typically performed by the specific person that
tests for the defects (Example - Attending doing
the Checkout, or Bean Counter making sure the
IVC is mentioned)
Everyone on the team (tech, manager, resident,
attending) is responsible to some degree
QI - Quality Improvement
Changes that lead to improved performance. A testable difference between QA and QI is that QA
is typically viewed as a stable process. With QI stuff keeps getting fucked up and you need to do
something about it. In my example where the Lead Tech has to retrain the other techs at the
expense of his Farmville time, this would be an example of QI. So, to be clear:
QA- The Lead Tech performs the audit, by cheeking to make sure the patient’s arms arc up
QI-The Lead lech retrains the techs to make sure they understand the importance of keeping
the arms up. During the training he raises his arms many times. I le is an overweight man and
sweats a lot. The perspiration stains under his arm pits make the other techs very uncomfortable
so they look at the floor. I le becomes angry that they aren’t looking at him during his
demonstration and questions their commitment to patient care. The whole scene is just ugly, and
the techs never make that mistake again. The QI intervention is a great success.
Trivia: Another concept regarding QA, QC, and QI is this idea that an active improvement is
hest.
This is how I remember this. Remember when your PD/Chairman said they had to take
your book fund / travel fund away because of Obama? The real reason was that they hired a QA
officer. For that QA officer to have a job he/she has to continuously stir up trouble, and he/she
does that by looking for projects. Why??? Because “ we can always improve.” “ I for Improve, I
for QI”
QA and QC = Old School Thinking
QI = New School with the Slogan “ We Can Always Improve”
