Making People Miserable - The Hawthorne Effect:
Monitoring your work for “ training purposes" - falls under the purview of the QA Officer.
People behave differently when they think they are being watched.
At the institution 1 trained I used to have a lot of “ unproductive conversations” while on night float. Me
and my teammate on call would discuss a variety of topics including (but not limited to);
•
How much I hated various Attendings and the Program Director(s),
•
Which female Residcnts/Attendings I would like to have sexual encounters with (with the priority
debated and ranked),
•
My thoughts on various political opinions (Mexico will pay for the wall!), gun rights- including
my desire to buy a fully automatic Israeli assault rifle (for home protection), the hoax of global
warming, how all the religions arc wrong (except the one I practice), various drugs I 've tried -
including DMT (the spirit molecule),
•
That time I told a Surgeon to go fuck himself
•
That time I told the ED to go fuck themselves
•
That time I told that Medicine Intern to go fuck himself.
Obviously these are not conversations that I would want to be made public or listened to by anyone. If
you take in house call I imagine you have similar conversations, or have similar conversations in the
privacy of your own home.
Now imagine if your chairman / PD told you he placed a recording device in the call reading room.
Those conversations probably wouldn 't happen, and you'd be a lot more productive. That is the
I lawthorne effect- you shut up and play by the rules when you are being watched.
Making People Miserable - The Weber Effect:
Along the lines of making people miserable - the QA Officer enjoys collecting data on mistakes and
errors. Who better to collect miss rate data on then the new guy?
People love to talk shit about the new guy. New attending shows up and everyone starts looking at
him/her very closely. I Ic said this or that. I le missed this or that. Look at the way he cats! If you
ever switched schools growing up you probably experienced this first hand.
It happens with drug adverse reactions a lot. The reporting of “ adverse events” is highest in the
first year, then starts to taper off.
The “ talk shit about the new guy effect”
