“ Standard Work”
“ Getting Lean” concept that is basically the idea of standardizing work (when possible).
Some people might disagree,but 1 think structured reporting style is actually a faster way and
safer way to read. That way you hit all the stuff you need to,in the same order, and minimize
the thinking. It makes everyone’s reports look similar which is nice for the ordering
providers-makes finding the one or two things they actually care easier. As opposed to
people who dictate in blob format waxing poetically about normal structures.
Which of these two looks more “lean” to you?
The liver has a normal contour and morphology.
No enhancing lesions. No focal hypodense
lesions. No fatty infiltration. There are 3
normally oriented hepatic veins which drain into
the IVC. The right, left, and main portal vein is
patent.
Liver:Normal
“ Waste”
Lean Concept - you want to eliminate waste... get lean.
Don’t make more than you need. Don’t make a shitty product (going back and fixing stuff
wastes time). Be efficient with how you do stuff (if you have two patients in the ED both
need ultrasound, - scan them both in one trip). Don’t spend time doing ancillary staff's job
(looking up phone numbers and tracking people down)- it’s a huge time sink. Anything that
wastes your time is waste.
“ Justin Time”
Yet another "Lean” Concept . Basically this is having a smooth continuous workflow.
Example: The ultrasound tech has been doing multiple portable exams,but waits until 7:59
to drop the tech work sheets on your desk, because he/she leaves at 8:00. That way they can
bail before you can ask for additional images,or complain about how shitty their work is (you
labeled the bile duct the portal vein... again). In addition to ducking work, this also causes a
work flow issue for you, as you were just sitting there with a clear list thinking you were
going to leave your swing shift on time,and now you are stuck till 9:30 cleaning up this
ultrasound dump. Ilad they provided you with a few ultrasound at a time you would be way
more efficient with your time. This would be a "just in time ” way to do things. No dumps...
you are working continuously through the time you have... just in time.
r
