Stirring Up Trouble - This vs That: FMEA vs PCA:
Failure Mode Effects Analysis ( FMEA) - This is a mechanism to PROSPECTIVELY identify error in a
process. Let's look at an example of how you can set up the analysis.
FUNCTION
potentja|
potentia|
Failure
Effects of
Mode
Failure
Potential
“S”
Causes of
Failure
Primary
Function of
the resident
is to take in
house
overnight
call so
Attendings
don’t have
to
Misses
Stuff At
Night
Type
Changes-
Pisses the
ED Off
Might Hurt
Someone
Important
Turn
Metric gets
Around
the attention
Time
of Hospital
Sucks
Administrator
Trainees
are stupid
Insufficient
Fear of
Consequences
Insufficient
Fear of
Consequences
“O”
Current
Process
Controls “D”
In-Service
Testing
Milestones
Public
Humiliation
“QA
Meeting”
In this example we have examined the Trainees in their primary function (taking call so the Attendings
don't have to). The potential failures arc listed with the possible consequences of those failures.
“S" = Is a subjective score of Severity. - Rated 0-10
The potential causes of failure for each“mode'' are listed, and
“O” = The objective number of how often these occur
The current processes for controlling the failures are listed and
“I)'’= A subjective score on how effective those detection processes are is given. Successful detection
is defined as - picking it up after it happens but prior to it effecting the consumer. In this case methods
for determining which trainees will be high risk for misses on call are given.
Testable Trivia
• It's a prospective process
• It's super subjective- therefore total bullshit
• Fake math equations : Risk Priority Number (RPN) = S x O x D and Criticality Index = S x O
r
Root Cause Analysis (RCA) - I his is a mechanism to RETROSPECTIVELY identify error in a process.
Trivia = Used for both Active and Latent Errors
Trivia = Retrospective Process (remember FMHA was prospective)
This is essentially a “systems analysis", used to discover the highest level cause or “root cause” or “evil at
the bottom.” RCA uses a multi-disciplinary approach to collect data and reconstruct the events that lead
to the error.
Second Level
Cause *
First Level
Cause
Visible
Problem
Symptom
Root
Cause
P.D. is an
Asshole *
No Time Off
to Study *
Poor
"Trainee"
Morale *
Culture of
Academics
Lotta Sick
Call Ins
What docs "multi-disciplinary" mean ? It means you let the nurses and techs pretend they are important
and invite them to the meeting. There is always at least one of them that is really excited to be there
usually a male nurse /tech who was going to go to med school but insert excuse here (as if becoming a
doctor is as easy as simply signing up).
Both active errors(sharp end- i.e. doctor cuts the wrong vessel during surgery ) and latent errors (blunt
end - system errors, like EMR allows for incorrect dosing of a medication) are evaluated for.
Why is a RCA stupid / almost never true ? Errors are usually multiple- like the swiss cheese ideas
(multiple holes). The idea that one single cause is to blame is silly. Ilaving said that- one single resident
/ tech / nurse can usually be blamed - (and should be) at the end of the process.
Swiss Cheese Trivia = Adding layers isn't always the answer, sometimes that bogs the system down
increasing it's inefficiency. Sorta like government bureaucracy - the cure to bureaucracy isn't always
more bureaucracy (you socialist pig!).
Short Run Goal =“Quick Fix” - Place immediate policy / countermeasure so that it doesn't happen again
(amputating more than one wrong limb in a week is frowned upon). In other words,when you amputate
the wrong leg on Monday - and blame it on the resident, you don't want to amputate the wrong arm on
Tuesday. Mainly because the resident you blamed it on Monday will be tired, and if you try and blame it
on another resident the higher ups might get suspicious that you arc actually the problem. So you want to
place a short term fix - threaten all the residents that you will make them all take call on Christmas if this
happens again. This is not a long term fix (plus some of them might be Jewish / Muslim / or even worse
not acknowledge the existence of a Celestial Dictator)
Long Run Goa! = This is the long term fix- a system fix. Mark the right leg pre-op before the patient is
sedated.
