Radiology Error- This vs That
If you haven’t figured it out yet - Radiology is hard. It’s very very hard. But at the same time
it’s simple (and made complicated by poor teaching at most academic centers).
It’s hard
because in the real world the volume is high and you have to maintain constant concentration for
hours and hours without a lapse. This is why Radiology is much tougher than Medicine or even
Surgery. What??? I thought radiology was supposed to he easy? Yeah... we all did. They lied
to us. Turns out its hard. Medicine and Surgery docs have a ton of walking around / bullshitting
time during their day. They sleep on call (at least part of the night), and they have other people
checking their work (Nurses, Pharmacists, etc...). Radiology is just you, and you get no break.
There arc 2 main categories for fucking up in Radiology.
• Perceptual - Majority, (60-80%)
This is when you didn’t see it. You called the
pancreas normal... it wasn’t normal. There was
a cancer. This is by far the most common type of
mistake. This is why you have to have a search
pattern, and you have to be a fucking robot /
zombie that never breaks the search pattern.
Academic Radiologists often push this idea that
“communication” is why people get sued. It is...
in a minority of cases. The main reason
radiologists get sued is missing the finding.
Slip / Lapse
• Cognitive / Interpretive - (20-40%)
You saw it but you called it the wrong thing. “ Hypodense lesion in the cirrhotic liver is
likely focal fat- no follow-up needed” .... Wrong !- that’s a 6cm HCC. You've heard the
expression “ you can't fix stupid” .... Search pattern won't help you here bro, you better read
some books. Actually, if you find yourself making these kinds of mistakes you’ll want to try'
and switch into an administrative role- something non-clinical like QA Officer. Or even
better, try and get into medical legal work so you can get paid helping to sue other Doctors,
who arc actually way better / smarter than you. You can wear a nice suit, and strut up to the
witness stand. Practice that strut in the mirror, it’s important to have the swagger to convince
the jury that you know what you are talking about.
Knowledge based error
Satisfaction of Search
When I was a young cub my father told
me “ never marry your first girl-friend.”
This turned out to be very applicable to
Radiology as well as life. Marrying your
first girlfriend is a satisfaction of search.
I found one who likes me, no need to
look for anything else. You saw' the
aneurysm- then you stopped looking
(30% arc multiple). You saw one
fracture, stopped looking- missed the
other fractures.
