Second Victim
The wire pulls back as you arc placing the monster IVC retrieval device and you run the pointy
end right through the side of the right ventricle. The patient turns very pale and flat-1ines. You
immediately shout “ the Trainee pulled the wire back!” -even though he wasn't even scrubbed in
yet. You shout it a second time with confidence so that the techs will remember you said it when
they testify in the malpractice case (and the firing of the trainee).
Homicide isn't a billable diagnosis- although 1 read online Obama tried to add it into Obama
Care. It was part of his secret Muslim Indonesian / Kenyan Trojan horse reptilian agenda (Alex
Jones has the documents).
First Victim = The Guy you stabbed in the heart with the filter retrieval device
Second Victim = You....
Tertiary Victim = The Medical Student / Tech / Trainee you blame it on
Second Victim is a concept that refers to buyers remorse / PTSD that you get after you’re really
hurt someone.
This vs That - Mistake vs Slip
The difference occurs at the “ level of intention” -
You make the decision to act- you are driving in an unfamiliar city and you come upon an intersection.
You must make a choice (turn right or turn left)- if you turn the wrong way that is a “ mistake.” If you
decided to turn right, but for some reason turned left instead this is a “slip” - your intention was correct...
you just fucked up.
Mistake = Error that occurs during active problem solving.
You choose to turn right, but should have
turned left
Mistake = In a just culture you get re-trained *more on this later
Slip = Error that occurs during automatic cognitive task. You choose to turn right, but your body turned
left instead. Classic example-calling your wife your girlfriends name while in the throes of passionate
lovemaking.
Slip = In a just culture you get consoled.*more on this later Unfortunately wives arc not just in these
particular setting-you will likely be punished (which is only appropriate for reckless behavior).
Slips can NOT be prevented with additional training, but can be prevented with “ forcing functions.” If
you bite your lip, you won’t call out anyones name and this won’t happen. Or... I guess you could not
commit adultery.
