Prevention
Human Factors Engineering:
More commonly referred to as “ergonomics.” Basically taking the human into consideration
when you are designing a piece of equipment. In the medical field this is more about the design
of a system built around known human weakness.
Examples:
•
People fuck up when they are tired = 80 hour work week
•
People forget shit-so we use a check list.
•
People have egos and want to be rich and famous so they write a book trying to take
credit for the invention of the check list-and title it with the pretentious word
“ manifesto.”
Human Reliability Curve:
This is a human reliability curve. The
idea is that with improvement in “ system
factors” that human performance
increases- but never achieves 100%
100%
S.
I
Human
Error
Succesful
Operations
Bad
Good
Resource Allocation: More resources = more reliability. You pay the doctor more than the
janitor, because the doctor’s job poses more safety risks... Well, sometimes you pay him more.
If he is a resident physician you pay him less- but use guilt based strategy “ 1 thought you went
into medicine to help people?” to get him/her to accept less money. But - you still in general put
more into resources for important things- to try and achieve near 100% reliability, and less
resources into things were safety is less of a concern.
Trivia - You can't achieve 100% reliability if your system contains humans
" It can only he attributable to human error ". - HAL 9000, 2001 a space odyssey
Culture of Safety
Basically - to create an environment that emphasizes safety you need to llrst ( I ) recognize that
complications occur. If you aren't having complications then you are not doing enough procedures, lo
reduce the number of complications you want to create an environment where (2) people can confess their
sins without punishment so that mistakes don't get repeated. You want the Trainees’' / fechs to not be
afraid of you (3) so they can tell you if a mistake is going to happen. You have to be willing to (4)
commit resources- usually time into developing safety protocols-checklists, QA meetings, etc..
Trivia: The “ Al IRQ Patient Safety Culture Survey” is the tool used to measure the culture of safety at a
given institution.
Trivia: This Al IRQ survey is brought to you by the bureaucracy of the Dept of 1 lealth and Human
Services.
