Must Read For Anyone Considering a Career in Academics
You’ve made a terrible mistake and you need someone to blame it on. If you are an Attending the
answer is obvious- blame your “Trainee.” If you are a Resident- 1 would try and pin it on a Mcdieal
Student or Nurse / Tech. You might be able to blame the Attending if he/she is new to the department
or not well liked by his/her peers. That’s more tricky and you could experience what Ron Paul referred
to as “ blow back.” In other words, they may crush you.
What if you feel compelled (the hospital lawyer / risk management guy is making you) to confess your
mistake to the patient or family?
You are supposed to handle it in a specific way— “ the sacrament of confession
(1) Break it down in a wav they can understand. Usually when a patient asks me a question I use
the most complicated medical jargon / anatomy possible to alpha dog them / make them feel
stupid and hopefully discourage them from wasting my time with another question. But in this
situation you are supposed to break it down.
a.
Example-"Remember when I said I would try and biopsy the liver ? I missed and
biopsied the blood vessel that brings the liver blood. Without that blood your
transplanted liver got very thirsty and sick.” “ Biliary necrosis” is the fancy doctor
word.
b.
Example-"Remember when I said I would try and drain that infection in your belly
with a tube? I accidentally thought your bladder was the infection and put the tube in it
instead.” “ Iatrogenic Bladder Rupture” is the fancy doctor word.
(2)
lake responsibility. The whole point of this is to convince the patient not to sue you. To
achieve that goal you want to seem honorable / likable. So this is the rare exception where you
want to actually own up and take responsibility. Now when you have your departmental QA
meeting... that is when you want to throw the Trainee directly under the bus. It's best to not
give them any warning. Just say-“ it would be best - for your education - if you came to the
QA meeting. Please sit in the front row where everyone can see you.”
(3) Apologize-Again I'd never advise this under normal circumstances, but you are trying to not
get sued.
(4) Explain what will be done to prevent similar errors. American culture is all about getting
famous. For most fame is even more desirable than getting rich. To take advantage of this
cultural psychopathology you can tell the patient that they have sparked an entire policy / rule
and that they will go down in the annals of medicine as a famous teaching / learning case.
They may even get a painting in the department. There is no greater honor in academic
medicine than having a painting of you hanging in some random room or hallway.
