Human Error (Slip) - Console
In a ‘‘just culture” you would not blame people for making
human errors. You can't be perfect all the time. Sometimes you just don't see that fucking
nodule, or you thought the ureteral stone was a phicbolith. In reality, we all know what would
happen - the Trainee isn't meeting his/her milestones and requires additional training (more
call).
People Feel Bad when they make mistakes = A just person would tell them it’s ok. “Console
them". A just culture would never punish someone for trying to do the right thing.
At Risk Behavior (Short Cut Taking) - In a “ just culture” you would almost expect humans
to try and take shortcuts- especially when the non-MD hospital administrator is telling them
their pay depends on how fast they get the allergy bad on, through put in the ED, turn around
time for ED studies etc... People are going to try and cut corners.
People will try and take short cuts to meet the unreasonable expectations they are given = A
just person will “ coach them” or “ counsel them” that you aren't supposed to do that... with a
wink and a nod. I cannot approve of the shortcuts you arc taking... everyone heard me say that
right?
Classic example = “ Driving 5mph above the speed limit”
Reckless Behavior (Ignoring Critical Safety Steps)- Not following the checklist
“ manifesto” ??? That shit is unforgivable. Don’t you know that I larvard invented the
checklist? There were never checklists before that book
it’s truly a revolutionary idea. “ 5
thousand” years old- this planet is and only in the last 10 did a human finally become smart
enough to invent a checklist. 1lave you read this book? This guy is using a checklist! You
can't ignore the checklist.
Ignore The Checklist? Even in a just culture = Your ass is fried chicken.
Classic example = “ Driving 30 mph above the speed limit in a school /.one”
Human Error
“You are only Human”
Console
“It will be ok bud”
Risk Behavior
“Short Cut Taking”
Retrain
Reckless Behavior
Ignoring Critical Safety Steps
Punish
