Communication Practice Standards:
**Disclaimer-the following tirade Reflects my (the author’s) understanding of the practice
parameter.
**Disclaimer- my opinion on this document does in no way represents those of the ACR, or
ABR. They are my own opinions.
Do communication standard exists? - Yes. There is a document written by the ACR referred to
as "ACR Practice Guideline for Communication of Diagnostic Imaging f indings.”
Is this document helpful ? In my opinion it is 10% helpful, and 90% very very very harmful.
When 1 first read this document it completely blew my fucking mind. It appears to place you
(the Radiologist) at significant litigation risk for every single case you read, if you don't call the
provider and read the entire report to them. Although, the document explicitly claims this is not
its intention.
Prometheus those are strong words
why do you feel like this ?
I'm deeply concerned about the section on ‘"non-routine communication" specifically part iii.
1 lerc is a brief summary of this section:
Section 2 "Non Routine Communications" ** this is from the 2014 revision.
/- Findings that suggest a need for immediate or urgent intervention (i.e. Pneumothorax ) - ok , totally
reasonable.
ii - Findings that are discrepant with a preceding interpretation of the same examination and where
failure to act may adversely affect patient health
ok , also totally reasonable.
iii - bindings that the interpreting physician reasonably believes may be seriously adverse to the patient s
health and may not require immediate attention but, if not acted on, may worsen over time and possibly
result in an adverse patient outcome- This is where they destroy you. They define these findings as
"acute infectious processes, possible malignant lesions, or other unexpected findings that may impact
patient care if not treated." In other words... anything. Literally any positive scan. Pulmonary nodule?
Well that could turn into cancer- gotta call on it. Possible pneumonia vs atelectasis ... gotta call on it.
Renal hypodensity that is 16 11.U.s probably a cyst but recommending an ultrasound just to cover my
ass... gotta call on it. So if you don't work in academics and have residents to call on all these findings
you literally cannot get any work done.
It's incredibly to me that this was put into writing. Absolutely
incredible.
]
