But you can just send them an email right???
I hey specifically say in this document that you
have to confirm receipt. 1low do you know they read that email?? Could have gone into the junk
folder. Plus there are 1 IIPAA concerns about sending emails. They strongly encourage telephone
or in person communication.
Are they not merciful hy letting you do it on the telephone?
I
assume to make it even more impossible to follow that for the next edition only in person
communication will be ok. You need to walk down to their clinic and tell them about the 3mm
nodule in person.
Is the document actually legally binding? NO Well, they say it’s not. They state that this
document is not intended to set a national standard of care, and that the Iowa Supreme Court
ruled on this. Unfortunately, the wording is such that in my opinion you arc truly at the mercy of
the court.
Plus they throw this line in there “ a practitioner who employs an approach substantially
different from the guidance in this document is advised to document in the patient record
information sufficient to explain the approach taken. ”
Per the document who is the ultimate judgement regarding the course of action up to? It is up to
the Practitioner (Radiologist)- who takes in all the practical circumstances.
Then why all the hate Prometheus? I’m just worried about the following situation. Remember
regardless of what it said- this is still an official guideline from our main national body:
Lawyer: Why didn’t you communicate the finding of a 1cm indeterminate renal cyst ?
Radiologist: I did
Lawyer: Really ? Where is it documented
Radiologist: It’s impression line 3- and 1 gave a specific follow-up recommendation
Lawyer: But did you call?
Radiologist: No... I assumed the ordering provider would read the report for the multi-thousand
dollar exam they ordered.
Lawyer: You assumed??? ACR- your professional leadership “ suggests” that you call on
findings that could potentially harm the patient at some point in the future.
Radiologist: That guideline is not legally binding. Ultimately the judgement to
communicate is up to the practitioner.
Lawyer: So you exercised poor judgement -since 10 years later this lesion turned out to be a
very slow growing malignancy. Did you document in the chart the reason you didn't
communicate this finding- as suggested in the document , since you decided to deviate from their
suggested course of action?
Radiologist: I surrender...(begins to cry) take all my money. I’ll sleep under the bridge
Lawyer: Excellent - My secretary will tell you who to make the check out to.
r
