Wrong Site
If you amputate the wrong leg people arc going to make a huge deal about it.
I get it, mistakes
happen. "To Err is Human ” as the Institute of Medicine would say... but for some reason wrong
site procedures are unforgivable.
Trivia: Any procedure where the patient can't say “ Hey! I thought the osteosarcoma was in my
other leg?” makes it high risk. In other words big risk = general anesthesia or deep sedation.
Trivia: Pre-procedure verification can (a) be done more than once- if that makes you happy, (b)
has to be before the procedure- with the actual time dictated by the hospital, (c) it’s optimal to
involve the patient. “The cancer is in your left leg right?” - “ Right” - “ Right or Left?” - “ Left”
Trivia: Mark the site of the procedure. Especially if it’s possible to do it on the wrong side.
Example = you have one nose, might not need to mark that... but you have two cars... gotta mark
those.
Trivia: For the spine you need to do a fluro spot film (to be interpreted by the Department of
Radiology a week later) for locating and marking the exact vertebral level.
Trivia: Gotta mark the site before the surgery starts. Can't mark it after you amputate the wrong
leg. Also, by the book you want the patient awake when you mark the right (left) site.
Trivia: You gotta mark with something that won’t just fall off or wash off during the prep and
draping. In other words- you can’t use a sticky note (or other adhesive marker).
Trivia: What if the patient’s religion forbids them from being marked (or wearing cotton and wool
at the same time) ? You’ll need to use a written alternative process.
Trivia: Other examples of when you need a written site mark alternative?- Teeth. Mucosal
Surfaces, or Premature infants (the mark could cause a permanent tattoo).
Trivia: Best time to get a permanent tattoo? When you arc a premature infant.
Trivia: The l ime Out- What if you are doing two procedures on the same patient?
You need to
perform the time out before each procedure (you can’t do them both in a row at the beginning).
Trivia: The l ime Out - You need to agree on (a) Correct Patient, (b) Correct Site, and (C) Correct
Procedure. Also , you have to document the time out happen.
Trivia: If the patient is demented (or smells had) and you can t (or don '1 want to) ask him/her for
identifying factors- who else can you obtain this information from? Basically anyone including
relatives, guardians, homosexual domestic partners, and even healthcare providers who “ know the
patient”
Patient Specific Assessment-This is a fancy way of saying a "‘pre-procedure note.” This is
required before any kind of image guided procedure, and involves review of the I f&P, sedation risk
(if they are getting sedation), and review of labs (II&IT coags, etc...). I know... it sounds horrible.
The good news is you (the Radiologist) don 't have to be the one to do it. A “ Qualified Assistant" i.e.
Nurse Practitioner or PA can do it for you. This is why having one of those is 100% essential if you
do procedures- otherwise you will be stuck spending part of your day talking to icky smelly
patients. In academics you can just make your Resident do it.
Trivia- Who can perform to (3) :
•
Radiologist Performing the Procedure,
•
your "assistant"- NP/PA,
•
or even the referring Provider- even better!
