Image Gently
Formed as an attempt to capitulate to the corporate media driven frenzy of radiation induced cancer. It's
basically a social marketing campaign, with the end result being increased liability risk Irom having to try
and interpret shitty low dose scans all the time.
It started out as a Pcds thing- which is actually reasonable in some cases. Then QA officers (who’s job
description is ‘‘trouble maker") decided to start applying low dose protocols to 95 year old patients
because saying you “ reduced dose" sounds great on paper- especially if you aren 't the one who has to
try and read (and accept liability risk) for the shitty exam.
Trivia = There were 3 phases of propaganda in this social marketing campaign
•
Phase 1 = Convince the Radiologists it’s a good idea (easy since most don't understand physics,
and those who do are huge pussies and will do whatever they arc told without questioning)
•
Phase 2 = Convince referring Physicians it's a good idea. There may actually be a secondary gain
to this- in that Family Medicine doctors who might have been afraid to order a Cl on a 90 year
old because of “ radiation" could feel more comfortable knowing it's ‘low dose."
•
Phase 3 = Convince the public that it 's a good idea. “ Radiation hormesis"- it's a real thing.
Google it. If you can convince people that colonics arc good for them with late night
infomercials than you can certainly sell them on needing a CT once or twice a year to help
stimulate and activate repair mechanisms.
Trivia = “Step Lightly" = what you call it for Pediatric IR
Trivia = “ Image Wisely" = what you call it for Adults.
Radiation Risk
Discussing with Patients-Obviously you want to avoid talking to patients at all costs. But sometimes
you just can 't avoid it.
I lere are some tips on discussing Radiation dose
Risk vs Benefit- What are the risks of not doing the exam?
I understand that you are concerned about
developing a malignancy from the radiation exposure of your PEI CT Scan but you already have widely
metastatic pancreatic cancer. Without the test your “ Cancer Doctors" can't tell il the chemotherapy is
working or not. Oh... you aren't taking chcmo- you refused that too? You arc using “ homeopathic juice
therapy" to focus your natural immune system....
Comparison to other exposures- I lours in an airplane or number of chest x-rays
What s my risk of harm from this single exam? Risk models arc developed based on populations. There is
no way to assess a specific individuals risk from a scan.
