Spatial Resolution (CT)
• Shit relative to plain film
• Focal Spol (Smaller = Better) : Determines Spatial Resolution in the X-Y Plane... sided to
side.
• Detector Size (Smaller = Better) : Determines Spatial Resolution in the Z Plane (the long axis
or Cranial Caudal direction)
• More projections, more data. Better Resolution
• Pitch < 1 improves spatial resolution. Pitch > 1 shitty spatial resolution
• Pitch > 1 “ increases slice sensitivity profile (SSP)”. As the SSP widens the slice thickness
increases. Thicker slices = Less Spatial Resolution.
• Sharp Filter = Better Spatial Resolution (trade oil is more noise)
• Smooth Filter = Crappy Spatial Resolution (trade off is less noise)
Spatial Resolution vs Contrast Resolution
•
Holding matrix size constant and decreasing FOV will decrease pixel size. This increases
spatial resolution but decreases contrast resolution (less photons per box)
•
Holding matrix size constant and increasing FOV will increase pixel size. This decreases
spatial resolution but increases contrast resolution (more photons per box).
Factors That Affect Spatial Resolution
Factors That Affect Contrast Resolution
Focal Spot (smaller spot = better)
Number of X-Rays (mAs, kV, pitch). More
dose (less mottle) will improve contrast
resolution.
Detector Width (smaller detector = better)
Slice Thickness
(thicker = more x-ray quanta = less noise).
Nyquist Limitations
“ Sampling” (Oversampling = better)
Reconstruction Method
(Iterative > Filtered Back)
Reconstruction Filter (example- bone
“ sharp” algorithm gives a higher spatial
resolution)
Reconstruction Filter (Soft tissue > Bone)
"CTDI"
CTDose Index - This is the radiation dose, normalized to beam width. There are subtypes-
the difference of which could easily be tested on a multiple choice test.
•
“ Weighted CTDI” - T his is 1/3 the central CTDI + 2/3 the Peripheral CTDI (expressed in mGy)
•
“ Volume CTDI” - This is obtained by dividing weighted CTDI by the Pitch. Remember that
Weighted CTDI is the intensity being used and can relate to mottle.
"DLP” - Dose Length Product- This value is simply the CTDI- Vol x the length of the scan in cm.
"Effective Dose” for CT : Effective Dose = kx DLP. Remember that “ k” is a body part constant.
Effective dose is going to be in Sv.
Artifacts:
Partial Volume Artifact - Fixed hy= Make your slices thinner. If the noise is a problem,
acquire thin slices then generate thicker slices by adding them together.
Fixing Photon Starvation: There are two main ways to llx this. (1) Automatic tube current
modulation. If you increase the dose through the area of greater attenuation you can add
enough photons to overcome this effect. (2) Adaptive filtration can be performed to correct
the attenuation profile “ smooth the data” in the high attenuation portions.
Fixing Metal Artifact: Tell the patient to remove it. Increase the kVp (sometimes works).
Use thinner slices. Certain interpolation software can help.
Fixing Motion Artifact: Tie the crazy patients down. Use a modern (fast) scanner. Align the
scanner in the primary direction of motion (vertically above or below a chest scan - for
breathing). “ Over scanning” an extra 10% on the 360 rotation, with the repeated portion
averaged. Gating - like in cardiac.
Fixing Ring Artifact - Recalibrate your dinosaur detector, or replace the broken part.
