Introduction
This study guide has been created to assist examinees in preparing for the noninterpretive skills (NIS)
section of the American Board of Radiology (ABR) Core and Certifying exams administered during
calendar year 2026.
The guide has undergone a few changes compared to the 2025 version, consisting mainly of updates
reflecting recently published guidelines related to MR safety and contrast administration.
Decisions regarding whether specific NIS topics merit inclusion in the study guide — and on the
exams — are based primarily on two factors. First, material contained in the NIS section should reflect
knowledge that is needed to perform effectively in a modern radiology practice. Second, inclusion of
the material should serve the public interest by ensuring that examinees possess this knowledge.
Core Elements of Professionalism are included because they reflect fundamental principles to which
all physicians, including radiologists, should adhere. Core Concepts of Quality and Safety address
underlying principles that drive quality and safety in complex work environments. Practical Quality
and Safety Applications in Healthcare contain quality and safety strategies as they are applied to
healthcare. Practical Safety Applications in Radiology focus on radiology-specific topics such as MR
safety and management of intravenous contrast material. Reimbursement, Regulatory Compliance,
and Legal Considerations in Radiology reflect mechanisms that external parties use to ensure quality
and safety in radiology practice. Informatics and artificial intelligence represent a growing area where
knowledge is increasingly integral to the modern practice of radiology.
The guide covers the majority of general conceptual and practical NIS information contained in the
Core and Certifying exams. However, the exams may also include questions on important
subspecialty-specific quality and safety knowledge and skills not addressed in this guide, especially
those related to nuclear medicine and other procedure-based specialties. Additionally, examinees
should be knowledgeable in basic quality and safety practices relevant to all subspecialties regardless
of whether they are included in this study guide. This study guide does not cover medical physics,
including radiation safety, as it is considered a separate topic; examinees should consult the ABR
Physics Study Guide for relevant physics material covered on the respective exams.
Examinees are expected to understand general NIS concepts rather than esoteric details. For example,
examinees should understand regulatory requirements that are relevant to daily radiology practice, as
well as their underlying purpose. Less emphasis is placed on superficial details, such as the names of
the various regulatory agencies.
This study guide will continue to evolve in future years to reflect continuing changes in the
noninterpretive knowledge and skills needed to practice effectively in a modern radiology practice.
We also draw your attention to the references provided at the end of each chapter. Examinees are
encouraged to consult these deeper resources, which provide additional perspective and depth beyond
the high-level overview presented in this study guide.
