Chapter 1: Core Elements of Professionalism
1.1 ABIM Physician Charter for distribution of healthcare resources.
Medical Professionalism in the New Physicians should work actively to
Millennium eliminate discrimination in healthcare.
The 10 professional responsibilities are
Merriam-Webster defines a profession as “a
summarized below:
calling requiring specialized knowledge and
often long and in- tensive academic 1. Commitment to professional
preparation.” Professionalism, defined as “the competence. Physicians must be
conduct, aims, or qualities that characterize or committed to lifelong learning of
mark a profession or a professional person,” medical knowledge and team skills
has been characterized as the basis of necessary for the provision of quality
medicine’s contract with society. Several care. More broadly, the profession as a
fundamental principles and physician whole must strive to see that all of its
responsibilities that apply to all professionals in members are competent and must
medicine have been specified in a Physician ensure that appropriate mechanisms are
Charter supported by the American Board of available for physicians to accomplish
Internal Medicine (ABIM). Ten professional this goal.
responsibilities support the following three
2. Commitment to honesty with patients.
fundamental principles of medical
Physicians must ensure that patients are
professionalism:
completely and honestly informed
1. Principle of primacy of patient welfare. before the patient has consented to
Physicians must be dedicated to serving treatment and after treatment has
the interest of the patient. Trust is occurred. Medical errors should be
central to the physician-patient communicated promptly to patients
relationship, which must not be whenever injury has occurred.
compromised by market forces, societal Physicians should be committed to
pressures, or administrative exigencies. reporting and analyzing medical
mistakes to develop appropriate
2. Principle of patient autonomy.
prevention and improvement strategies.
Physicians must be honest with their
patients and empower them to make 3. Commitment to patient confidentiality.
informed decisions about their Physicians are responsible for
treatment. Patients’ decisions about safeguarding patient information.
their care must be paramount, as long as Fulfilling this commitment is more
they are in keeping with ethical practice pressing now than ever before, given
and do not lead to demands for the widespread use of electronic
inappropriate care. information systems. However,
considerations of public interest may
3. Principle of social justice. The medical
occasionally override this commitment,
profession must promote the fair
such as when patients endanger others. to harm, decrease health expenses, and
improve access to resources for patients
4. Commitment to maintaining
who need them.
appropriate relations with patients.
Given the inherent vulnerability and 8. Commitment to scientific knowledge.
dependency of patients, certain Physicians should uphold scientific
relationships between physicians and standards, promote research, and create
patients must be avoided. In particular, new medical knowledge and ensure its
physicians should never exploit patients appropriate use. The integrity of this
for any sexual advantage, personal knowledge is based on scientific
financial gain, or other private purpose. evidence and physician experience.
5. Commitment to improving quality of 9. Commitment to maintaining trust by
care. Physicians should not only managing conflicts of interest. Medical
maintain clinical competence, but professionals and organizations can
should work collaboratively with other compromise their professional
professionals to continuously improve responsibilities by pursuing private gain
the quality of healthcare, including or personal advantage, especially
reducing medical errors, increasing through interactions with for-profit
patient safety, improving utilization of companies. Physicians have an
healthcare resources, and optimizing obligation to recognize, disclose to the
outcomes of care. general public, and deal with conflicts of
interest that arise in the course of their
6. Commitment to improving access to
professional duties and activities.
care. Physicians should work
Relationships between industry and
individually and collectively toward
opinion leaders should be disclosed,
providing a uniform and adequate
especially when physicians are
standard of care and reducing barriers
determining criteria for conducting and
to equitable healthcare. These barriers
reporting clinical trials, writing
may be based on education, laws,
editorials or therapeutic guidelines, or
finances, geography, or social
serving as editors of scientific journals.
discrimination. This commitment entails
the promotion of public health and 10. Commitment to professional
preventive medicine, without responsibilities. Physicians have both
promotion of the self-interest of the individual and collective obligations to
physician or the profession. work collaboratively to maximize
patient care, be respectful of one
7. Commitment to a just distribution of
another, and participate in the processes
finite resources. To provide cost-
of self-regulation, including remediation
effective health care, physicians should
and discipline of members who have
work with other physicians, hospitals,
failed to meet professional standards.
and payers to develop evidence-based
The profession should also define and
guidelines for effective use of healthcare
organize the educational and standard-
resources. This includes the scrupulous
setting process for current and future
avoidance of superfluous tests and
members. These obligations include
procedures to reduce patient exposure
engaging in internal assessment and other matters of policy that affect the
accepting external scrutiny of all aspects quality and safety of care.
of their professional performance.
5. Self-referral. Referring patients to
healthcare facilities in which
radiologists have a financial interest is
1.2 Ethical Considerations Specific to
not in the best interest of patients and
Radiology
may violate the Rules of Ethics.
The ABIM professional responsibilities largely
6. Harassment. Radiologists are expected
overlap with the Code of Ethics as described in
to relate to other members of the
the American College of Radiology (ACR)
healthcare team with mutual respect
Bylaws. However, several principles and rules
and refrain from harassment or unfair
of ethics apply specifically to the field of
discriminatory behavior.
radiology, as stated by the ACR.
7. Undue influence. Radiologists should
1. Professional limitations. The Bylaws
seek to ensure that the system of
state that radiologists should be aware
healthcare delivery in which they
of their limitations and to seek
practice does not unduly influence the
consultations in clinical situations where
selection and performance of
appropriate. Any limitations should be
appropriate available imaging studies or
appropriately disclosed to patients and
therapeutic procedures.
referring physicians.
8. Agreements for provision of high-
2. Reporting of illegal or unethical
quality care. Radiologists should not
conduct. To safeguard the public and
enter into an agreement that prohibits
the profession against physicians
the provision of medically necessary
deficient in moral character or
care or that requires care at below
professional competence, radiologists
acceptable standards.
are expected to report any perceived
illegal or unethical conduct of medical 9. Misleading billing arrangements.
professionals to the appropriate Radiologists should not participate in
governing body. billing arrangements that mislead
patients or payers concerning the fees
3. Report signature. Radiologists should
charged.
not sign a report or claim attribution of
an imaging study interpretation that 10. Expert medical testimony. Radiologists
was rendered by another physician, should exercise extreme caution to
making the reader of a report believe ensure that the testimony provided is
that the signing radiologist was the nonpartisan, scientifically correct, and
interpreter. clinically accurate. Compensation that is
contingent upon the outcome of
4. Participation in quality and safety
litigation is unacceptable.
activities. Radiologists who actively
interpret images should participate in 11. Research integrity. Radiologic research
quality assurance, technology must be performed with integrity and
assessment, utilization review, and be honestly reported.
12. Plagiarism. Claiming others’ intellectual
property as one’s own is unethical. This
includes plagiarism or the use of others’
work without attribution.
13. Misleading publicizing. Radiologists
should not publicize themselves
through any medium or forum of public
communication in an untruthful,
misleading, or deceptive manner.
References
1. American Board of Internal Medicine
Foundation. Medical Professionalism in the
New Millennium: The Physician Charter.
American Board of Internal Medicine
Foundation Website. http://
abimfoundation.org/what-we-do/medical-
professionalism-and-the-physician-charter/
physician-charter. Accessed October 1, 2016.
2. American College of Radiology. Code of
Ethics. American College of Radiology
Website. https:// www.acr.org/Member-
Resources/Commissions-
Committees/Ethics. Accessed June 13, 2018.
