Chapter 2: Core Concepts of Quality and Safety
2.1 Core Concepts of Quality “quality” is the patient. Those who wish to
provide quality care must understand and seek
2.1.1 Introduction to Quality
to achieve consistent excellence from the
Merriam-Webster defines quality as “a level of perspective of the patient—which may differ
value or excellence.” The Institute of Medicine from that of the provider.
has defined quality of care as “the degree to
Fourth, the goal is to consistently achieve
which health services for individuals and
desired health outcomes using methods that are
populations increase the likelihood of desired
consistent with current professional
health outcomes and are consistent with
knowledge. Achieving excellent outcomes on a
current professional knowledge.” As it relates
consistent basis depends on consistency in the
to diagnostic imaging and image-guided
methods, or processes, that are used to achieve
treatment, quality can be considered to be “the
those outcomes. Therefore, a major goal of
extent to which the right procedure is done in
quality is that of decreasing unnecessary
the right way, at the right time, and the correct
variation, both in processes and outcomes. In a
interpretation is accurately and quickly
practice with multiple professionals, this
communicated to the patient and referring
generally requires those professionals to
physician. The goals are to maximize the
collaborate in developing and adhering to
likelihood of desired health outcomes and to
practice standards based on the evidence.
satisfy the patient.”
2.1.2 Quality as a Discipline
Several important concepts are connected to
these statements. Achieving consistent excellence in processes
and outcomes is challenging in healthcare,
First, quality has two important dimensions:
including in radiology. However, healthcare is
excellence and consistency. It is not enough to
by no means the only field in which consistent
provide excellent care; it must be done on a
excellence is desired. Over the past century,
consistent basis. Lack of consistency is a marker
“quality” has emerged as its own discipline of
of poor quality.
study and practice, with a set of broadly
Second, performance must be monitored to applicable definitions, principles, and tools.
ensure consistent quality. It is unlikely for an
Quality control (QC) refers to measuring and
organization to achieve consistent excellent
testing elements of performance to ensure that
performance in the absence of performance
standards are met and correcting instances of
standards or measurements.
poor quality. An example of a QC activity is
Third, the goals are twofold: 1) maximize the when a radiologist reviews and corrects errors
likelihood of health outcomes desired by the in a radiology report before finalizing it.
patient and 2) satisfy the patient. In other
Quality assurance (QA) refers to a process for
words, optimizing health outcomes and patient
monitoring and ensuring performance quality
experience are both important goals of
in an organization. This includes QC activities,
healthcare. Furthermore, while excellence may
but also refers to strategies designed to prevent
be a subjective term, the ultimate arbiter of
instances of poor quality. An example of a QA
activity is the use of standardized report Quality methods and philosophies have
templates to minimize errors in reporting evolved in several other important ways in the
accompanied by verification of appropriate use past several decades:
with audit-based performance metrics.
• Rather than being solely the purview of
Quality improvement (QI) refers to activities a “quality department,” quality has
designed to improve performance quality in an come to be recognized as the
organization in a systematic and sustainable responsibility of everyone in the
way. This requires a deliberate effort within an organization—especially organizational
organization to agree on a measurable leaders.
performance objective, measure the relevant
• The focus has shifted from detecting
performance, understand the causes of poor
and correcting errors that have already
performance, develop and implement strategies
occurred to improving processes and
to improve performance, and ensure that those
systems to prevent errors from
strategies are embedded in the organization
happening or from causing harm.
such that performance will not relapse. An
example of QI is a project whereby radiologists • Frontline staff are increasingly engaged
agree to improve consistency in reporting using to help improve processes.
standardized radiology report templates, • The value of making errors visible
implement those templates, monitor radiology
rather than quietly fixing them without
reports and make necessary adjustments, and
sharing them with the staff is
ensure that consistency is maintained through increasingly recognized. Exposing
feedback and accountability.
errors allows them to be more easily
QC is generally considered to be the most basic detected so they can be corrected and
level of quality-related activities in an their causes addressed.
organization. QA is more comprehensive than
2.1.3 2001 Institute of Medicine Report,
QC and is required to maintain consistently
Crossing the Quality Chasm
high performance levels in an organization.
In 2001, the Institute of Medicine (IOM)
However, QA typically is designed to maintain
published a report entitled, “Crossing the
rather than improve performance, implying
Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the
that quality was presumed to be adequate in
21st Century.” In this report, the IOM
the first place. QI, on the other hand, assumes
committee members maintained that all
that quality is not as good as it could be and
healthcare constituencies, including
employs strategies to successfully improve
policymakers, purchasers, regulators, health
quality through a variety of means, including
professionals, health- care trustees and
changes in processes, systems, and even
management, and consumers, should commit
organizational structure. As organizations’
to a shared explicit purpose to continually
focus has transitioned in recent decades from
reduce the burden of illness, injury, and
seeking to maintain the status quo to seeking to
disability, and improve the health and
constantly improve performance, the field of
functioning of the people of the United States.
quality has transitioned from relying solely on a
QA approach to one of continuous quality The committee asserted that healthcare should
improvement (CQI). be:
• Safe—avoiding injuries to patients from and assimilate scientific evidence, and
improve the practice of medicine.
the care that is intended to help them.
• Effective—providing services based on • Patient Care and Procedural Skills: Provide
care that is compassionate, appropriate,
scientific knowledge to all who can
and effective treatment for health
benefit and refraining from providing
problems and promote health.
services to those not likely to benefit
(avoiding underuse and overuse). • Systems-based Practice: Demonstrate
• Patient-centered—providing care that is awareness of and responsibility to the
larger context and systems of
respectful of and responsive to
individual patient preferences, needs, healthcare. Be able to call on system
and values and ensuring that patient resources to provide optimal care (e.g.,
values guide all clinical decisions. coordinating care across sites or serving
as the primary case manager when care
• Timely—reducing waits and potentially
involves multiple specialties,
harmful delays for both those who
professions, or sites).
receive and those who give care.
• Medical Knowledge: Demonstrate
• Efficient—avoiding waste, in particular
knowledge about established and
waste of equipment, supplies, ideas, and
evolving biomedical, clinical, and
energy.
cognitive sciences and their application
• Equitable—providing care that does not in patient care.
vary in quality because of personal
• Interpersonal and Communication Skills:
characteristics.
Demonstrate skills that result in
Since its publication, the IOM “Chasm” report, effective information exchange and
which was itself a follow-up to a 2000 IOM teaming with patients, their families,
report on medical error, has provided a road and professional associates (e.g.,
map for individuals and organizations in fostering a therapeutic relationship that
healthcare to focus their improvement efforts. is ethically sound; using effective
listening skills with nonverbal and
2.1.4 Core Competencies of the ABMS and
verbal communication; and working
ACGME
both as a team member and, at times, as
To encourage active physician participation in a leader).
advancing the goals of continuous
• Professionalism: Demonstrate a
improvement, in 1999 the Accreditation Council
commitment to carrying out
for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and
professional responsibilities, adhering to
the American Board of Medical Specialties
ethical principles, and being sensitive to
(ABMS), which is composed of subspecialty
diverse patient populations.
boards including the American Board of
Radiology, described six core competencies that By establishing this set of competencies, the
all physicians should attain. ACGME and ABMS assert that the skills
necessary to effectively practice medicine in a
• Practice-based Learning and Improvement:
modern complex healthcare environment
Show an ability to investigate and
extend beyond the traditional domains of
evaluate patient care practices, appraise
medical knowledge and individual practice. It fundamental factors contributing to the errors,
is not enough for professionals to gain adequate including the following: 1) the decentralized
knowledge; they must also continuously nature of the healthcare delivery system (or
improve their knowledge and practice for the “nonsystem,” as the report calls it); 2) the
duration of their careers. They must be not only failure of licensing systems to focus on errors;
technically competent, but also compassionate 3) the impediment of the liability system to
and ethical. They must practice effectively not identify errors; and 4) the failure of third- party
only as individuals, but also as members of providers to provide financial incentive to
teams, organizations, and systems of care. improve safety.
Organizations and leaders who are responsible
The report authors emphasized that most errors
for certifying competence of practitioners must
are multifactorial; most errors can be attributed
demonstrate adequacy of the professional’s
to unsafe systems and processes of care as well
competence in all domains.
as to human error. Therefore, the only strategy
to decrease medical errors that is likely to be
both successful and sustainable in the long run
2.2 Core Concepts of Safety
is to design safety into systems and processes of
2.2.1 2000 Institute of Medicine Report, To Err care. Blaming and “rooting out the bad apples,”
is Human the authors contended, is not a viable strategy
to decrease error.
In 1998, the National Academy of Sciences’
Institute of Medicine (IOM) initiated the 2.2.2 2015 Institute of Medicine Report,
Quality of Health Care in America project to Improving Diagnosis in Health Care
develop a strategy that would result in
In 2015, the IOM issued what it considered to
improved quality of care in the United States.
be a follow-up report to its 2000 report on
To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health
medical error, this time focusing on diagnostic
System, published in 2000, was the first in a
error. In this report, Improving Diagnosis in
series of reports arising from this project. The
Health Care, the IOM committee defined
report’s findings that between 44,000 and
diagnostic error as “the failure to establish an
98,000 in-hospital deaths per year were
accurate and timely explanation of the patient’s
attributable to medical errors made national
health problem(s) or (b) communicate that
headlines, including a suggestion that an
explanation to the patient.” The definition is
epidemic of death from medical errors
purposely patient-focused because, according
exceeded that from motor vehicle accidents,
to the report, patients are considered to be key
breast cancer, or AIDS. The report projected
team members in the collaborative efforts
total societal costs of medical errors to be
required to prevent diagnostic error.
between $17 billion and $29 billion.
Quickly establishing a correct diagnosis is
The report defined medical error as the failure
critical to the provision of safe and effective
of a planned action to be completed as intended
patient care. The problem of diagnostic error
or the use of a wrong plan to achieve an aim,
tends to be underappreciated, for several
with the highest risk for errors occurring in
reasons. Data on diagnostic error are sparse,
high-acuity environments such as the intensive
few reliable measures exist, and often the error
care unit, operating room, and emergency
is identified only in retrospect. The best
department. The report identified several
estimates indicate that nearly all Americans will
likely experience a meaningful diagnostic error 4. Develop and deploy organizational
in their lifetimes. A poll commissioned by the approaches to identify, learn from, and
National Patient Safety Foundation in 1997 reduce diagnostic errors and near
found that approximately one in six of those misses in clinical practice.
surveyed had experience with diagnostic error,
5. Establish a work system and culture that
either personally or through a close friend or
supports the diagnostic process and
relative.
improvements in performance. This
On average, 10% of postmortem exams were may include redesigning payment
associated with diagnostic errors that might structures since fee for service (FFS)
have affected patient outcomes. The report payments lack incentives to coordinate
authors maintained that reducing diagnostic care among team members, such as
error should be a key component of quality communication among treating
improvement efforts by healthcare clinicians, pathologists, and radiologists
organizations. about diagnostic test ordering,
interpretation, and subsequent decision
Similar to the 2000 IOM report, this report
making.
called for objective, nonpunitive efforts to
understand error and to improve systems and 6. Develop a reporting environment and
processes accordingly. This includes learning medical liability system that facilitates
from both errors and near misses on one end of improvement.
the spectrum and from exemplary accurate and
7. Design a payment and care delivery
timely diagnoses on the other end. The report
environment that supports the
authors viewed the diagnostic process as a
diagnostic process. Specifically,
collaborative activity, often between numerous
oversight bodies should require that
professionals and professional groups.
healthcare organizations have programs
Therefore, improving diagnosis often requires
in place to monitor the diagnostic
collaborative efforts between professionals to
process and identify, learn from, and
understand error and improve performance.
reduce diagnostic errors and near
The report authors made eight specific misses in a timely fashion.
recommendations for improvement in the
8. Provide dedicated funding for research
diagnostic processes:
on the diagnostic process and diagnostic
1. Facilitate more effective teamwork errors.
among healthcare professionals,
With respect to radiology, the 2015 IOM report
patients, and their families. Radiologists
identified failures in communication as being a
and pathologists are an integral part of
significant contributor to diagnostic error. The
the diagnostic team.
report authors made several recommendations
2. Enhance healthcare professional for IT professionals and organizational leaders
education and training in the diagnostic to improve communication, including the
process. following:
3. Ensure that health information • Standardize communication policies
technologies support patients and and definitions across networked
healthcare professionals. organizations
• Ensure clear identification of the Multiple brands of defibrillators exist that differ
in physical appearance as well as functionality;
patient’s care team to facilitate contact
a typical hospital may have many different
by the radiology team
models scattered around the building,
• Implement effective results
sometimes even on the same unit.
management and tracking processes
Human Factors Engineering
• Develop shared quality and reporting
Human factors engineering as a discipline
metrics
attempts to identify and address such problems
2.2.3 Human Factors
in a systematic way. It takes into account
Background human strengths and limitations in the design
of interactive systems that involve people,
An obstetric nurse connects a bag of pain
equipment, technology, and work
medication intended for an epidural catheter to
environments to ensure safety, effectiveness,
the mother’s intravenous (IV) line, resulting in
and ease of use. A human factors engineer
a fatal cardiac arrest. Newborns in a neonatal
examines a particular activity in terms of its
intensive care unit are given full-dose heparin
component tasks and then assesses the human
instead of low-dose flushes, leading to three
physical, mental and skill demands in the
deaths from intracranial bleeding. An elderly
context of team dynamics, work environment
man experiences cardiac arrest while
(e.g., adequate lighting, limited noise, or other
hospitalized, but when the code blue team
distractions), and device design required to
arrives, the team is unable to administer a
optimally perform a task.
potentially life-saving shock because the
defibrillator pads cannot be connected to the In essence, human factors engineering focuses
defibrillator itself. on how systems work in actual practice, with
real—and fallible—human beings at the
Busy healthcare workers rely on equipment to
controls. It attempts to design systems that
carry out life-saving interventions with the
optimize safety and minimize the risk of error
underlying assumption that technology will
in complex environments.
improve outcomes.
Human factors engineering has long been used
But as these examples illustrate, the interaction
to improve safety in many industries, including
between workers, equipment, and the
aviation and nuclear power. Its application to
environment can actually increase the risk of
healthcare is relatively recent; pioneering
consequential errors. Each of these safety
studies of human factors in anesthesia were
hazards ultimately was attributed to a relatively
integral to the redesign of anesthesia
simple, yet overlooked, problem with system
equipment, significantly reducing the risk of
design.
injury or death in the operating room.
The bag of epidural anesthetic was similar in
Standardization
size and shape to IV medication bags, and,
crucially, the same catheter could access both Human factors engineering asserts that
types of bags. Full-dose and prophylactic-dose equipment and processes should be
heparin vials appeared virtually identical, and standardized whenever possible to increase
both concentrations were routinely stocked in reliability, improve information flow, and
automated dispensers at the point of care. minimize cross-training needs. Standardizing
equipment across clinical settings is one basic errors.
example, but standardized processes are
Many healthcare organizations are attempting
increasingly recognized as a requirement for
to adopt high-reliability behaviors and
safety. The use of checklists as a means of
organizational strategies to reduce medical
ensuring that safety steps are performed, and
errors for their patients.
performed in the correct order, has its roots in
human factors engineering principles. According to the authors of the concept, HROs
Establishing an agreed- upon, standardized maintain resilience through stressful situations
by both anticipating unexpected events and
approach for the basic elements of a procedure
containing their impact when they occur.
allows team members to identify when
Anticipation has three elements: preoccupation
unintended variances from that approach occur
(which may represent errors) and frees the team with failure, reluctance to simplify, and sensitivity
members to better focus on the unique aspects to operations. Containment has two elements:
of the case. commitment to resilience and deference to expertise.
These can be described as follows:
Communication
Anticipation
Effective communication is a critical aspect of
quality and safety in any complex environment.
1. Preoccupation with failure. Members of
Communication can be defined as the the organization recognize that even
meaningful exchange of information between minor lapses can have severe
individuals or groups of individuals; it is often consequences and tend to be
deliberately watchful for clues that
bidirectional or multidirectional and is
indicate trouble. The organizations have
successful when it results in shared
processes in place to enable individuals,
understanding of meaning. Communication
consists of two major parts: 1) conveyance— teams, and systems to quickly detect
transmission of information from a sender to a and respond to potential threats before
receiver, and 2) convergence—verification, they result in harm.
discussion, and clarification until both parties 2. Reluctance to simplify. When problems
recognize that they mutually agree (or fail to arise, rather than accept simple
agree) on the meaning of the information. explanations, individuals are expected
Convergence activities are especially critical
to dig deeper to understand the source
when information is ambiguous or when the
of the problem.
negative impact of a miscommunication would
3. Sensitivity to operations. Members of
be severe.
the organization—especially the
High Reliability Organization (HRO)
leaders—continuously understand the
In modern medicine, care delivery is frequently messy reality of the details of what is
performed in a high complexity setting. A so- actually happening in the place of work
called “high reliability organization (HRO)” is rather than what is supposed to be
an organization that, despite operating in a happening and respond accordingly.
high-stress, high-risk, complex environment,
Containment
continually manages its environment
1. Commitment to resilience. It is
mindfully, adopting a constant state of
assumed that unexpected trouble is both
vigilance that results in the fewest number of
ubiquitous and unpredictable. HROs make it hard to perform the wrong action (i.e.,
recognize that they can never fully forcing functions, such as a microwave that
anticipate each unexpected event, so cannot be operated with the door open) and
they empower individuals to adjust and enablers that make it easy to perform the right
innovate as necessary and then seek to action (i.e., affordances, such as installing a
learn from those situations. door handle for pulling and a plate for
pushing). Rules- and knowledge-based errors
2. Deference to expertise. No one
tend to be amenable to increased supervision,
individual ever knows everything about
additional training and coaching, deliberate
any situation. People with greater
practice, and intelligent decision support.
authority often have less useful
knowledge about a situation than those Note that additional training is generally less
with lesser authority. HROs overcome effective for skill-based errors, and behavior
the dangers of hierarchy by enabling shaping constraints are less effective for rules-
leaders to defer to the relevant expertise, or knowledge-based mistakes. For example, a
regardless of its source, while radiologist who accidentally dictates “100 mg”
preserving the organizational structure. instead of “100 μg” is unlikely to benefit from
an educational course on units of measure in
2.2.4 Human Error
the metric system. Conversely, a simple clinical
People are prone to error, but not all errors are decision-support rule that forces a physician to
identical. order ultrasonography when he or she thinks
that magnetic resonance imaging is warranted
A commonly used human error classification
is more likely to be ignored and thus less likely
scheme is the “skill-rule-knowledge” (SRK)
to be successful than education and consensus-
model. This model refers to the cognitive mode
building efforts. Thus, in learning from an
in which the individual is operating when he or
error, it is important to determine the cognitive
she commits an error. Actions that are largely
mode in which the individual was operating at
performed automatically, requiring little
the time.
conscious attention, are considered skill-based
actions, such as tying one’s shoes or driving on 2.2.5 Culture of Safety
the open freeway. Actions that require an
Background
intermediate level of attention are considered
rules-based actions, such as deciding which The concept of safety culture originated in
clothes to wear or when to proceed at a four- studies of high reliability organizations. High
way stop. Actions that require a high level of reliability organizations maintain a
concentration, usually in the setting of commitment to safety at all levels, from
situations that are new to the individual, are frontline providers to managers and executives.
knowledge-based actions, such as playing a According to the Agency for Healthcare
sport for the first time or driving in poor Research and Quality (AHRQ), this
visibility conditions in an unfamiliar city. commitment establishes a “culture of safety”
that encompasses the following key features:
Appropriate strategies for ensuring safety in
the face of human error depend on the type of • Acknowledgment of the high-risk
error committed. Skill-based errors tend to be nature of an organization’s activities
amenable to behavior- shaping constraints that and the determination to achieve
consistently safe operations Just Culture
• A blame-free environment where The traditional culture of individual blame,
individuals are able to report errors or which still dominates some healthcare
near misses without fear of reprimand organizations, impairs the advancement of a
or punishment safety culture. However, while blame is
generally an undesirable approach to safety,
• Encouragement of collaboration across
individuals need to be held accountable for
ranks and disciplines to seek solutions
their actions to a certain degree. In an effort to
to patient safety problems
reconcile the need for reducing a focus on
• Organizational commitment of blame and maintaining individual
resources to address safety concerns accountability, the concept of “just culture” was
proposed by David Marx. The just culture
Studies have documented considerable
model distinguishes between human error (e.g.,
variation in perceptions of safety culture across
slips), at-risk behavior (e.g., taking shortcuts),
organizations and job descriptions. Historically,
and reckless behavior (e.g., flaunting firmly
nurses have often complained of the lack of a
established safety rules). In this model, the
blame-free environment and providers at all
response to an error or near miss is predicated
levels have noted problems with organizational
on the type of behavior associated with the
commitment to establishing a culture of safety.
error, not the outcome or severity of the event.
The underlying reasons for the underdeveloped
healthcare safety culture include poor For example, reckless behavior, in which firmly
teamwork and communication, a “culture of established safety norms are willfully ignored,
low expectations,” and the presence of steep such as a physician who refuses to perform a
authority gradients. time out before surgery, may merit firm—
possibly punitive—action, even if no patients
Authority Gradient
were harmed. In contrast, a person who makes
In an organization with steep authority
an innocent human error, even if this error
gradients, especially where there is fear of
resulted in significant patient harm, would be
punishment for errors, quality and safety
consoled since human errors are considered to
problems are rarely reported to senior
be inevitable and not necessarily the result of
leadership. In this way, such authority
negligence. In the middle ground, those
gradients not only undermine the safety
persons who engage in at-risk behavior— e.g.,
culture, but increase the difficulty of accurately
workarounds of convenience, such as failing to
measuring error rates.
communicate critical results, that could subvert
Measuring and Achieving a Culture of Safety established safety precautions—probably
underestimate the risks of their actions. These
Perceptions by the staff of poor safety culture
persons are counseled or coached in the Just
have been linked to increased error rates. Safety
Culture Model (Table 2.1).
culture can be measured by surveys of
providers at all levels. Available validated A safety coach or champion is a person in the
surveys include the AHRQ’s Patient Safety organization who takes ownership of the
Culture Surveys and the Safety Attitudes processes and fosters the creation and
Questionnaire. maintenance of the safety culture, including
oversight of safety-reporting systems whereby
safety incidents and near-miss events are The term “second victim” has been coined for a
reported and archived. In a safety-reporting healthcare worker who is traumatized by an
system, the primary focus is on the patient, the error or adverse patient event in which they
event, and the processes and systems to were involved.
identify opportunities for sustainable
These individuals often feel an intense sense of
improvement. The individual who made the
guilt, sorrow, and anxiety, and may even
error should not be the focus of the
exhibit signs similar to post-traumatic stress
investigation, as long as the individual was not
disorder. Many hospitals have begun to
acting recklessly. In other words, the reporting
develop internal programs to identify, console,
system should not be used as a means of
and advocate on behalf of such individuals.
instigating punitive action.
Three Manageable Behaviors of the Just Culture Model
Behavior or event Human Error At-risk Behavior Reckless Behavior
Definition A product of our current A choice where the risk A conscious disregard
system design and our is believed to be for a substantial and
behavioral choices insignificant or justified unjustifiable risk
Management Strategies • Modify available • Counsel individual • Remediate or remove
choices from the environment
• Better incentivize
• Change processes/ correct behavior • Take punitive action as
workflows • Modify processes, warranted
• Improve training training, etc. as needed
programs
• Redesign system or
facility
Recommended Console Coach Punish/Sanction
approach to the
individual
Table 2.1 Outline of the Just Culture Model. Adapted from Marx 2009.
References
1. Balogh EP, Miller BT, Ball JR, eds. Board on 8. Larson DB, Froehle CM, Johnson ND,
Health Care Services, Institute of Medicine. Towbin AJ. Communication in diagnostic
Improving diagnosis in health care. radiology: meeting the challenges of
Washington, DC: The National Academy of complexity. AJR Am J Roentgenol
Sciences, The National Academies Press, 2014;203(5):957-964.
2015.
9. Larson DB, Kruskal JB, Krecke KN,
2. Committee on Quality of Health Care in Donnelly LF. Key concepts of patient safety
America; for the Institute of Medicine. in radiology. Radiographics 2015;35(6):1677-
Crossing the quality chasm: a new health 1693.
system for the 21st century. Washington,
10. Marx D. Console, coach, or punish? In:
DC: National Academy Press, 2001.
Whack-
3. Hillman BJ, Amis ES Jr, Neiman HL,
a-mole: the price we pay for expecting
FORUM participants. The future quality
perfection. Plano, TX: By Your Side Studios,
and safety of medical imaging: proceedings
2009;47–55.
of the third annual ACR FORUM. J Am Coll
Radiol 2004;1(1):33-39.
11. A Trusted Credential: Based on Core
Competencies. American Board of Medical
4. Kelly AM, Cronin P. Practical approaches to
Specialties Website. www.abms.org/board-
quality improvement for radiologists.
certification/a-trusted-credential/based-on-
Radiographics 2015;35(6):1630-1642.
core- competencies/. Accessed October 1,
5. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, eds. 2016.
Committee on Quality of Health Care in
America,
Institute of Medicine. To err is human:
building a safer health system. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press, 2000.
6. Kruskal JB, Anderson S, Yam CS, Sosna J.
Strategies for establishing a comprehensive
quality and performance improvement
program in a radiology department.
Radiographics 2009;29(2):315-329.
7. Kruskal JB, Eisenberg R, Sosna J, Yam CS,
Kruskal JD, Boiselle PM. Quality initiatives:
Quality improvement in radiology: basic
principles and tools required to achieve
success. Radiographics 2011;31(6):1499-1509.
