Chapter 3: Practical Quality and Safety Applications in
Healthcare
3.1 Practical Quality Applications in anticipated in the near future. First-tier huddles
Healthcare are held within local units and involve all
frontline staff on service for the day. Unit
Quality improvement activities can be divided
leaders then attend huddles at a higher tier,
into two aspects: 1) frequent small
whose leaders in turn attend huddles at a
improvement efforts conducted in close
higher tier, up to the executive team. Huddles
association with the management of the day-to-
generally take place at a visibility board (often
day clinical operations and 2) dedicated
simply an organized white board), which tracks
improvement projects to address areas of
important elements of the daily management
performance that generally require more
huddles for all staff members to see.
focused improvement efforts.
Goal and Metrics Review
3.1.1 Daily Management Systems
Organizational goals help focus the members
A daily management system (DMS) provides a
on making tangible progress toward better
day- to-day operating framework for leaders to
fulfillment of the organization’s missions.
engage with staff to solve problems on a
Performance metrics enable members of the
continuous basis. The objective of the DMS is to
organization to objectively determine how well
facilitate communication and coordination
those goals are being met. Ideally such goals
within and across organizational units and
and metrics should be aligned with the stated
roles in the organization. For example, in a
values of the organization, including excellence
radiology department, a DMS allows for
in care, patient safety, patient and family
coordination and communication between 1)
experience, efficiency, etc. A brief review of
radiologists, technologists, nurses, medical
quantitative metrics at the huddle on a regular
assistants, IT professionals, administrators, etc.;
basis helps the organization make iterative
2) front line staff, managers, and leaders; and 3)
improvements to facilitate continued progress
the radiology department and other units such
toward the goals.
as the emergency department, inpatient units,
medical and surgical specialties, etc. Daily Readiness Assessment
A DMS can be implemented in a variety of A daily readiness assessment reviewed at the
ways to meet local organizational needs. huddle helps the staff be aware of the number
However, DMS programs tend to have a few and types of patients to be seen that day and to
core elements that help them achieve the determine whether they are prepared to
programs’ objectives. accommodate their needs. Topics that are
typically reviewed include 1) methods:
Tiered Huddles
ensuring that the proper protocols and plans
A huddle is a brief structured meeting are in place to accommodate patients, especially
occurring in an organizational unit in which those with special needs, 2) equipment:
participants review what has recently occurred, reviewing whether all of the equipment is
the current status of the unit, and what is operational and staff have appropriate training,
3) supplies: ensuring that all needed supplies more amenable to dedicated improvement
are available for use, and 4) associates: ensuring projects. Several well-known improvement
that appropriate staff are in place to meet models exist, including Lean, Six Sigma, and
patient needs and that any staff shortages have the Model for Improvement. Each of these
been accommodated. models uses a similar approach to structuring
improvement projects, though framed in
Problem Management and Accountability Cycle
different ways. The following sections
Continuous problem solving is a critical
summarize the major steps that the models
element of the DMS. Staff are encouraged to
share.
identify problems at the daily huddle. Problems
are documented on the visibility board, along Identifying a Problem
with an “owner” of the problem and an
As it relates to improvement, the term
expected resolution date. Problems that are
“problem” can be interpreted two ways: 1)
more complex often are listed on a separate
something that is difficult to deal with, a source
board along with the owner of the problem, the
of trouble, worry, etc. and 2) something to be
date the issue was first identified, and a date on
worked out or solved, such as an arithmetic
which the owner is expected to make a progress
problem.
report.
The fact that the problem is a source of trouble
Regular Follow-up
is what drives the organization to decide to
The regular cadence of the daily huddles, along focus improvement in a specific area. Before
with the tracking of assignments on the visibility beginning the project, leaders should make sure
board, provides a mechanism to routinely follow that it addresses a problem that is of high
up on assignments. importance to the organization, so that it will
receive needed support when challenges arise.
This visibility and follow-up greatly increases
the likelihood that assignments will be Framing the problem as a challenge to be
completed or revised as needed. solved helps depersonalize the issue and turn it
into an opportunity for improvement. Clearly
Frequent Visits to the Workplace
defining the problem is the first step in solving
A core tenet of effective management is that one the problem, helping to ensure that the project
must see what is happening in the workplace to team remains focused and aligned as team
truly understand it. Managers and leaders are members evaluate causes and consider possible
encouraged to minimize the time spent in solutions.
closed-door meetings in favor of spending time
Forming a Team
where the work is done. When individuals visit
the workplace, they are expected to respectfully To effectively carry out the project, a dedicated
observe and ask questions to learn about the team is organized for a limited period of time
work; they should not give direction, solve and given the guidance, resources, instruction,
problems, or otherwise interfere with the work and authority needed to make process and
during this time. other organizational changes to improve
performance in a sustainable way. Project roles
3.1.2 Project-based Improvement Methods
typically include the following:
Problems that are too difficult to solve using
• Project Sponsor: This individual provides
routine daily problem-solving methods may be
organizational oversight and support, should avoid encroaching on the role of
removing barriers as they arise. The project leader or performing tasks of the
sponsor should have the organizational project participants.
authority to provide resources and
Assessing Current Performance
resolve interpersonal conflicts. Projects
Improvement project team members are
may have more than one sponsor.
expected to visit the workplace and spend at
While sponsors may provide general
least several hours quietly observing and taking
guidance and suggestions, they
notes. Team members should respectfully ask
should be careful to avoid
questions to deeply understand the process:
overstepping their bounds and
what is done and why it is done that way. They
assuming the project leader’s role.
should convene and discuss their observations,
• Project Leader: The project leader’s role is mapping out the process, and then revisit the
to direct and coordinate activities of the workplace to validate their observations. They
project to ensure its success. The leader should, to the extent possible, observe all steps
helps assemble the team, manage the in the process at different times of day and days
project, delegate and follow up on of the week.
assignments, report on progress, alert
Measuring Performance
the project sponsor when more help is
To be able to assess performance in an objective
needed, and ensure the timely
and repeatable fashion, team members should
completion of the project. Project leaders
develop performance measures. These may
should have strong organizational and
include outcome measures, including those of end
leadership skills.
outcomes such as morbidity, patient satisfaction,
• Project Participants: Participants should
and costs, as well as those of intermediate
be selected from the areas targeted for
outcomes, such as service times, error rates, and
improvement; each organizational unit
supply utilization. In addition to outcomes
included in the process targeted for
measures, process measures can be used such as
improvement must be represented on
adherence to standard work, equipment
the team. It is generally more effective to
utilization rates, and times for each process
select “front-line” staff who perform the
step.
work on a daily basis rather than
After one or more quantitative measures are
supervisors, managers, or other
established, performance should be tracked and
organizational leaders. Participation
monitored. Performance can be monitored with
should be voluntary.
a run chart, which displays data over time. The
• Project Coach: The project coach is an
run chart should display the mean before the
expert in improvement methods who
beginning of the project and at the end of the
advises and supports the team. The
project, as well as the performance goal. An
coach helps guide the project leader and
annotated run chart is a run chart that also
team, facilitates communication with the
indicates the dates and the nature of
sponsor, and alerts organizational
interventions implemented during the project
leaders when the project appears to be
(Fig. 3.1).
veering off track. However, the coach
Figure 3.1 Example of an annotated run chart. Each point represents the mean daily
examination completion time. Dates that interventions were implemented are plotted
on the chart and described in the key. The goal for this hypothetical project was to
decrease mean daily examination completion time from 120 minutes to 30 minutes.
Source: Larson and Mickelsen. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2015.
Establishing a Specific Goal time from 120 minutes to 30 minutes by July 1,
2018.”
The project team should establish a
performance goal (often referred to as an aim Identifying Causes of Problems
statement). A commonly used acronym to
After establishing a measure and a goal and
describe the attributes of the goal is “SMART,”
observing the process in detail, the project team
meaning that the goal should be specific,
should seek to discover and document the
measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-
causes of problems that negatively impact
bound. The goal should state the beginning
performance. A tool for documenting these
performance, the end performance, and the
causes is a cause-and-effect diagram, also known
date (i.e., “from what, to what, by when”). For
as a fishbone diagram (Fig. 3.2).
example, the goal might state, “Our goal is to
decrease mean daily examination completion
Figure 3.2. Cause-and-effect diagram or fishbone diagram. This diagram lists and
categorizes possible contributing causes to the problem of over-ordering of CT scans
in the emergency department (ED). Source: Kruskal et al. Radiographics 2011.
Prioritizing Problem-solving Efforts prioritized accordingly.
After possible causes of problems are Developing Solutions through Iterative Testing
documented, the frequency of those causes
After the problem has been thoroughly
should be measured in some way. Often this is
investigated, including likely causes, it is the
accomplished with a simple tally sheet, in
project team’s task to develop strategies to
which staff members document every time the
solve the problem by making process changes.
problem occurs over a period of time along
However, such changes are rarely successful in
with the cause for the occurrence. These can
the form in which they are originally conceived
then be plotted in a Pareto chart (Fig. 3.3),
and typically require multiple revisions before
which illustrates which causes occur most
they can be fully implemented. The process of
frequently. The Pareto principle, also known as
iteratively testing, refining, and validating
the “80/20 rule,” states that a few causes are
process changes is known as the Plan-Do-
usually responsible for the majority of the
Study-Act (PDSA) cycle.
problems. Problem-solving efforts can then be
Figure 3.3. Pareto chart. This chart illustrates which causes are most commonly responsible
for the problem. In this case, the team was seeking to identify the most common types of
unhelpful emergency department (ED) exams. Source: Kruskal et al. Radiographics 2011.
The PDSA cycle is essentially a restatement of try a different approach.
the scientific method. A synonym for a PDSA
Changes are tested on a larger scale only after
cycle is a planned test of change. A cycle starts
they have been proven successful on a smaller
with a hypothesis of how a process change will
scale. The final determination of whether the
lead to a desired outcome. The steps include
changes are effective in practice is if they result
developing a plan to test that hypothesis
in improved performance. Hence, it is critical to
(planning the test), testing the hypothesis
continuously monitor performance throughout
(doing the test), analyzing the data (studying
the life of an improvement project.
the results), and drawing actionable
conclusions and determining next steps (acting Improvement is generally most effective when
accordingly). multiple PDSA cycles are run in parallel or in
rapid succession. With each test, the
Because the effects of process changes are not
improvement team gains greater insight and
known in advance, initial changes are typically
knowledge of how specific changes impact
tested on as small a scale as possible and in a
outcomes—for better and for worse. Only after
relatively protected environment. It is expected
the problems have been worked out and the
that many of these proposed changes will be
team is confident that the changes will result in
unsuccessful. For this reason, the team is wise
the desired improved outcomes are the changes
to generate a number of potential changes
fully implemented. Despite the fact that
through brainstorming. When a test of change
multiple PDSA cycles are needed for most
does not result in the desired outcome, the
successful improvement projects, if they are
project team may wish to modify the approach
executed well and kept as small and brief as
and test it again or abandon it altogether and
possible, the process of testing, refining, and to be done by whom and by when, and
validating changes need not be protracted. following up on each task; 2) progress tracking:
keeping people apprised of project progress,
Sustaining the Improvement
reminding individuals as deadlines approach,
Without deliberate mechanisms to sustain and alerting appropriate individuals when
improvements, performance usually reverts to milestones are missed; 3) conducting effective
the initial state. Strategies to increase the meetings; and 4) avoiding mistakes common to
likelihood that results will be sustained include quality improvement.
1) establishing regular measurement and
feedback, 2) using handoffs to enforce
standards by ensuring that all staff expect the References
same standard, 3) establishing the practice of
1. Donnelly LF. Daily management systems in
stopping the process and summoning
medicine. Radiographics 2014;34(2):549-555.
immediate supervisors whenever a problem is
encountered, 4) embedding checks into the 2. Kruskal JB, Eisenberg R, Sosna J, Yam CS,
process, and 5) using high-reliability solutions. Kruskal JD, Boiselle PM. Quality initiatives:
Quality improvement in radiology: basic
High-reliability Solutions: Process changes may
principles and tools required to achieve
take many forms, including education and
success. Radiographics 2011;31(6):1499-1509.
feedback, standardization of procedures, and
infrastructure and system changes. In general, 3. Kruskal JB, Reedy A, Pascal L, Rosen MP,
processes that rely on education and feedback Boiselle PM. Quality initiatives: lean
tend to result in lower consistency in outcome, approach to improving performance and
or reliability, than those that rely on efficiency in a radiology department.
standardization of procedures, which in turn Radiographics 2012;32(2):573-587.
tend to result in lower consistency of outcome
4. Larson DB, Kruskal JB, Krecke KN,
than those that rely on changes to infrastructure
Donnelly LF. Key concepts of patient safety
and organizational culture. As a general rule,
in radiology. Radiographics 2015;35(6):1677-
high-reliability process changes are more
1693.
effective and require less effort by the process
5. Larson DB, Mickelsen LJ. Project
owner to sustain than low-reliability solutions.
management for quality improvement in
QI Project Management
radiology. AJR Am J Roentgenol
A project is defined as “a temporary group 2015;205(5):W470-W477.
activity, designed to produce a unique product,
service, or result.” Project management is the
“application of knowledge, skills, and
techniques to execute projects effectively and
efficiently.” Effective project management
techniques bring order to what can otherwise
be a chaotic process, to help ensure that projects
meet their objectives.
Examples include 1) task management: defining
each task, clearly setting expectations of what is
3.2 Practical Safety Applications in administration of medications to reduce
Healthcare anxiety, during which the patient
responds to verbal commands. In this
3.2.1 Periprocedural Care
state, cognitive function and
Patient Identifiers coordination may be impaired, but
ventilatory and cardiovascular functions
Patient identification is critical to ensure that
are unaffected.
the right patient receives the right treatment,
medication, invasive or noninvasive procedure, 2. Moderate Sedation/Analgesia. A mildly
and blood products, as well as to reduce the depressed level of consciousness,
chance of unnecessary radiation exposure. At induced by the administration of
least two patient identifiers should be used pharmacologic agents, in which the
before every procedure. Identifiers can include patient retains a continuous and
patient name, assigned identification number, independent ability to maintain
telephone number, or other person-specific protective reflexes and a patent airway
identifier (e.g., date of birth, government-issued and to be aroused by physical or verbal
photo identification, and last four digits of the stimulation.
social security number). Transient factors such
3. Deep Sedation/Analgesia. A drug-
as patient’s location or room number cannot be
induced depression of consciousness
used. Sources of identifiers may include the
during which the patient cannot be
patient, a relative, a guardian, a domestic
easily aroused but responds
partner, or a healthcare provider who has
purposefully after repeated or painful
previously identified the patient. In the case of
stimulation. Independent ventilatory
a discrepancy between identifiers, the
function may be impaired. The patient
practitioner should stop and seek additional
may require assistance in maintaining a
information to confirm the identity before
patent airway. Cardiovascular function
proceeding.
is usually maintained.
Patient Assessment
4. General Anesthesia. A controlled state
Before sedation is initiated, a patient must be of unconsciousness in which there is a
assessed and approved for sedation. Recent oral complete loss of protective reflexes,
intake, recent illness, pulmonary status including the ability to maintain a
(including upper airway), cardiac status, patent airway independently and to
baseline vital signs, level of consciousness, respond appropriately to painful
pulse oximetry, capnography (if available), and stimulation.
electrocardiography (when applicable) should
It is important to recognize that these “levels”
be obtained and documented.
are actually a continuum. Patients may rapidly
Sedation move between the levels and may reach a
deeper level of sedation than desired. Sedation
The Joint Commission and the American
may result in the loss of protective reflexes.
Society of Anesthesiologists have defined four
Thus, all sedated patients require monitoring
levels of sedation, analgesia, and anesthesia:
regardless of the intended level of sedation.
1. Minimal Sedation or Anxiolysis. A
Patients who are candidates for sedation by a
drug- induced state, created by the
non- anesthesia provider such as a radiologist must have intravenous access. Continuous
must be screened to determine if they have risk monitoring should include, at a minimum, level
factors that may increase the likelihood of an of consciousness, respiratory rate, pulse
adverse outcome. Such risk factors include, but oximetry, blood pressure (as indicated), heart
are not limited to, congenital or acquired rate, and cardiac rhythm. Similar monitoring is
abnormalities of the airway, liver failure, lung needed in the recovery period from sedation.
disease, congestive heart failure, symptomatic The supervising physician should have
brain stem dysfunction, apnea or hypotonia, a sufficient knowledge of the pharmacology,
history of adverse reaction to sedating indications, and contraindications for the use of
medications, morbid obesity, and severe sedative agents, including the use of reversal
gastroesophageal reflux. agents. A key point related to reversal agents is
that their duration of effect may be shorter than
The patient’s American Society of
that of the sedating agent, leading to a risk of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical Status
relapse into a deeper level of sedation. It is
Classification should also be assessed. This is a
recommended that consciousness and vital
six-level classification as follows:
signs return to acceptable levels and remain at
• Class I - A normal healthy patient those levels for a period of two hours from the
• Class II - A patient with mild systemic time the reversal agent was administered before
monitoring ends and the patient is discharged.
disease
• Class III - A patient with severe Informed Consent
systemic disease Informed consent is required for invasive
• Class IV - A patient with severe image- guided procedures. Apart from legal or
regulatory requirements, patients have the right
systemic disease that is a constant threat
to be informed about the procedures they
to life
undergo and may request to speak with a
• Class V - A moribund patient who is not
radiologist even when local policy does not
expected to survive without the
require the radiologist to initiate an informed
operation
consent process.
• Class VI - A declared brain-dead patient
Despite the fact that a consent form is often
whose organs are being removed for
used to document the discussion, the ACR-SIR
donor purposes
Practice Parameter on Informed Consent for Image-
Patients in Classes III and IV or with other Guided Procedures states that “informed consent
significant risk factors may require a is a process and not the simple act of signing a
consultation with anesthesiology or the formal document.” Consent can also be
performance of sedation by an anesthesiologist documented by a note in the patient’s medical
or anesthetist. Patients in Class V should not be record, by a recording on videotape, or by
sedated by non-anesthesiologists. another similar permanent modality. Consent
should be obtained from the patient or the
When sedation is performed under the
patient’s legal representative by a physician or
supervision of a radiologist, there must be a
other healthcare provider performing the
separate qualified healthcare professional
procedure. The final responsibility for
whose primary focus is the monitoring,
answering the patient’s questions and
medicating, and care of the patient. The patient
addressing any patient concerns rests with the issue of parental rights versus minors’ rights
physician performing or supervising the vary from state to state. States and courts have
procedure. never allowed children younger than 12 years
to make medical decisions and exercise self-
Elements of informed consent include 1) the
determination, whereas adolescents between
purpose and nature of the intended procedure,
ages 12 and 18 (or 19 in some states) experience
2) the method by which the procedure will be
a gradual transition to self- determination.
performed, 3) likely risks, complications, and
Factors that impact the determination of
expected benefits, 4) risks of not proceeding, 5)
adolescents’ rights include the following:
any reasonable alternatives to the proposed
procedure, and 6) the right to decline the 1. Legal determination of maturity, such
proposed procedure. An exception to these as married status, parenthood, self-
steps exists when a delay in treatment would sufficiency, or active duty in the armed
jeopardize the health of a patient who is unable services.
to provide informed consent (e.g., an
2. Evidence that the child is sufficiently
unconscious trauma patient for whom family
mature to make his or her own
has not yet been identified). Since the patient
decisions, such as age greater than 14
must be able to understand the consent process
years; evidence that the minor has the
for it to be valid, consent must be obtained
ability to understand the implications of
before procedure-related sedation is
treatment, including risks, benefits,
administered.
likely short- and long-term
When the patient is not able to give valid consequences, and alternatives; and
consent because of short-term or long-term evidence that the minor can make an
mental incapacity, whether from pain informed decision without coercion.
medications or otherwise, or when the patient
3. Conditions exempting parental
has not achieved the locally recognized age of
consent, such as seeking testing or
majority, consent should be obtained from the
treatment for sexually transmitted
patient’s appointed healthcare representative,
diseases, included HIV; seeking
legal guardian, or appropriate family member.
contraception, prenatal care, or abortion;
In emergency situations when the patient needs
or seeking mental health treatment,
immediate care, the patient’s predetermined
emergency care, or treatment of alcohol
wishes are not known or appropriately
or drug abuse after the age of 12 years.
documented, and consent cannot be obtained
from the patient’s representative, the physician Universal Protocol
may provide treatment or perform a procedure Universal protocol refers to the three-part
“to prevent serious disability or death or to
process of conducting a preprocedure verification,
alleviate great pain or suffering.”
marking the procedure site, and performing a
Minors’ Rights in Medical Decision Making Courts preprocedure time out. Note that site marking
in the United States have recognized that may be performed before completing the
children younger than 18 years deserve a voice preprocedure verification.
in determining their course of medical
1. Preprocedure verification. This is an
treatment if they show maturity and ongoing process of information
competence. However, rules that govern the
gathering and confirmation before the
procedure. The purpose is to ensure that cases for which the catheter or
all relevant information and equipment instrument insertion site is not
are 1) available before the start of the predetermined (such as cardiac
procedure, 2) correctly labeled, catheterization), procedures on teeth,
identified, and matched to the patient’s and procedures on premature infants,
identifiers, and 3) reviewed and are for whom the mark may cause a
consistent with the expectations of the permanent tattoo.
procedure to be performed.
3. Preprocedure time out. A standardized
Preprocedural verification may occur at
time out should be conducted
more than one time and place before the
immediately before an invasive
procedure.
procedure is started or an incision is
2. Marking of the procedure site. At a made. The designated member of the
minimum, a procedure site should be team starts the time out. The time out
marked when there is more than one should involve the immediate members
possible location for the procedure and of the team, including the individual
when performing the procedure in a performing the procedure, anesthesia
different location could harm the providers, the circulating nurse, the
patient. If possible, the patient should be operating room technician, and other
involved in the site marking. The site active participants who will be present
must be marked by a licensed throughout the case. During the time
independent practitioner who will be out, all relevant members of the team
present when the procedure is actively communicate and at a
performed. In limited circumstances, minimum agree on the following:
site marking may be delegated to correct patient identity, correct site, and
medical residents, physician assistants procedure to be done. Documentation of
(PAs), or advanced practice registered the time out should be performed
nurses (APRNs), but ultimately the according to the organization’s policy.
licensed independent practitioner is
3.2.2 Hand Hygiene
accountable for the procedure, even
when delegating site marking. Hand hygiene refers to cleaning one’s hands by
using either handwashing (washing hands with
The mark should be made at or near the
soap and water), antiseptic hand wash,
procedure site, and should be
antiseptic hand rub (i.e., alcohol-based hand
sufficiently permanent to be visible after
sanitizer including foam or gel), or surgical
skin preparation and draping. It should
hand antisepsis.
also be unambiguous and used
consistently throughout the Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are the most
organization. An organization should effective products for reducing the number of
bacteria on the hands. When hands are not
have written alternative processes for
visibly dirty, alcohol-based hand sanitizers are
situations such as procedures on
the preferred method for cleaning one’s hands
mucosal surfaces or perineum, minimal
in the healthcare setting. Soap and water are
access procedures treating a lateralized
internal organ, interventional procedure recommended when hands are visibly dirty,
before eating, after using a restroom, or after
known or suspected exposure to Clostridium sequence of events leading to the error, with the
difficile, norovirus, or Bacillus anthracis. goals of identifying how the event occurred
(active errors) and underlying conditions that
Hand hygiene should be performed 1) before
contributed to the event (latent conditions). It
eating, 2) before and after having direct contact
should be recognized that serious adverse
with a patient’s skin, 3) after contact with
events are almost never the result of a single
blood, body fluids or excretions, mucous
cause, and often are associated with numerous
membranes, nonintact skin, or wound
contributing factors. The RCA should culminate
dressings, 4) after contact with inanimate
in an analysis of issues that should be
objects in the immediate vicinity of the patient,
addressed to decrease the likelihood of
5) if hands will be moving from a
recurrence and a plan for addressing those
contaminated-body site to a clean- body site
issues, including a timeline and individual
during patient care, 6) after glove removal, and
responsibility.
7) after using a restroom. When hands are
cleaned with soap and water, the soap and In the setting of a serious adverse event,
water should cover all surfaces of the hands immediate interventions may be implemented
and fingers. When alcohol-based hand sanitizer to quickly reduce the risk of recurrence of a
is used, the product should cover all surfaces as similar error. However, such quickly generated
hands are rubbed together. Adequate cleansing solutions typically do not address the root
can be achieved in about 20 seconds via either cause and should only serve as a placeholder
route. until more reliable and sustainable solutions
can be developed, tested, and implemented.
3.2.3 Root Cause Analysis
Root cause analysis (RCA) is a structured
method used to analyze serious adverse events References
to decrease the likelihood of recurrence. The
1. American College of Radiology, Society of
goal of RCA is to identify both active errors
Interventional Radiology. ACR-SIR practice
(errors occurring at the point of interface
parameter for sedation/analgesia. American
between humans and a complex system) and
College of Radiology, Society of
latent conditions (the hidden problems within
Interventional Radiology.
healthcare systems that increase the likelihood
https://www.acr.org/-
of an adverse event). For example, an active
/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/sed-
error occurs when a nurse accidentally
analgesia.pdf. Accessed June 13, 2018.
administers a full dose of heparin rather than a
heparin flush; an associated latent condition 2. Brook OR, Kruskal JB, Eisenberg RL, Larson
might be the fact that the two vials appear DB. Root cause analysis: learning from
virtually identical and both are routinely adverse safety events. Radiographics
stocked near each other in the same cabinet at 2015;35(6):1655-1667.
the point of care.
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
RCAs should generally begin with data Hand hygiene in healthcare settings.
collection to create an objective narrative of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
event based on a review of the medical record Website. http://www.cdc.
and interviews with people involved. A gov/handhygiene/providers/index.html.
multidisciplinary team should then analyze the
Accessed October 1, 2016.
4. Hickey K. Minors’ rights in medical decision
mak- ing. JONA’s Healthcare, Law, Ethics, and
Regulation 2007;9(3):100-104.
5. The Joint Commission. National patient
safety goals effective January 1, 2016. The
Joint Commission Website.
https://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6
/2016_NPSG_HAP.pdf. Accessed October 1,
2016.
6. The Joint Commission. Speak UP. The Joint
Commission Website.
www.jointcommission.org/as-
sets/1/18/UP_Poster1.PDF. Accessed
October 1, 2016.
7. Kohi MP, Fidelman N, Behr S, Taylor AG,
Kolli K, Conrad M, Hwang G, Weinstein S.
Periprocedural Patient Care. Radiographics
2015;35(6):1766-1778.
8. Weick KE, Sutcliffe KM. Managing the
unexpected: resilient performance in an age
of uncertainty. San Francisco, Calif: Jossey-
Bass, 2007.
