Chapter 4: Practical Safety Applications in Radiology
patients, research subjects, MRI personnel, and
4.1 MR Safety
visitors. Greater risk exists for non-MR personnel
An MRI scanner has been described as a coil who do not regularly work in the MR environment,
within a coil within a coil, with each coil including physicians and nurses who rarely enter
producing different magnetic fields for the MR environment but may do so in urgent
different purposes (Figs. 4.1 and 4.2). The situations. Improperly trained and inadequately
three unique magnetic fields in MRI are the screened staff such as security and cleaning
static magnetic field (B ), time-varying personnel may also unknowingly bring
gradient magnetic field (dB/dt), and time- ferromagnetic materials into the MR environment.
varying radiofrequency magnetic field (B ). Without dedicated attention, patients’ family
These fields are generated by the main coil, members who could also carry such materials can
the gradient coils (in the x, y, and z be overlooked.
directions), and the radiofrequency (RF) coils,
To address these risks, operators of MRI scanners
respectively. The superconducting main coil
are expected to establish specific MR safety
is contained in a helium-cooled cryogenic
management roles, including the following: (1) a
assembly, whereas the gradient and RF
designated physician MR Medical Director
transmit coils are contained in a non-
(MRMD) for MR safety; (2) an MR safety officer
cryogenic assembly cooled by chilled water.
(MRSO); and (3) an MR safety expert (MRSE). The
The construct and function of the MR scanner MRMD assumes ultimate responsibility for a site’s
pose unique safety risks. For example, operational MR safety and the safe execution of all
because the strong static magnetic field is MR examinations. The MRMD appoints MRSOs and
always on, a ferromagnetic object may MRSEs, maintains MR safety policies and
become a projectile anytime it enters the MRI procedures, and appropriately investigates any MR
scan room. Patients undergoing MRI may be safety adverse events. The MRSO, a role typically
subjected to burns or displacement of devices filled by a technologist, ensures that policies and
such as aneurysm clips. Additionally, the procedures are followed, emergency procedures are
quenching of the supercooled magnetic can in place and trained for, and sufficient education is
cause helium to displace room air, leading to completed by relevant personnel, among other
asphyxiation. responsibilities. The MRSE, typically an MR
physicist, is a resource for the MRMD and MRSOs,
Due to these and other risks, strict safety
rendering expertise related to the safe use of MR
precautions must be enforced in the MR
equipment, and providing recommendations for
environment. The American College of
appropriate scanning conditions for patients with
Radiology (ACR) Manual on MR Safety
implanted devices, for example.
provides a comprehensive set of
recommendations for the design, operation,
and oversight of MRI suites to ensure patient 4.1.1 Zoning and Screening
and personnel safety. This manual is
To ensure that the strictness of safety measures
available in the form of a free online
matches the level of risk inherent in the
document which is periodically updated.
proximity to the scanner, the MRI site is
MRI-related risks apply to all who may enter divided into four zones, with progressively
the MRI scanner environment, including increasing monitoring requirements and
Figure 4.1. Diagram illustrating the magnetic coils of an MRI scanner. The three primary sets of
coils embedded in the scanner are the main coil (red), gradient coils (blue) and radiofrequency
(RF) transmit coil (yellow). The portable surface (receive) coil is placed on the patient. Note that
the main coil assembly is supercooled with cryogenic liquid helium.
Figure 4.2. Cross-section view (longitudinal to the scanner) of the magnetic coils depicted in
Figure 4.1.
recommends that the door remain closed or
restriction of entry into higher
protected by a physical barrier such as a
numbered, more controlled zones. A
retractable safety strap, plastic chain, or specific
depiction of MRI zones in an MRI suite
doorway gate device at all times except when
is provided in Figure 4.3. These zones
personnel and patients travel across the
are defined as follows:
threshold. When a medical emergency occurs,
Zone I: Access is unrestricted. This MR trained and certified personnel should
zone includes all areas that are freely begin basic life support or CPR in Zone IV if
accessible to the public. This is the required, while urgently moving the patient
area through which patients and from Zone IV to a magnetically safe location to
others pass before they access the allow for others to assist in a safe environment
controlled MR environment. outside the scan room, and securing the door to
Zone IV to prevent inadvertent entry.
Zone II: This is the interface between
the uncontrolled Zone I and the The major transition in levels of safety occurs from
strictly controlled Zones III and IV.
the interfacing area of Zone II to the higher risk
Zone II may be used to greet Zone III. MR personnel working within Zone III and
patients, obtain patient histories, and Zone IV should have specific education on MR
screen patients for MR safety issues. safety and pass an MR safety screening process.
Patients in Zone II should be under
There are two MR personnel safety level
the supervision of MR personnel.
designations: Level 1 and Level 2. Level 1 personnel
Zone III: This is a strictly controlled have passed the facility’s basic MR safety education
area near the scanner, with a risk requirements to ensure that they would not be a
from interaction between danger to themselves or others. Level 1 personnel
unscreened people or ferromagnetic are not to be independently responsible for the
objects and the magnetic field of the safety of others in Zone IV.
scanner. The scanner control room is
Level 2 personnel are more extensively trained,
typically in Zone III. Access to Zone
including on topics such as radiofrequency (RF)-
III must be strictly restricted and
induced heating. Level 2 personnel can be
under the supervision of MR
independently responsible for the safety of others in
personnel, with physical restriction
Zone IV. However, according to the ACR Manual
such as locks or passkey systems.
on MR Safety, a technologist should not work alone;
Zone IV: This is the MR scanner
there should always be at least one Level 2
magnet room and therefore is the
technologist assisted by an additional MR-trained
highest risk area. individual (either Level 1 or Level 2) present in
This zone contains the “Projectile Zone” Zone III to help ensure patient and personnel safety.
where an uncontrolled ferromagnetic
All other non-MR personnel and patients entering
object could fly dangerously into the
Zone III should be appropriately screened. MR
magnet. Therefore, it should be clearly
screening begins with a focused history to identify
demarcated and marked as potentially
potential metallic foreign objects and medical
hazardous.
implants. This may be supplemented as needed by
Access to Zone IV should be under the reviewing any existing radiographs, CT, or MR of
direct observation of MR personnel. The the questioned area as well as operative reports and
ACR Committee on MR Safety implanted devices information in electronic medical
Figure 4.3. Example of MRI zones in an MRI suite. Access is unrestricted in Zone I, which is the
public area outside the MRI suite. Patients are greeted in Zone II, which should be under
supervision of MR personnel. Zone III is strictly controlled, including with physical restrictions
such as locks; patients entering this Zone must be under the supervision of MR personnel. Zone
IV is the highest risk area; patients in Zone IV must be under direct supervision of MR personnel
at all times.
adhered to, including magnetic field strength (e.g.,
records. When an object or implant is
1.5T or 3T), specific coils that are permissible (e.g.,
identified, its MR safety potential should be
some device conditions require use of a local
assessed specific to the field strength of the
transmit/receive coil at a distance from a device, and
magnet and specific factors such as RF
do not permit use of a receive-only coil using the
deposition (e.g., specific absorption rate or
magnet RF coil), and specific RF deposition
SAR).
parameters (e.g. a defined SAR, such at 1.0 W/kg).
Objects that might be brought into the MRI
Published information is available regarding the
suite should be labeled according to the MR safety of most medical implants, and it is
conventions shown in Figure 4.4. Objects that essential that the manufacturer’s most up to date
are nonhazardous in all MR environments,
MR safety information defining the MR conditions
such as a plastic tube, are deemed “MR Safe,”
for safe scanning are used, as these change
whereas those contraindicated, such as a
frequently.
ferromagnetic aneurysm clip, are labeled “MR
Ferromagnetic objects should be restricted from
Unsafe.” “MR Conditional” devices can be
entering Zone III whenever practical. Ferromagnetic
safely scanned providing the specific
detection devices, either wall mounted or handheld,
conditions for safe scanning are appropriately
Figure 4.4. MRI labels. A. MR Safe label. An MR safe device contains no metal and is composed
of materials that are nonconductive, nonmetallic and nonmagnetic B. MR Conditional label. An
MRI Conditional device may be used only under clearly specified conditions. C. MR Unsafe
label. MR unsafe devices must be kept outside the MR scanner room.
can augment safety screening processes in The strong magnetic field inherent to an MR
helping to identify unknown ferromagnetic scanner can pose a risk for projectile injury if a
objects concealed on a patient, and some ferromagnetic object (e.g., hospital gurney,
superficial internal implants, such as pacemakers. scissors, cell phone) is brought too close to the
All MR sites should have a handheld magnet (≥ magnet (within the “projectile zone” in Fig. 4.2).
1000 Gauss) for these purposes. To minimize risk There have been reports of projectile injuries from
of unsafe items entering Zone IV, and to minimize ferromagnetic anesthetic gas or oxygen cylinders,
risk of burns from potential metallic fibers in and even patient deaths. In addition to injuring
clothing, the ACR Committee on MR Safety now patients, projectiles may also cause extensive
recommends that all MR patients are changed damage to the MR unit. It is important to
into MR safe gowns or scrubs. understand that magnetic attraction does NOT
increase linearly as one approaches the magnet.
Occasionally, devices that are determined to be
Rather, the spatial gradient magnetic field
ferromagnetic and MR unsafe may be
increases very steeply in close proximity to the
intentionally permitted into Zone III. In such
magnet such that one can perceive very little
cases, these must be appropriately secured or
magnetic pull on a ferromagnetic object, and then
tethered at all times and be under the supervision
when moving only a short distance closer, the
of trained MR personnel.
object is subjected to a tremendously higher
attractive force, typically ripping an object from the floors or walls for safety, particularly when it
one’s grasp in an uncontrolled manner. For this extends beyond the walls of the MR scanner room.
reason, the ACR Manual on MR Safety now It is important to remember that the magnetic
recommends pocketless attire for MR personnel field is three- dimensional. Thus, the restricted
who work in Zone IV on a daily basis. area may extend through the floor and/or ceiling
to adjacent floors.
Screening is more difficult when the patient is
unconscious or otherwise unable to provide a 4.1.2 Implanted Devices
reliable history. In such cases, screening
Medical devices contain varying amounts of
information should be obtained as best as possible
ferromagnetic material and can be subject to
from other sources, such as family members, the
translational and rotational forces when
medical record, and available prior imaging. The
interacting with the magnetic field of an MR
urgency of the examination should be balanced
unit. In addition, presence of any conducting
with the level of uncertainty of the screening
metal can result in current generation from
process. A physical examination by trained MR
the radiofrequency B field and interactions
personnel should be performed to assess for
with the gradient dB/dt field. All metal-
surgical scars that may warrant additional
containing implants are considered either
evaluation.
MR unsafe (e.g., a ferromagnetic aneurysm
Radiography may be required to assess for
clip), or MR conditional (e.g., a titanium
foreign bodies, implants, or devices. If there is a
aneurysm clip, a nitinol stent, an MR
documented history of eye injury from metal and
conditional cardiac pacemaker system), but
uncertainty as to whether there may be retained
are never considered to be MR safe.
intraocular metal, imaging is recommended,
which may include either orbital X-rays or thin There has been at least one documented case
section head CT. of a fatality due to rotation of an MR unsafe
ferromagnetic aneurysm clip while the
The 5 Gauss line historically demarcated the
patient was in the MR scanner. If a patient is
threshold of safety for implantable cardiac
identified to have an intracranial aneurysm
devices. However, cardiac implantable device
clip(s), MRI should not be performed until
manufacturers have been required to demonstrate
the specific manufacturer, model, and type
that their devices are immune to static magnetic
of (each) aneurysm clip is definitively
fields up to 10 Gauss. Thus, the 5 Gauss line
identified, and its MR safety conditions
provided a substantial safety margin. The
identified. Although a patient may
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
previously have undergone an MR
has recently revised the safety margin
examination with an aneurysm clip without
demarcation from the more stringent 5 Gauss line
known complications, that fact alone is not
to the less stringent 9 Gauss line, which is closer to
sufficient to conclude that the clip is MR
the magnet. This still allows for 1 gauss tolerance
conditional.
for variability in the device testing methods. This
Cardiac implantable electronic devices
change was recognized by the FDA and endorsed
(CIED) similarly can be adversely affected by
by the ACR MR Safety Committee in 2024.
Because the 9 Gauss line is within the 5 Gauss line the B 0 , B 1 , and dB/dt fields, potentially
(closer to the magnet), sites that have been leading to complications, including failure to
following previous 5 Gauss recommendations are pace, induction of ventricular fibrillation,
and heating of cardiac tissue adjacent to the
already compliant with the new 9 Gauss
leads; these complications can potentially be
recommendations. This line should be marked on
fatal. The FDA label designation of MR include the implanted pulse generator as
conditional for pacemakers became available well as the leads) and if MR conditional, the
in February 2011; such labels specify conditions for scanning must be strictly
conditions under which the devices may adhered to.
enter the MR scan room. If MRI is performed
4.1.3 MR and Pregnancy
on a patient with an MR-conditional CIED,
the conditions for scanning must be followed MRI exposure alone, without the administration
of gadolinium-based contrast media, has not
in their entirety, including attention to
been shown to have a detrimental effect on the
magnet field strength, scanning parameters,
and cardiology programming of the device, developing fetus. For this reason, no special
and monitoring of the patient throughout the consideration is recommended during pregnancy
exam in the presence of ACLS trained regarding exposure to noncontrast MRI up to 3T
personnel, with ready availability of a crash at normal operating mode. However, since it is
impossible to completely eliminate all risk,
cart should resuscitation be necessary.
patients and clinicians should consider whether
Of note, CIED systems not specifically
it is safe to delay an MR examination until the
labeled as MR conditional are being scanned
end of pregnancy.
at some centers in an informed consent
Pregnant healthcare workers may work in an
manner following guidelines established by
MRI environment during all stages of
the Heart Rhythm Society and the ACR.
pregnancy, but they should not remain in
Some of the specific elements that must be in
Zone IV during data acquisition or scanning.
place for this to occur include: 1) there is to
be an institutional protocol in place with a 4.1.4 MR-induced Burns
responsible MRMD and CIED MD using a
The possibility of thermal injury and burns,
radiology/cardiology team approach; 2)
some severe, in MRI is predominantly due to
medical necessity must be established for the the radiofrequency (RF) fields. Examples of
exam; 3) patient monitoring must be
MRI burns are shown in Figure 4.5.
performed, including ECG and pulse
As shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2, the RF coil
oximetry; 4) defibrillator/monitor with
is the closest to the patient in the magnet bore
external pacing must be available (outside
and poses specific risks. Physical contact
Zone IV); 5) ACLS personnel must be in
alone with the inner surface of the scanner
attendance during exam; and 6) appropriate
bore can produce proximity burns, and
CIED reprogramming must occur post MRI.
insulating pads are necessary to keep skin at
The number of active implanted medical
least 1 to 2 centimeters from the scanner
devices (devices that contain an energy
surface. In a large patient, tightly wedging a
source such as a battery or can be inductively
sheet in place of a pad between the skin and
coupled) continues to rapidly increase,
the bore creates a distinct risk of burns as it
including many types of neurostimulators
does not maintain the requisite distance; this
(e.g., deep brain, spinal cord, hypoglossal
practice is specifically recommended against
nerve, cochlear implants) and medication
in the ACR Manual on MR Safety.
pumps. It cannot be emphasized enough
RF fields can also induce currents within the
that there must be precise identification of
body, particularly when a “closed loop” is
the make and model of each component of
formed; for example, if there is skin-to-skin
an implanted device system (e.g., in the case
contact at the inner thighs. If there is only a
of a spinal cord stimulator system, this is to
Figure 4.5 Examples of serious tissue burns resulting from RF-related heating during MRI exams.
(A) Healing third degree burn at patient’s knee. (B) Reenactment of path of an arterial pressure
transducer extension cable within the RF field that crossed an anesthetized patient’s knee during an
interventional MR procedure. Subsequent testing with the cable in that configuration demonstrated
that the turbo spin-echo pulse sequences with whole body-averaged SARs of approximately 2 W/kg
produced localized heating approaching 30° Celsius. (C) Skin burns caused by ECG electrode lead
heating during MRI. (D) Third degree burn resulting from RF-related heating of a material (i.e., cell
phone) courtesy of Frank G. Shellock, PhD. Figure from the ACR® Manual on MR Safety 2024, used with
permission.
padding prevents such situations.
small surface area of skin-to-skin contact, the
Commercial pads with strategically placed
concentrated current density and resistive
notches to keep thighs separated are
heating can lead to burns. Skin-to-skin burns
available, minimizing this skin-to-skin
have also occurred when a finger contacts the
contact risk.
thigh and when an overhanging abdominal
panniculus contacts the upper thigh in obese Patient clothing containing metal can also serve as
patients. Care must be taken to ensure that a source of heating, placing the patient at risk for
burns, especially when the clothing is adjacent to initiated by an operator using the emergency
the skin, such as underclothing. To minimize this magnet shutoff (quench) button, or it may occur
risk, it is recommended that patients change out of spontaneously and unintentionally as a result of
street clothes into hospital gowns or similar MR- equipment malfunction or system failure.
safe attire.
A magnetic quench is a significant event in which
Loops of metallic wire (e.g., from electronic a cascade of physical processes unfolds in rapid
physiologic monitoring equipment), patches of succession. In normal operation, the main
metal (e.g., in foil backed transdermal medication magnetic field is sustained by keeping the
patches), and other electrical conduction circuits electromagnetic coils of the MR scanner
may be rapidly heated by RF pulses during immersed in large volumes (typically 1500 to 2000
normal operation of an MRI system. Additionally, L) of extremely cold liquid helium, cooled to
large tattoos may occasionally undergo heating approximately -269°C (4°K). When the
and cause burns; application of a cold compress or temperature of the coils rises above the threshold
an ice pack may be necessary to reduce the risk of required to maintain superconductivity, electrical
skin burning. Since the RF resonant wavelength is resistance develops, generating additional heat
a function of magnet field strength, leads or other and triggering a rapid, self-reinforcing loss of
conductors can have drastically different and superconductivity. This process causes the liquid
unpredictable tendencies to heat in different helium to boil violently into gas, expanding its
magnets. Care must be taken to prevent wire volume by a factor of approximately 760.
loops or metallic patches from touching patients’
To safely accommodate this expansion, MR
skin during routine scanning.
systems are equipped with a dedicated quench
When medication patches are removed for MRI pipe that vents helium gas directly to the external
scanning, there must be a clear line of atmosphere. If the quench pipe fails or becomes
communication to ensure medication obstructed during a quench, the rapidly
replacement after the MRI, particularly for expanding helium gas may be inadvertently
critical medications (e.g., clonidine foil-backed released directly into the magnet room (Zone IV).
patches). Because helium is lighter than air, it rapidly
displaces oxygen, particularly near the floor,
4.1.5 Quenching (Emergency Magnet Shutoff)
creating an immediate risk of hypoxia and
When the presence of the magnetic field poses an asphyxiation for anyone in the room. In addition,
immediate risk to human life or health—such as the sudden influx of extremely cold gas can
when personnel are pinned to the magnet by a produce dense condensation fog, severely
ferromagnetic hospital gurney—the magnetic reducing visibility and complicating safe egress.
field must be eliminated by initiating an For these reasons, emergency procedures for a
emergency magnet shutoff. MRI personnel must quench should always include immediate
recognize that, unlike most medical equipment, evacuation of Zone IV.
an MRI magnet cannot simply be switched on
Architectural features of the magnet room can
and off.
further influence safety during a quench.
Because the supercooled main magnetic coil is Inward-swinging doors may create a risk of
always on, the only way to turn off the main positive-pressure entrapment during rapid
magnetic field is by initiating a “quench,” in gas expansion. Thus, most contemporary MRI
which the magnetic coil abruptly loses its
installations incorporate pressure-
superconducting properties and associated equalization mechanisms designed to
magnetism. A quench may be deliberately mitigate this hazard.
4.2 Management of Intravascular contrast media. Iso-osmolality media are
Contrast Media sometimes used for intra-arterial injection (and
uncommonly for intravenous injection), because
4.2.1 Iodinated Contrast Media
they cause less discomfort than do nonionic
Types of Iodinated Contrast Media monomers when injected into the arteries.
All iodinated contrast media are derived from Many nonionic contrast media are approved for
tri-iodinated benzene rings. Iodinated intravascular use in the United States, including
contrast media can be classified as ionic or the low-osmolality agents iohexol (Omnipaque®),
nonionic, and monomeric or dimeric. iopamidol (Isovue®), iopromide (Ultravist®),
ioversol (Optiray®), and ioxilan (Oxilan®). Only
Ionic contrast media dissociate into two
one iso-osmolality contrast agent has been
particles in solution (an anion, which contains
approved for use: iodixanol (Visipaque®).
the tri-iodinated benzene ring, and a cation,
consisting of sodium or methylglucamine Adverse Reactions to Iodinated Contrast Media
[meglumine]). Nonionic contrast media are
Most patients who receive iodinated contrast
hydrophilic molecules that do not need to be
media have no adverse effects. Adverse contrast
conjugated with cations to be water soluble.
reactions of any type have been reported in up to
They do not dissociate in solution.
3% of patients injected with nonionic contrast
Lipiodol is the only currently approved water-
material, though some series have reported a
insoluble iodinated contrast media.
much lower frequency.
Monomeric contrast molecules contain only
one tri-iodinated benzene ring, while dimeric Acute adverse reactions can be categorized as
contrast molecules contain two joined tri- either physiologic or allergic-like. Physiologic
iodinated benzene rings. reactions are dose related. These reactions are
less likely to occur, and when they do occur,
The concentration of iodinated contrast media is
they are less likely to be severe when lower
often associated with the name of the product.
doses of contrast material are administered.
The higher the iodine concentration, the higher
They are believed to represent direct toxic
the osmolarity. For example, iohexol
effects of the injected contrast media.
(Omnipaque® ) 350 has 350 mg iodine/ml and has
greater osmolarity than Omnipaque® 300, which The mechanism of allergic-like reactions is
has 300 mg iodine/ml. At standard iodine not understood in most patients. However, it
concentrations, ionic monomeric contrast media is known that in most patients these reactions
have the highest osmolality, roughly four times (especially those classified as mild or
that of human serum. They are referred to as moderate) do not represent the antigen-IgE
high-osmolality contrast media. These agents are antibody response characteristic of typical
not employed routinely for intravascular injection allergic reactions, such as to penicillin.
in the United States as they are associated with Therefore, sensitization due to prior exposure
higher rates of adverse reactions than are is not required for an allergic-like reaction to
nonionic monomeric or dimeric contrast media. contrast material to occur. Thus, these
reactions are generally considered to be
Nonionic monomeric contrast media have about
“allergic-like” rather than “allergic.”
half the osmolality of high-osmolality contrast
Nonetheless, allergic-like reactions present
media, and roughly twice that of serum.
with symptoms similar to those of true
Nonionic dimers have similar osmolality to that
allergic reactions. These reactions are
of plasma and are referred to as iso-osmolality
idiosyncratic and can occur from any
administered volume of contrast media. hypotension and tachycardia, pulmonary
edema, cardiopulmonary arrest.
Acute adverse reactions are categorized as
being mild, moderate, or severe. Examples of As noted above, pulmonary edema and
some reactions of different types and severity cardiopulmonary arrest can be symptoms of either
as summarized in the ACR Manual on Contrast severe physiologic or severe allergic-like reactions.
Media are as follows:
Fortunately, a clear majority of acute adverse
Mild Reactions: Signs and symptoms are self- reactions to contrast media are physiologic, mild,
limited and without progression. and self- limiting, often consisting of warmth,
metallic taste, and nausea. Allergic- like reactions
1. Mild Physiologic Reactions: Nausea,
are much less common, encountered in < 1% of
vomiting, flushing, warmth, chills,
injected patients. In one recent series, 0.6% of
headache, anxiety, altered taste, mild
patients injected with low- osmolality contrast
hypertension, and spontaneously
media had allergic-like reactions, most of which
resolving vasovagal reaction
were mild. Severe life- threatening allergic-like
2. Mild Allergic-like Reactions: Few hives, reactions are extremely rare, with the incidence of
pruritus, limited cutaneous edema, such reactions estimated to be 0.01% to 0.04% of
itchy/scratchy throat, nasal congestion,
injected patients.
repetitive sneezing, stuffy nose
Risk Factors for Adverse Reactions
Moderate Reactions: Signs and symptoms
Several factors increase the likelihood of an
are more pronounced and commonly require
adverse reaction to contrast media. Patients
medical management.
with a history of a prior allergic-like reaction
1. Moderate Physiologic Reactions: to the same class of contrast media
Protracted nausea, chest pain, vasovagal (iodinated or gadolinium-based) are
reaction that requires and is responsive to believed to have approximately five times
treatment the risk of the general population for having
2. Moderate Allergic-like Reactions: Diffuse another allergic-like reaction to that same
hives, diffuse erythema (with stable vital class of contrast media.
signs), facial edema without dyspnea, Patients with other allergies and asthma are
wheezing with mild or no hypoxia. about two to three times as likely to have an
allergic-like reaction. Allergies to shellfish or
Severe Reactions: Signs and symptoms are
other iodine-containing products (such as
potentially life threatening and can result in
povidone-iodine [Betadine®]) are not
permanent morbidity or death if not managed
believed to increase the risk for an allergic-
appropriately.
like contrast reaction beyond that of other
1. Severe Physiologic Reactions: Vasovagal allergies. Also, a history of a prior allergic-
reaction resistant to treatment, arrhythmia, like reaction to gadolinium-based contrast
seizures, hypertensive crisis, pulmonary media (GBCM) is not believed to increase
edema, cardiopulmonary arrest. the risk of an allergic- like reaction to
iodinated contrast agents above that of other
2. Severe Allergic-like Reactions: Diffuse
allergies and vice versa.
edema or facial edema with dyspnea,
erythema with hypotension, laryngeal Some patients’ underlying diseases may be
edema with stridor and/or hypoxia, exacerbated by administration of contrast
wheezing with hypoxia, severe
media. Such disease exacerbations are administered. Currently, the ACR does NOT
considered to be non-allergic-like reactions. recommend routine premedication for patients
These can occur in patients with severe with a history of allergies to substances other
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and acute than contrast media, to patients with a history
kidney injury (AKI) (see section on contrast- of asthma, or to patients with allergic-like
associated AKI), cardiac arrhythmias, reactions to other classes of contrast media, such
congestive heart failure, myasthenia gravis, as iodinated contrast in the setting of an
and severe hyperthyroidism or allergic-like reaction to gadolinium-based
hypothyroidism. contrast.
Additional attention should be paid to the The only proven benefit of corticosteroid
use of intravascular iodinated contrast premedication regimens is a reduction in the
media in patients being considered for number of mild reactions. Studies showing
radioactive iodine therapy or undergoing the reduction in the number of mild
radioactive iodine imaging of the thyroid reactions after premedication did not have
gland. Administration of iodinated contrast sufficient numbers of patients with
medium can interfere with uptake of the moderate, severe, or life- threatening
treatment and diagnostic dose; therefore, reactions to draw statistically significant
washout periods of 3-4 weeks for patients conclusions about the ability of
with hyperthyroidism and 6 weeks for premedication to reduce those reaction rates.
patients with hypothyroidism, respectively, Thus, while there is no definite evidence that
are suggested. premedication protects against moderate,
severe, or life-threatening reactions, it is
typically assumed that there is a positive
Screening of Patients before Contrast Media
effect. The rarity of severe reactions makes it
Administration
difficult to prove a benefit of premedication
Safe administration of contrast media begins in this setting.
with a focused patient history to identify the
factors that may increase the likelihood of an
adverse reaction to contrast media.
Premedication Regimens
The likelihood of an allergic-like contrast reaction
The most widely accepted premedication
may be reduced by premedication.
regimens, or “preps,” involve the use of oral
Premedication corticosteroids and an antihistamine, with the first
steroid dose administered 12 to 13 hours before
The utility of premedication in high-risk patients is
uncertain based on best available evidence. contrast media injection and the antihistamine
Globally, there is widespread variability on given one hour before contrast media injection.
recommending use of premedication for allergic- One common adult regimen involves oral
like reactions to contrast. For example, in Europe, administration of 50 mg of prednisone 13, 7, and 1
hour(s) before contrast media injection, and oral
premedication is NOT routinely advised. In the
administration of 50 mg of diphenhydramine
United States, the ACR Manual on Contrast
Media (2024) suggests consideration of (Benadryl®) 1 hour before injection. Another
premedication only for patients who have had a common regimen involves oral administration of
prior allergic-like or unknown-type reaction to 32 mg of methylprednisolone 12 and 2 hours
the same class of contrast media as that to be before contrast media injection. While a 12- or 13-
hour oral regimen has been proven effective, and
a 1- or 2-hour oral regimen has been proven to be transient hyperglycemia can occur from three
ineffective, the precise minimum effective time doses of corticosteroids, it is usually mild and is
for premedication is not known. rarely clinically significant. Other complications
from a short burst of corticosteroids, such as
Premedication can also be administered to
exacerbation of infection and peptic ulcer
children who have had prior allergic-like
disease, steroid psychosis, and tumor lysis
contrast reactions. One recommended
syndromes, have been reported, but are very
regimen calls for administration of 0.5-0.7
rare.
mg/kg of oral prednisone at 13, 7, and 1
hours prior to contrast injection, up to a
maximum of 50 mg, with one dose of oral
Premedication Break-Through Reactions
diphenhydramine (Benadryl ®) one hour
prior to injection, at a dose of 1 mg/kg, up to Premedication likely reduces the risk of a contrast
a maximum dose of 50 mg. reaction in high-risk patients, but it does not
eliminate it. A contrast reaction that occurs despite
In some situations, patient health can be
premedication is called a “breakthrough
seriously jeopardized by having the patient
reaction.”
wait 12 or more hours before a contrast-
enhanced study. In these situations, “rapid” Even with appropriate use of an accepted
corticosteroid regimens may be utilized, with premedication regimen, breakthrough reactions
the understanding that limited evidence occur in a small number of high-risk patients.
When they do occur, they are of similar severity to
supports this approach. The ACR Manual on
the initial reaction about 80% of the time, less
Contrast Media (2024) suggests using one of
these regimens in inpatients and Emergency severe about 10% of the time, and more severe
Room patients. One of the more commonly about 10% of the time.
used rapid preps consists of intravenous (IV)
A patient who has had an allergic-like reaction to
administration of 200 mg of hydrocortisone
contrast media despite steroid premedication can
every 4 hours until the study is performed,
be reinjected in the future after being
preferably deferring imaging until at least premedicated again, if clinical circumstances
two doses of hydrocortisone have been
require reinjection. Many such patients will not
administered (if safe and feasible). In this
have a repeat reaction, and if a repeat reaction
rapid prep, 50 mg of diphenhydramine is
occurs, it will most likely be of the same severity
also administered 1 hour before contrast
as the previous breakthrough reaction (e.g., mild
media injection. In the rare emergency
subsequent breakthrough reaction if the previous
situation where a contrast-enhanced
breakthrough reaction was mild).
examination must be performed
immediately, the contrast media may have to
be administered without premedication. Contrast-associated Acute Kidney Injury and
Contrast-induced Acute Kidney Injury
The greatest risk of corticosteroid premedication
to patient health is probably the delay that it Contrast-associated acute kidney injury (CA-
causes in the performance of an imaging study AKI) is a general term used to describe a
(which can delay disease diagnosis, increase sudden deterioration in renal function that
cost, and, in inpatients, expose patients to the occurs after the intravascular administration
additional risk of hospital-acquired infections for of iodinated contrast media (with clinical
longer periods of time). For such patients, use of onset detectable within 48 hours as
the “rapid” prep has been recommended. While creatinine accumulates in the serum). Such
injury may occur whether or not the contrast could also affect renal function, including catheter
medium is determined to have caused the manipulation in the abdominal aorta (i.e.,
deterioration in renal function. CA-AKI is a atheroemboli) and exposure of the kidneys to
correlative diagnosis, meaning that AKI can more concentrated contrast media.
be correlated to, but not proven to be caused
With the recent performance of several large
by, the administration of IV contrast.
propensity-adjusted controlled retrospective
Contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI) studies, it is now understood that true CI-AKI is
is defined as a sudden deterioration in renal much less common than previously thought, and
function caused by intravascular if CI-AKI occurs at all, it is most likely to develop
administration of iodinated contrast media. in patients who have severe CKD (estimated
CI-AKI is a subset of CA-AKI; that is, those glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] < 30
cases of CA-AKI in which iodinated contrast mL/min/1.73 m2) or AKI. CI-AKI occurring in
media is proven or known to be the cause of patients with an eGFR of 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 or
the AKI. CI-AKI is more of a statistical higher is very unlikely, and in patients with an
concept because it is difficult in practice to eGFR between 30 and 45 mL/min/1.73 m2, it is
identify which individual cases of CA-AKI questionable. As a result, special precautions for
can be proven to be caused by the contrast administering IV iodinated contrast media are
media. For example, if a group of patients advised only for patients with severe CKD or
who are administered iodinated contrast AKI. Administration of large or multiple doses of
media have a higher rate of CA-AKI than a contrast media within 24 to 48 hours may also be a
properly chosen control group of patients not risk factor for AKI, although precise risk
receiving iodinated contrast media, then the thresholds are not well defined and likely vary by
excess rate is due to CI-AKI, but it is patient condition, and whether the contrast
generally not possible to identify which medium is administered intra-arterially or
patients have CA-AKI from CI-AKI and intravenously.
which have CA-AKI from causes other than
This dose-toxicity relationship has been
contrast media.
consistently shown after coronary arteriography,
Nearly all papers published on CI-AKI before but has not been conclusively shown for IV
2006, and many afterwards, considered all CA- administrations. From a practical standpoint, it is
AKI to be CI-AKI. This error has led to therefore unclear if small reductions in
substantially inflated estimates of the rate of CI- administered IV contrast volume has any actual
AKI. It is now known that most CA-AKI is not benefit in further reducing risk of CI-AKI. It is
due to CI-AKI. therefore advised to always try to use the lowest
dose of IV contrast needed to get a diagnostic
CI-AKI was previously believed to be common,
exam for the clinical indication.
because a clear majority of published studies that
came to this conclusion did not include control The Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes
groups of patients who did not receive contrast (KDIGO) organization has suggested that,
media. For this reason, distinction between CI- regardless of the cause, AKI should be diagnosed
AKI and CA-AKI was not possible in these whenever there is 1) an absolute serum creatinine
studies. Additionally, many previous publications increase of at least 0.3 mg/dL; 2) a percentage
studied patients who had undergone increase in serum creatinine of at least 50% (1.5-
arteriography rather than IV contrast media fold above baseline); or 3) a reduction in urine
injections. Catheter angiography may be output to 0.5 mL/kg/h for at least 6 hours.
associated with additional risks to the patient that
The usual clinical course of CA-AKI these patients may be more important to their
(including CI-AKI) is a rise in serum well-being than for patients on chronic
creatinine beginning within 24 hours of hemodialysis.
contrast media administration, peaking at
There is some controversy concerning screening of
about 4 days and then usually returning to
patients’ renal function before contrast media
baseline by 7 to 10 days. Most affected
administration if no recent eGFR level is
patients do not have oliguria, and it is
available. Suggested indications for obtaining a
extremely rare for IV iodinated contrast to
serum creatinine, from which an eGFR can be
cause permanent renal dysfunction.
determined, have included a history of renal
In addition to severe renal dysfunction, other disease (including dialysis, renal transplant,
previously identified diseases or conditions solitary kidney, renal cancer, or renal surgery),
may predispose patients to develop AKI, but hypertension and diabetes mellitus. If a
most likely, in and of themselves, they do not potentially at-risk patient’s condition is stable, a
specifically predispose patients to develop creatinine value within 30 days of contrast
CI-AKI. These include diabetes mellitus, administration is generally considered sufficient.
dehydration, cardiovascular disease, diuretic
In patients with severe CKD or AKI who are
use, advanced age, multiple myeloma with
considered at increased risk of developing CI-
high beta 2-microglobulin, and hypertension.
AKI, several prophylactic strategies should be
Although patients with end-stage renal considered. Since most iodinated contrast media
disease who are on chronic hemodialysis are currently administered intravenously for CT
could experience additional renal function scans, alternatives include performing only
compromise (resulting in a further decrease unenhanced scans or using other modalities such
in any remaining urine output that might be as ultrasound or MR (note that contrast-enhanced
helpful for managing electrolyte balance), MR performed with certain MR contrast media is
such a risk is theoretical. Many associated with a risk of nephrogenic systemic
nephrologists agree to inject these patients fibrosis [NSF] in patients with severe CKD or AKI
with intravascular contrast media if a —see separate section on NSF). When iodinated
contrast- enhanced study is necessary. There contrast media administration is deemed
is also a possibility that such patients, if their necessary in high-risk patients, the lowest
fluid status is brittle, could develop fluid possible dose needed to perform a diagnostic
overload as a result of the administration of study should be used.
even a relatively small volume of
The most widely accepted strategy for
hyperosmolality contrast media.
minimizing the risk of CI-AKI in at-risk
Because iodinated contrast media have no patients (typically those with AKI or eGFR <
significant toxicity if retained in the body after 30) is IV volume expansion with isotonic
injection, there is no requirement that chronic fluids, such as 0.9% saline or Lactated
hemodialysis be timed to occur either Ringer’s solution. No standard volume
immediately before or immediately after contrast expansion protocol has been established;
media administration. therefore, the prescribed volume will vary
by patient and institutional guidelines.
Some nephrologists advocate more caution in
However, for reference, an example
administering potential nephrotoxins such as
approach might include administration of
intravascular iodinated contrast to patients on
volumes of 100 mL/h for 6 to 12 hours before
peritoneal dialysis because the urine output of
contrast administration and continued for 4
to 12 hours after contrast administration. Iodinated Contrast Media in Pregnancy
Volume expansion with sodium bicarbonate
Although iodinated contrast media cross the
solution instead of saline or Lactated
placenta, there is no evidence that maternal
Ringer’s solution has been used, but it is not
exposure to intravascular iodinated contrast
clear that this solution is any more
media is harmful to the fetus. Specifically, there is
efficacious for preventing AKI after IV
no evidence that fetal (in utero) exposure to
iodinated contrast administration.
iodinated contrast media given to the mother
Multiple other drugs have been studied to increases mutagenesis or fetal cancer risk or
assess if they can help reduce risk of CI-AKI. affects fetal renal function or fetal thyroid
N-acetylcysteine, mannitol, furosemide, and function.
theophylline have all been discredited as a
Iodinated Contrast Media in Women Who Are
means of preventing CI-AKI.
Breastfeeding
Metformin
Only 1% of maternally administered contrast
Metformin-containing drugs are prescribed media enters the milk of breastfeeding mothers
as oral agents of choice for treating many and, of this, only 1% of the contrast media in
patients with diabetes mellitus. Metformin is breast milk is absorbed through an infant’s
contraindicated in patients with severe renal gastrointestinal tract.
dysfunction because a very small percentage
This represents less than 1% of the recommended
of these patients develop lactic acidosis,
infant dose of iodinated contrast media that could
leading to a reported 50% mortality rate.
be used for a contrast- enhanced imaging study
There is no direct interaction between on that infant.
iodinated contrast media and metformin;
There is no evidence that this tiny amount of
however, if a patient receiving metformin
absorbed iodinated contrast media has any
develops AKI, the possibility of developing
adverse effect on the infant. Although it is
lactic acidosis exists. The American College of
generally accepted that no precautions need to be
Radiology Committee on Drugs and Contrast
taken, it is recommended that a lactating mother
Media currently recommends that no
be informed that studies assessing the risks to an
precautions are necessary in diabetic patients
infant are limited. If concerned, the mother can
taking metformin, unless the patient has
abstain from breastfeeding for 12 to 24 hours after
CKD and the eGFR is < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2
a contrast-enhanced study is performed and
(in which case the patient should not be
pump and discard breast milk that is produced
taking metformin anyway), the patient has
during this time.
AKI, or the patient is undergoing arterial
catheterization with the risk of emboli to the
Iodinated contrast media in young children
renal arteries. In the latter instances, the drug
should be withheld for 48 hours after contrast
In 2022, the FDA updated thyroid function
media administration and only reinstituted if
monitoring guidelines for young children
the renal function is reassessed and found to
who received iodinated contrast media. The
be acceptable.
FDA has since updated their recommended
Thus, metformin itself is not a risk factor for the for children under age 3 who receive
development of CI-AKI, but patients who develop intravascular iodinated contrast media that
renal failure while taking metformin are at risk of decisions to monitor thyroid function should
developing lactic acidosis. be based on an individualized assessment
incorporating patient risk factors such as toxic effects and its hyperosmolality. Adverse
prematurity, very low birth weight, and effects are usually self-limited, most
other medical conditions that could affect commonly consisting of prolonged pain or
thyroid function. However, these guidelines swelling.
remain controversial and have not been
Severe extravasation injuries occur in < 1% of
endorsed by the ACR Committee on Drugs
patients with extravasations. The most common
and Contrast Media.
and most potentially devastating severe injuries
Extravasation after extravasation of nonionic contrast media are
compartment syndromes, which result from
Extravasation of IV-administered iodinated
mechanical compression. Skin ulceration and
contrast media is an occasionally
tissue necrosis are less commonly encountered.
encountered complication of intravascular
Other complications, including lymphedema and
contrast media administration, usually
reflex sympathetic dystrophy, are extremely rare.
occurring during CT. The reported overall
rate of extravasation with power injection for Compartment syndromes are more likely to
CT ranges from 0.1% to 1.2%. While develop when large volume extravasations occur,
extravasations are more likely to occur when especially into smaller compartments such as the
poor catheter insertion technique is utilized, hand, wrist, or foot, but even large- volume
they can be encountered even when proper extravasations most often resolve without any
technique is employed. adverse effects. The risk of a severe extravasation
injury may also be increased in patients with
Extravasations are more common in patients
arterial insufficiency or compromised venous or
who are uncommunicative, have altered
lymphatic drainage.
circulation in the injected extremity, have
had radiation to the injected extremity, and Severe symptoms may not be evident
are injected in the hand, foot, or ankle. immediately after the extravasation occurs. They
may develop gradually over time. For this reason,
Methods to help reduce risk of extravasation
patients should be monitored to assure that minor
include using angiocatheters instead of
symptoms remain stable or that minor or more
butterfly needles, confirming the location of
significant symptoms are resolving or improving.
the line via blood aspiration and doing a
When a symptomatically stable or improving
small test injection, and carefully securing the
patient is discharged from the radiology
inserted catheter. Injections into the
department, he or she must be given clear
antecubital or other large forearm veins are
instructions concerning what new or recurring
preferred.
symptoms may indicate a severe injury and
Immediately after extravasation of contrast where and how to seek prompt additional
media occurs, most patients complain of treatment if necessary.
swelling or tightness and/or stinging or
Little can be done to mitigate the effects of
burning pain at the site of extravasation.
contrast extravasations after they occur. Elevation
Edema, erythema, and tenderness may be
of the affected extremity above the level of the
found on physical examination. Ninety-eight
heart is recommended to decrease capillary
percent of extravasation injuries resolve with
hydrostatic pressure. This may promote
no adverse sequelae. In the remaining 2% of
resorption of the extravasated contrast media.
injuries, some patient morbidity develops
Cold or warm compresses can be applied to the
because contrast media can damage adjacent
site of extravasation. Attempted aspiration of the
tissue, likely due to a combination of direct
extravasated contrast media and injection of than acute adverse reactions to iodinated contrast
medications into the extravasation site (such as media. In general, the physiologic and allergic-
corticosteroids or hyaluronidase) are ineffective. like reactions that occur after GBCM
administration are similar to those that occur after
Surgical consultation should be obtained
injection of iodinated contrast agents. For this
after an extravasation whenever there is
reason, treatment of contrast reactions to GBCM
concern for a developing compartment
is similar to that of contrast reactions to iodinated
syndrome or for tissue necrosis. Ominous
contrast media (see separate section on treatment,
symptoms that indicate the need for prompt
to follow).
surgical consultation include progressive
swelling or pain, decreased active or passive A clear majority of GBCM reactions are mild and
range of motion, altered tissue perfusion non-allergic-like (i.e., physiologic), including
(manifested by decreased capillary refill), coldness at the injection site, nausea with or
change in sensation or paresthesia without vomiting, headache, warmth or pain at
development, or skin ulceration or blistering. the injection site, paresthesias, and dizziness.
In general, the earliest and most reliable sign Rash, hives, and urticaria are the most frequent
of a severe injury is severe or progressive allergic-like symptoms; however, respiratory and
pain. cardiovascular reactions can occur. Fatal contrast
reactions have been reported but are exceedingly
It should be noted that there is no
rare.
extravasation volume threshold above which
surgical consultation is considered A unique physiologic side effect of gadoxetate
mandatory. disodium (Eovist®) is transient tachypnea, which
can cause motion artifact on arterial- phase MRI.
4.2.2 Gadolinium-based Contrast
It is more common with high volume, off-label
Media (GBCM)
administrations.
Classification of GBCM
Patients at highest risk for adverse reactions
Most contrast agents used for MRI contain to GBCM are those who have had previous
gadolinium bound within a chemical moiety reactions to these agents (even to different
called a chelate. GBCM). Lesser risk factors include other
allergies and asthma. A history of a prior
Gadolinium-based contrast media (GBCM)
allergic-like reaction to iodinated contrast
are classified as linear or macrocyclic, and
media is not believed to increase the risk of an
ionic or nonionic. In general, macrocyclic
allergic-like reaction to GBCM above that of
GBCM, in which the gadolinium ion is
other allergies.
surrounded by a chelate ring, have more
stable binding of the gadolinium ion within Some preventive measures can be considered
the chelate than do linear agents, in which the in patients who have experienced previous
chelate is not in the form of a ring. Among the adverse reactions to GBCM. This includes
linear agents, the nonionic agents are less using a different gadolinium compound for
stable than the ionic agents. Table 4.1 reinjection. It should be noted that the FDA-
summarizes the gadolinium- containing approved package insert for one GBCM
contrast agents currently available for use in (gadobenate dimeglumine [MultiHance®])
the United States. states that use of this GBCM is specifically
contraindicated in patients who have had
Acute adverse reactions to GBCM occur
prior allergic-like contrast reactions to
approximately two to four times less frequently
Agent Ionicity Linear or macrocyclic
Gadopentetate dimeglumine Ionic Linear
(Magnevist®)1
Gadobenate dimeglumine Ionic Linear
(MultiHance®)2
Gadoxetate disodium (Eovist®)3 Ionic Linear
Gadodiamide (Omniscan®)1 Nonionic Linear
Gadoteridol (ProHance®)2 Nonionic Macrocyclic
Gadobutrol (Gadavist®)2 Nonionic Macrocyclic
Gadoterate meglumine Ionic Macrocyclic
(Dotarem®)2 (Clariscan®)2
Gadopiclenol (Elucirem®)2 Nonionic Macrocyclic
(Vueway®)2
Table 4.1. Characteristics of approved gadolinium-containing contrast agents.
1Indicates agents that have a higher risk for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)
2Indicates agents that have a lower risk for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)
3Indicates agent with limited evidence regarding association with nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis (NSF).
relatively contraindicated in pregnant patients.
ANY GBCM. Another preventive measure is
These agents pass through the placental barrier and
premedicating patients with corticosteroids and
enter the fetal circulation. They are then filtered by
antihistamines (using a regimen identical to
the fetal kidneys and excreted into the amniotic
that used for prophylaxis of adverse reactions
fluid, where they may remain for a prolonged
to iodinated contrast media) before injection.
period. Prolonged presence of the agent in the
The effectiveness of premedication before
amniotic fluid could theoretically increase the risk of
GBCM has not yet been determined, but
dissociation from the chelate of the potentially toxic
premedication is still often performed, based on
gadolinium ion (see separate section on
evidence extrapolated from experience with
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, to follow). For this
iodinated contrast media.
reason, GBCM should only be administered to
GBCM in Pregnancy pregnant patients in carefully selected situations in
which the benefit is thought to outweigh the
GBCM have been classified by the Food and
Drug Administration as pregnancy class C potential risk.
drugs (no adequate and well-controlled studies
GBCM in Women Who Are Breastfeeding
in humans have been performed, although
Only tiny amounts (0.04%) of administered
animal reproduction studies have shown an
GBCM are excreted into the milk of
adverse effect on the fetus) and are therefore
breastfeeding mothers, and only a tiny
percentage of this (1%) GBCM is absorbed has only been exposed to one agent.
through an infant’s gastrointestinal tract.
NSF has been encountered almost exclusively after
This is much less than the allowed GBCM
patient exposure to several specific linear GBCM,
dose, when a contrast-enhanced imaging
with the high-risk agents being gadodiamide
study is needed in an infant. There is no
(Omniscan®), gadoversetamide (OptiMark®, no
evidence that the tiny amount of absorbed
longer manufactured), and gadopentetate
GBCM has any adverse effect on a
dimeglumine (Magnevist®).
breastfed infant. Therefore, there is no
Higher doses and multiple doses of the higher risk
need for a mother to stop breastfeeding
after a GBCM-enhanced study. However, GBCM are believed to increase the likelihood of
as with the administration of iodinated NSF, although cases have occurred after only a
single administration of a standard dose of GBCM.
contrast media, if the mother is concerned,
she can stop breastfeeding for 12 to 24 Few, if any, cases of unconfounded NSF have been
hours after the study, and pump and reported with the lower-risk agents, which include
discard any milk produced during this gadobenate dimeglumine (MultiHance®),
time.
gadobutrol (Gadavist®), gadoterate meglumine
Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis (NSF) (Dotarem® and Clariscan®), and gadoteridol
(ProHance®).
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is a
fibrosing disease most evident in the skin Gadoxetate disodium (Eovist®) is a newer agent
with limited information about its association with
and subcutaneous tissues, but it also may
NSF; however, the risk of NSF developing after
involve other organs, such as the lungs,
esophagus, heart, and skeletal muscles. gadoxetate disodium administration has also been
Initial symptoms typically include skin found to be very low.
thickening with plaque formation.
Gadopiclenol (Elucirem® and Vueway®) was
Symptoms and signs may progress rapidly,
approved by the FDA in 2022. This agent is
with some affected patients developing
macrocyclic and has been classified in the lower-risk
contractures and joint immobility. agent group for NSF development. The agent is
Occasionally, the disease may be fatal.
unique in that it has the highest relaxivity values of
There is no known effective treatment.
any GBCM agent approved in the US. Based on
NSF occurs nearly exclusively in patients non-inferiority trials, it was approved by the FDA at
with severe CKD (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 a dose that results in a 50% reduction in gadolinium
m2) or in patients with AKI who have been dose (0.05 mmol/kg compared to most other GBCM
exposed to GBCM. Symptom onset can agents which are dosed at 0.1 mmol/kg).
occur from days to years after GBCM
Because most patients with severe CKD who are
administration. Identification of the GBCM
exposed to NSF-associated GBCM do not develop
responsible for the precipitation of this
NSF, other factors are believed to be required for
disease is sometimes difficult, because
disease development. Additional suggested risk
many patients have received multiple
factors for NSF have included metabolic acidosis or
different MR contrast agents. GBCM agent
medications that predispose patients to acidosis;
exposure is considered to be
increased iron, calcium, and/or phosphate levels;
“confounded” in patients with NSF who
high-dose erythropoietin therapy;
have been exposed to multiple GBCM; the
immunosuppression; vasculopathy; an acute pro-
exposure is considered to be
inflammatory event; and infection. Unfortunately,
“unconfounded” when a patient with NSF
no consistent relationship between these factors
and NSF has been identified. Gadolinium Retention
The mechanism of NSF is unknown, Some administered gadolinium remains in the body
although many experts have speculated after GBCM administration. It has long been known
that it may result from dissociation of the that this retention occurs in the skeleton and is
gadolinium ion from its chelate in vivo, greater with linear than macrocyclic agents.
with subsequent precipitation of
More recently, investigators have found that
gadolinium in tissue. This mechanism has
gadolinium is also retained within the brain
been suggested because the three high-risk
(particularly in the globus pallidus and dentate
GBCM have lower stability of gadolinium
nucleus). This occurs even in patients with normal
ion binding to the chelate than do most of
renal function. The amount of gadolinium
the nonimplicated GBCM. With high-risk
accumulation is proportional to the amount of
GBCMs, a different ion is thought to be
GBCM that a patient has received. It is not clear in
able to replace the gadolinium ion within
what state the gadolinium is retained. As with
the chelate more easily, thereby freeing up
retention in the bones, retention in the brain is
the toxic gadolinium atom. This
greater with linear than with macrocyclic agents.
replacement process is referred to as
transmetallation. There is no evidence of any adverse neurologic
effects of this accumulation (even after millions of
In response to the emergence of NSF,
GBCM administrations throughout the world);
radiologists have instituted a number of
however, further study is necessary to determine
precautions that have been effective in
long-term effects, if any, that gadolinium deposition
nearly eliminating this disease. The most
in the brain may have.
important precaution is avoiding the high-
risk GBCM (gadodiamide [Omniscan®], 4.2.3 Treatment of Acute Contrast Reactions
gadoversetamide [OptiMark®], and
When an allergic-like reaction occurs, rapid
gadopentetate dimeglumine [Magnevist®])
recognition, patient assessment, and diagnosis are
in any patients requiring
important so that appropriate treatment can be
contrast- enhanced MRI who might have
instituted rapidly.
severe CKD (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2) or
A responding radiologist should assess the patient
AKI. At institutions where high-risk GBCM
quickly. A brief discussion with the patient and any
are used, patients referred for contrast-
present healthcare providers, when possible, should
enhanced MRI should be screened for renal
provide the following information: the reason for
disease (which may include obtaining
the imaging study, a description of the patient’s
eGFR levels in any patient with a history of
current symptoms, and a summary of the patient’s
a solitary kidney, kidney transplant, or
health problems and medications. Vital signs should
renal neoplasm; or hypertension or
be obtained promptly. IV access should be secured.
diabetes mellitus). The three high-risk
A pulse oximeter should be available. Oxygen
GBCM are absolutely contraindicated by
should also be available and, if administered,
the Food and Drug Administration when
should be given at high doses.
the eGFR is less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2.
There is no proof that immediate post-MRI
The examining radiologist should quickly
dialysis reduces the risk of NSF in any
determine the level of patient consciousness,
high-risk GBCM- exposed patients.
the appearance of the skin, the quality of
phonation, and the presence or absence of Hives (Urticaria)
respiratory and cardiovascular symptoms.
• No treatment is needed in most cases.
Mild reactions usually resolve within 20 to
• If symptomatic, administer
30 minutes and do not require medical
diphenhydramine (Benadryl®), 25 to 50
treatment; however, some patients with
mg orally (PO), intra- muscularly (IM),
moderate and severe reactions may
or intravenously (IV). Alternatively, use
initially develop only mild symptoms. For
fexofenadine (Allegra®), 180 mg PO.
this reason, all patients should be
monitored until their symptoms have Diffuse Erythema
improved. • Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and
Aggressiveness in managing a contrast use a pulse oximeter.
reaction depends on the type and severity • Give O
, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
of the reaction. Epinephrine comes in two
• If the patient is normotensive, no further
concentrations: a higher concentration (1
treatment is usually needed; note that
mg/mL in a 1 mL vial) intended for
antihistamines should be administered
intramuscular (IM) injection, and a more
with caution, as they may exacerbate
dilute concentration (1 mg/10 mL in a 10
existing or developing hypotension.
mL vial) intended for intravenous (IV) use.
Both contain the same total dose of 1 mg, • If the patient is hypotensive, give 1 L of
but in different volumes, which is a IV fluids rapidly, either 0.9% normal
frequent source of confusion—especially saline or Lactated Ringer’s solution.
since both may be stocked in code carts and
• If hypotension is profound or does not
referenced in ACLS algorithms. The key
respond to IV fluids, consider
point is that the concentrated 1 mg/mL
epinephrine IV (1 mg/10 mL), 1 mL
formulation should be used only for IM
(0.1 mg) slowly into a running
injection, while the dilute 1 mg/10 mL
infusion of IV fluids. Repeat as
formulation can be given as a slow IV push
needed at 5- to 10-minute intervals up
into a running infusion of fluids. EpiPen®
to 10 mL total. In the absence of IV
contains 0.3 mL of 1 mg/1 mL
access, consider epinephrine IM (1
concentration epinephrine, and the
mg/mL), 0.3 mL (0.3 mg), or IM
pediatric version (EpiPen Jr®) contains 0.15
EpiPen® or equivalent (usually 0.3
mL of 1 mg/1 mL concentration
mL). IM epinephrine may be repeated
epinephrine, both for IM administration. In
up to 1 mg total.
practice, IM epinephrine is the first-line
• Consider calling an emergency response
treatment in emergent situations without
team or 911 based on the severity of the
IV access, whereas IV epinephrine should
reaction and the completeness of patient
be reserved for patients who are severely
response to treatment.
unstable and already have a running IV
line. Laryngeal Edema
Treatments recommended in the ACR Manual on • Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and use
Contrast Media (2024) for different types of a pulse oximeter.
reactions in adults are condensed and
• Give O
, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
summarized below.
• Give epinephrine IM (1 mg/mL), 0.3 mL • Give O
, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask).
(0.3 mg), or IM EpiPen® or equivalent
• Consider rapid administration of 1 L of
(0.3 mL), or, especially if hypotensive,
IV fluids, 0.9% normal saline or Lactated
epinephrine IV (1 mg/10 mL), 1 mL (0.1
Ringer’s solution.
mg) slowly into a running infusion of IV
Hypotension with Bradycardia (pulse < 60 bpm)
fluids.
(Vagal Reaction)
• Repeat epinephrine as needed up to a
• If mild, no additional treatment is
maximum of 1 mg.
usually needed beyond that listed
• Consider calling an emergency response
above for any cause of hypotension.
team or 911 based on the severity of the
• If severe (patient remains unresponsive
reaction and the completeness of patient
to above measures), give atropine, 0.6
response to treatment
to 1.0 mg IV, into a running infusion of
Bronchospasm
IV fluids. (Note: lower doses of
• Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, and atropine may exacerbate bradycardia.)
use a pulse oximeter.
• May repeat atropine up to a total dose
• Give O
, 6 to 10 L/min (via mask). of 3 mg.
• Give beta-agonist inhaler albuterol,
• Consider calling an emergency
2 puffs (90 mcg per puff); can
response team or 911.
repeat up to three times. In cases in
which bronchospasm is severe
Hypotension with Tachycardia (pulse > 100 bpm)
and/or unresponsive to an inhaler,
(Allergic-like Reaction)
consider adding epinephrine IM (1
mg/mL), 0.3 mL (0.3 mg), or IM • If hypotension persists after the basic
EpiPen® or equivalent (0.3 mL), or treatment listed above for any cause of
epinephrine IV (1 mg/10 mL), 1 mL hypotension, can give 0.3 mL IM
(0.1 mg) epinephrine (0.3 mg) of 1 mg/ml solution,
slowly into a running infusion of IV or IM EpiPen® or equivalent (0.3 ml). IM
fluids. epinephrine may be repeated up to 1 mg
total. If the patient is unresponsive to IM
• Repeat epinephrine as needed up
dose, can give epinephrine IV (1 mg/10 mL
to a maximum of 1 mg.
solution), 1 mL (0.1 mg) slowly into a
• Consider calling an emergency
running infusion of IV fluids. Can repeat
response team or 911 based on the
as needed up to 10 mL (1 mg) total.
completeness of patient response to
• Consider calling an emergency
treatment.
response team or 911 based on the
Hypotension, Any Cause (systolic blood
severity of the reaction and the
pressure < 90 mm Hg)
completeness of patient response to
• Preserve IV access, monitor vitals, treatment.
and use a pulse oximeter.
Unresponsive and Pulseless
• Elevate legs at least 60
• Check for responsiveness.
degrees (Trendelenburg
• Activate emergency response team or call
position).
911. • Beta agonist inhaler (Albuterol ®): 2
puffs (90 mcg/puff) for a total of 180
• Perform CPR per American Heart
mcg; can repeat up to three times
Association protocols.
• Epinephrine:
• Defibrillate as indicated if equipment
is available. o IM dosing: (up to 30 kg):
epinephrine autoinjector (EpiPen
• May administer epinephrine IV 1
Jr®) single dose of (0.15 mg)
mg/10 mL), full 10 mL (1 mg) dose,
between 2-minute cycles of CPR.
o IM dosing: (over 30 kg patient
Reaction Rebound Prevention weight): use adult autoinjector; or
0.01 mL/kg (0.01 mg/kg) of 1
• IV corticosteroids are not useful in
mg/mL solution (maximum
acute treatment of any reaction.
single dose of 0.3 mL [0.3 mg]);
• However, IV corticosteroids help
repeated every 5-15 minutes
prevent a short- term recurrence of an
needed up to a maximum dose
allergic-like reaction and may be
of 1 mg (1 mL)
considered for a patient having a
severe allergic-like reaction before
o IV dosing: 0.1 mL/kg (0.01
transportation to the emergency
mg/kg) of 1 mg/10 mL solution
department.
(maximum single dose of 1 mL
• Give hydrocortisone, 5 mg/kg IV [0.1 mg]), repeated every 5 – 15
over 1 to 2 minutes ,or minutes, as needed up to a
methylprednisolone,
maximum dose of 1 mg (10 mL).
1 mg/kg IV over 1 to 2 minutes.
Hypertensive crisis, pulmonary edema,
seizures or convulsions, and hypoglycemia
References
are uncommon reactions. If these occur,
1. American College of Radiology. ACR Manual
the radiologist should refer to standard
on Contrast Media. American College of
treatment sources, including the ACR
Radiology Website.
Manual on Contrast Media.
https://www.acr.org/Clinical-
Pediatric Dosing
Resources/Contrast-Manual. Accessed April 2,
Pediatric dosing for some of the 2024.
interventions/medications utilized for
2. Greenberger PA, Patterson R. The
treating allergic-like contrast reactions are
prevention of immediate generalized
provided as follows:
reactions to radiocontrast media in high- risk
• Isotonic fluid: 10-20 mL/kg of 0.9% patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1991
normal saline or Lactated Ringers Apr;87(4)867-872.
up to a maximum volume of 500-
3. ACR Manual on MR Safety
1,000 mL
https://www.acr.org/-
• Diphenhydramine (Benadryl /media/ACR/Files/Radiology-Safety/MR-
®): 1 mg/kg up to a maximum Safety/Manual-on-MR-Safety.pdf
of 50 mg
4. Kanal E, Gillen J, Evans JA, et al. Survey of
reproductive health among female MR 12. Mervak BM, Cohan RH, Ellis JH, Khalatbari
workers. Radiology 1993;187:395-399. S, Davenport MS. Intravenous
corticosteroid premedication
5. Klucznik RP, Carrier DA, Pyka R, et al.
administered 5 hours before CT
Placement of a ferromagnetic intracerebral
aneurysm clip in a magnetic field with a compared with a traditional 13-hour
fatal outcome. Radiology 1993;187:855-856. oral regimen. Radiology 2017; 285:425-
6. Klucznik RP, Carrier DA, Pyka R, 433.
et al. Placement of a ferromagnetic
13. Sodagari F, Davenport MS, Asch D, Cavallo
intracerebral aneurysm clip in a
JJ, Cohan RH, Ellis JH, Pahade JK. A Survey
magnetic field with a fatal of Practicing Radiologists on the Use of
outcome. Radiology 1993;187:855- Premedication Before Intravenous
856. Iodinated Contrast Medium
7. Landigran C. Preventable deaths and Administration. J Am Coll Radiol. 2023 Jul
injuries during magnetic resonance 27:S1546-1440(23).
imaging. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1000-
1001.
8. Lasser EC, Berry CC, Mishkin MM,
Williamson B, Zheutlin N, Silverman
JM. Pretreatment with corticosteroids to
prevent adverse reactions to nonionic
contrast media. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1994 Mar;162(3):523-526.
9. Nordbeck P, Ertl G, Ritter O. Magnetic
resonance imaging safety in pacemaker
and implantable cardioverter
defibrillator patients: how far have we
come? Eur Heart J 2015;36(24):1505-1511.
10. Tsai LL, Grant AK, Mortele KJ, Kung
JW, Smith MP. A Practical Guide to
MR Imaging Safety: What Radiologists
Need to Know. Radiographics 2015
Oct;35(6):1722- 1737.
11. Maloney E, Iyer R, Phillips GS, Menon
S, Lee JJ, Callahan MJ. Practical
administration of intravenous
contrast media in children:
screening prophylaxis,
administration and treatment of
adverse reactions. Pediatr Radiol
2019; 49:433-
44.7
