Chapter 5: Reimbursement, Regulatory Compliance, and
Legal Considerations in Radiology
5.1 Reimbursement and Regulatory The CPT Editorial Panel is composed of
Compliance physicians nominated by national medical
societies, CMS, and other industry leaders. A
5.1.1 Coding, Billing, and Reimbursement
separate committee, the AMA CPT Advisory
Appropriate reimbursement for healthcare Committee, assists the CPT Editorial Panel by
services involves a series of complex and making recommendations regarding new
interconnected steps that often vary depending codes and existing codes. The CPT Advisory
on the payer. A number of generalizable Committee is composed of representatives
principles based on Medicare rules should nominated by national medical societies. For
guide best practice efforts to optimize revenue example, national radiology societies designate
and compliance activities. These principles of representatives to serve on the CPT Advisory
reimbursement are also important to Committee who then advocate for radiologists
understand as they often serve as the basis for by making recommendations for new or
how third-party payors structure their existing radiology CPT codes.
reimbursement. Traditionally, physician
Each CPT code is assigned a value called the
services and procedures are reimbursed on a
Relative Value Unit (RVU) based on the
fee-for-service basis. Although this fee-for-
Resource Based Relative Value Scale. This value
service system of reimbursement forms the
is relative in that each value reflects its relative
basis for physician reimbursement today, it is
value compared to other services or procedures
important to recognize that especially with
within the specialty as well other medical
primary care models, there is a clear shift away
specialties. The AMA RBRVS Update
from a volume-based form of reimbursement
Committee (also known as “The RUC”), makes
(i.e., fee-for -service) towards more value-based
recommendations to CMS for RVU valuation
payments requiring attainment of certain
for each CPT code, and is predominantly
quality measures.
composed of physicians representing various
Each service or procedure that a physician medical societies. The AMA RUC Advisory
provides is given a unique code called a Committee, supports the RUC by making
Current Procedural Terminology code (CPT) recommendations just as the CPT Advisory
that in turn is assigned a specific Committee supports the CPT Editorial Panel.
reimbursement amount. The first step in National medical societies can nominate
obtaining reimbursement for a new service or representatives to the RUC Advisory
procedure is to have it assigned a unique CPT Committee who then advocate for their
code. The American Medical Association membership by recommending specific RVU
(AMA) CPT Editorial Panel, is responsible for valuations to the RUC, which in turn makes its
maintaining the CPT code set, including final recommendations to CMS.
authorizing new codes, modification of existing
Each service or procedure’s total RVUs reflect
codes, and deletion of codes no longer relevant.
the amount of 1) encounter time, intensity,
effort, and skill (the work RVU); 2) costs of service. Terms such as “rule out” or “consistent
maintaining a practice, such as equipment, with” are not capable of being coded by ICD-10,
supplies, and nonphysician staff (practice and therefore do not meet medical necessity
expense RVU); and 3) professional liability criteria.
expenses (malpractice RVU). Work RVU is used
Reimbursement for radiology services is largely
by many practices to track physician
predicated on the adequacy of documentation
productivity. Although the Centers for
within the physician report. Professional
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
coders, assisted by software tools, extract
ultimately sets the valuation of RVUs, it has
information from radiology reports to assign
historically accepted the AMA RUC
both ICD-10 and CPT codes. The Radiology
recommendations in the vast majority of cases.
Coding Certification Board is the primary
Once an RVU is determined for a specific organization that credentials professional
service or procedure designated by its CPT medical imaging coders. These individuals
code, a multiplier called the Conversion Factor extract ICD-10 information from radiology
(CF) is used to determine the actual reports using any statements 1) about
reimbursement. Thus, to obtain the actual examination indication and clinical history
reimbursement for a specific procedure, the provided by the referring physician or patient
RVU for that procedure is multiplied by the CF. and 2) from any specific diagnostic information
located in the findings section or (preferably) in
Payment = RVU x CF
the impression section of the radiologist’s
The conversion factor is set annually by CMS in report. CPT codes are assigned based on the
Final Rule of the Medicare Physician fee specific details of the described service. For
schedule. For example, the CF for 2020 was set radiography, more views generally translate to
by CMS at $36.09 and in 2021 this fell to $34.89. higher complexity codes. For ultrasound, organ
inventory “checklists” apply to abdominal,
CMS and private insurers generally pay only
pelvic, obstetrical, and extremity imaging. For
for services deemed medically necessary. CMS
CT and MRI, details of contrast administration
defines medical necessity as “healthcare
(i.e., without, with, or without and with
services or supplies needed to prevent,
contrast) determine the CPT code for a specific
diagnose, or treat an illness, injury, condition,
body part. Structured template reporting helps
disease, or its symptoms and that meet
radiologists comply with many of these
accepted standards of medicine.” In
reporting requirements, facilitating appropriate
practicality, the determination of medical
reimbursement and regulatory compliance.
necessity is usually a rules- based
administrative exercise performed at the time a Many private payers, Medicaid plans, and
claim is submitted to a payer, wherein a CPT Medicare Advantage (i.e., not traditional
service code must match a pre-approved Medicare indemnity) payers contract with
diagnosis code list. Those diagnosis codes must radiology benefit management (RBM)
be in the form of the International Classification of companies, and require preauthorization (also
Diseases (ICD) system, established by the World known as precertification) as a condition for
Health Organization, currently in its 10th reimbursement for any elective outpatient
revision (ICD-10). ICD-10 codes describe the advanced imaging service. Before performing
signs, symptoms, or specific diagnosis of a advanced imaging services such as CT, MRI,
patient that form the indication for a healthcare
and PET/CT, radiology facilities should government from being overcharged or sold
determine whether preauthorization is required substandard goods or services. A false claim is
for a particular service for a particular patient generally defined as a request for payment for
and, if so, whether such preauthorization has services that a provider knew or should have
been obtained. Although a necessary condition known was false or fraudulent. While the U.S.
for payment, preauthorization by an Department of Justice does not expect
outsourced RBM does not always guarantee a physicians to be experts in all of these nuanced
subsequent favorable medical necessity matters, it has set an expectation that radiology
determination by the insurer itself when a claim practice processes, structures, and cultures be
is filed. As a general rule, preauthorization oriented toward optimizing the integrity of
requirements do not apply to emergency revenue cycle operations. Best practice
department and inpatient services. techniques call for formal compliance plans,
with a formally designated compliance officer
The consultation of software for imaging
and compliance committee appropriately
Clinical Decision Support software (CDS) is
empowered to oversee these activities. A false
technically required for all Medicare outpatient
claim ruling can result in fines of up to three
and certain ED patients when ordering
times the billed amount plus $11,000 per claim
advanced imaging tests (CT, MRI, and Nuclear
filed, because each single exam or service billed
Medicine), although payment consequences
to Medicare or Medicaid counts as a claim. In
have not yet been defined. This software
2014, the largest radiology practice settlement
further scores appropriateness of imaging
occurred for $15.5 Million based upon
orders in 8 clinical priority conditions;
allegations at a diagnostic testing facility that it
Coronary artery disease (suspected or
falsely billed federal and state health care
diagnosed), Suspected pulmonary embolism,
programs for tests that were not performed or
Headache (traumatic and nontraumatic), Hip
not medically necessary and paid kickbacks to
pain, Low back pain, Shoulder pain (including
physicians. Multi-million dollar settlements
suspected rotator cuff injury), cancer of the
occur almost annually with $5 million being
lung (primary or metastatic, suspected or
paid in 2020 to resolve allegations of
diagnosed) and cervical or neck pain. These
unsupervised radiology services and services
initial 8 clinical priority conditions were
provided at unaccredited facilities.
designated by the CMS in 2016 with scores now
being transmitted on provider claims. The list is 5.1.2 Patient Privacy and HIPAA
likely to grow in future years after the initial
Respect for patient privacy is a core
operations testing period. These software
responsibility of a medical professional. The
systems are to use appropriate imaging
Privacy and the Security rules of the Health
recommendations from Qualified Provider Led
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
Entities (QPLEs) which include national
1996 (HIPAA) represent a codification of this
medical societies. The intent is to guide
principle in the law. They provide a set of
ordering physicians to the most appropriate
national privacy standards and bring with them
studies for their patients, and this approach is
the power of law. As such, compliance activities
being attempted by CMS as an alternative to
must prioritize patient privacy. HIPAA rules
the pre-authorization process.
apply to healthcare providers, plans, and
The False Claims Act (FCA) protects the clearinghouses alike.
The Privacy Rule establishes national standards authorization. Exceptions include information
for the protection of individually identifiable disclosed or transmitted when necessary for 1)
health information, referred to as protected the delivery of care or treatment, 2) payment
health information (PHI). The Security Rule activities, and 3) healthcare operations
establishes a national set of security standards involving quality or competency assurance,
for securing PHI when held or transferred in fraud or abuse detection, or compliance. In
electronic form. It operationalizes the addition, when required by law, information
protections contained in the Privacy Rule by can be released 1) to public health authorities,
addressing both technical and nontechnical 2) during investigation of abuse, neglect, or
safeguards that organizations must put in place domestic violence, 3) to oversight agencies, 4)
to secure individuals’ electronic PHI (e-PHI). for judicial and administrative proceeding, 5)
Within the U.S. Department of Health and for law enforcement purposes, and 6) for
Human Services, the Office for Civil Rights worker’s compensation.
(OCR) has responsibility for enforcing these
5.1.3 Human Subjects Research
rules with civil money penalties.
Properly controlled biomedical research
The major goals of the HIPAA rules are to
involving human subjects is essential to
assure appropriate protection of each
advancing medical knowledge and care.
individual’s PHI while still permitting the flow
Unfortunately, human cruelty has occasionally
of information necessary to provide and
been perpetrated in the name of research, and
promote quality healthcare. The following
not all human studies have been either
identifiers are included in the definition of PHI:
justifiable or useful. The discoveries of such
1) names; 2) geographic subdivisions smaller
abuses during Nazi Germany were the basis for
than a state (except for the first three digits of a
the development of the Nuremberg Code,
ZIP code representing a population greater
which represented the first international
than 20,000); 3) all elements of dates (except
codification of minimal expectations for the
year) related to an individual, such as birthdate,
conduct of ethical research involving human
admission date, discharge date, and date of
subjects. The Code’s most important principles
death; 4) phone numbers; 5) fax numbers; 6)
were that experiments involving human
email addresses; 7) Social Security numbers; 8)
subjects should occur only with subjects who
medical record numbers; 9) health plan
have freely chosen to participate, and in the
beneficiary numbers; 10) account numbers; 11)
context of a clear scientific rationale. The
certificate and license numbers; 12) vehicle
subsequent Declaration of Helsinki, now
identification and license plate numbers; 13)
widely regarded as the cornerstone of human
device identifiers and serial numbers; webpage
research ethics, has recommended that all
universal resource locators (URLs); Internet
research protocols be reviewed by an
Protocol (IP) addresses; 16) biometric identifiers
independent committee prior to initiation.
such as finger- and voice-prints; 17) full face or
similar photographs; and 18) any other unique That recommendation led to the development
identifier, characteristic, or code. of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) system
currently in place in the United States, wherein
As a general rule, an individual’s PHI cannot be
appropriately constituted groups, usually at the
disclosed or transmitted to anyone other than
university or health system level, are formally
the individual without that individual’s
designated to review and monitor biomedical
research involving human subjects. In protocol review when a project constitutes a
accordance with Food and Drug quality improvement activity, as long as the
Administration (FDA) regulations, an IRB has primary objective is to improve local practice
the authority to approve, require modifications rather than to create generalizable knowledge.
in order to secure approval, or deny approval IRB approval is not required for studies that do
for proposed research protocols. These review not meet federal definitions of human subjects
groups serve important roles in the protection research (e.g., studies that utilize open source
of the rights and welfare of human research public datasets).
subjects.
IRBs are required to ensure a “diversity of
5.2 Malpractice and Risk Management
members, including consideration of race,
gender, cultural backgrounds, and sensitivity to 5.2.1 General Principles of Malpractice
such issues as “community attitudes” and to Malpractice fears have been cited as a cause of
register with the Department of Health and physician burnout and distress, including in
Human Services (HHS). Institutions engaged in radiology.
research involving human subjects usually have
Approximately 7% of all radiologists are named
their own IRBs to oversee research conducted
in a medical malpractice lawsuit each year;
within the institution or by its staff. However,
radiology indemnity payments in malpractice
institutions without an IRB are permitted to
cases average approximately $480,000. The
arrange for an outside IRB to assume oversight
average radiologist spends approximately 19
responsibilities.
months of his or her career with an unresolved
Because the free choice of research subject open malpractice claim. Malpractice concerns
participation is a fundamental prerequisite to have also been identified as a cause of
ethical research, an IRB carefully scrutinizes all overutilization of services; more than 90% of
aspects of consent. The research informed physicians report that they at least sometimes
consent process involves 1) providing adequate engage in the practice of defensive medicine.
information about a study to potential subjects,
Malpractice insurance coverage is usually
2) providing an adequate opportunity for
mandated as a condition of state licensure and
subjects to consider all options, 3) responding
hospital credentialing. “Claims-made” policies
adequately to all subject questions, 4) ensuring
are the most common types of policies and
that the subject comprehends all necessary
protect physicians from personal financial
information, 5) obtaining the subject’s
liability, up to a predetermined policy cap, but
voluntary agreement to participate, and 6)
only while the policy is in effect. Physicians
providing ongoing information as the subject or
with claims- made policies thus usually need to
situation so requires. In some situations (such
arrange for tail insurance when changing jobs
as many studies involving the retrospective
or retiring to ensure continued financial
review of imaging), an IRB may waive the
protection. “Occurrence” policies cover any
requirement for informed consent when the
claim for an event that took place during the
research involves no more than minimal risks
period of coverage, even if a claim is filed after
to participants, and cannot be practically
the policy lapses.
carried out without such a waiver. IRBs
Medical malpractice lawsuits are based on the
typically provide an exemption from formal
tort of negligence, and require four elements:
1. The physician must have an established errors in diagnosis. Depending on the clinical
duty to a patient. For example, duty indication and modality, the sensitivity of
would exist for a radiologist to provide imaging in detecting disease is highly variable,
and plaintiff lawyers frequently contend that
treatment for a patient undergoing a
any false negative interpretation represents
contrast reaction in the radiology
medical negligence. In considering a chest
department but not for interpreting the
radiograph with missed lung cancer, for
contents of a CT scan on a CD in a
example, as many as 90% of cancers are
patient’s purse in her ICU room unless
identifiable in retrospect; a radiologist’s
those images were submitted for formal
potential legal exposure is not insignificant.
review under established hospital Hindsight bias represents the tendency for
policy. people with a knowledge of the actual outcome
of a case to believe falsely that they would have
2. There must have been a breach of duty,
predicted its outcome. This jury bias makes
which usually involves a failure to meet
defending such cases difficult.
the standard of care. The definition of
Negligent diagnosis claims can be categorized
standard of care varies by jurisdiction,
as related to 1) failures of perception (i.e., not
but is generally how a reasonable,
identifying a finding), 2) failures of
prudent, or ordinary physician of a
interpretation (i.e., identifying a finding but not
similar specialty would have acted in
appropriately appreciating or adequately
similar circumstances.
communicating its significance), or 3)
3. Causation must exist, in that the breach combinations of both. Diagnostic errors can also
be categorized as 1) cognitive errors (e.g., not
must have been the proximate cause of
identifying a lung nodule when interpreting a
injuries. A radiologist, for example, may
chest radiograph), which are usually errors of
have negligently missed a lung mass on
visual perception (scanning, recognition, and
a chest radiograph, but establishing that
interpretation), or 2) system errors (e.g., failure
as the proximate cause of a hemorrhagic
to adequately communicate the presence of that
stroke the next day would be difficult.
nodule), which are usually attributed to health
4. The negligence must result in damages. system issues or context of care delivery
problems.
In many jurisdictions, emotional
distress, pain, and suffering are As in other medical disciplines, errors in
frequently considered remunerative diagnosis in radiology often result from a
damages. combination or interaction between cognitive
and system errors, such as preliminary reports
Claims of negligence against radiologists
by residents that are revised in a final report
generally fall into 3 categories: 1) diagnostic
but not fully communicated to care teams.
errors, 2) procedural complications, and 3)
Certain system factors, such as lighting
communication deficiencies.
conditions, shift length, or pace of
5.2.2 Malpractice Related to Diagnostic Errors interpretation, have been shown to increase the
likelihood of diagnostic errors. Enhanced
The most common cause of malpractice
awareness of these types of errors helps
lawsuits against radiologists is for alleged
radiologists identify areas of diagnostic procedure also helps set realistic expectations.
vulnerability and institute interventions to The doctrine of informed consent has been
improve patient care and mitigate their own codified in the U.S. courts as a basic right of
potential risks. self-determination: “Any human being of adult
years and sound mind has a right to determine
5.2.3 Malpractice Related to Procedural
what shall be done with his body; and a
Complications
surgeon who performs an operation without his
Any invasive procedure has a risk of patient’s consent commits an assault.” Courts
complication. Such complications vary in type have subsequently expanded that decision to
and severity based on the procedure, and can apply to procedures other than open operations
similarly serve as the grounds for medical and those performed by nonsurgeon
negligence claims. Despite what some plaintiff physicians. Necessary elements of informed
lawyers might contend, complications by consent are described in Section 3.2.1 of this
themselves do not indicate negligence. study guide. Although most hospitals have
Lawsuits based on procedural complications, standard consent forms in place, additional
however, are more successfully argued in detailed documentation in procedure reports
scenarios in which a radiologist did not exercise may prove helpful in a claim of negligence.
appropriate care in 1) minimizing the risk of the
5.2.4 Malpractice Related to Communications
complication, 2) identifying complication once
Deficiencies
it occurred, or 3) treating the complication. In
the instance of the very common complication Appropriate communication of actionable
of pneumothorax after a lung biopsy, for information from radiologists to clinical
example, a radiologist’s malpractice risk would caregivers is a critical component of patient
increase if he or she 1) used an overly large care. Both courts and regulatory agencies are
needle or chose a trajectory unnecessarily increasingly holding radiologists to higher
crossing an aerated lung, 2) did not obtain a standards of ensuring prompt communication
postprocedural chest radiograph, or 3) of diagnostic information. In fact, a number of
discharged the patient to home in the setting of court decisions have focused not only on a
an enlarging pneumothorax. radiologist’s duty to communicate important or
critical findings with referring physicians, but
Patients and their families are more likely to
also on communications with patients
sue physicians for damages related to
themselves when their treating physicians may
complications if they believe that details of their
not be available.
care were withheld. As a result, most risk
managers advocate full and prompt disclosure Routine Communication
of any untoward events, and ongoing
In radiology, routine communication refers to
communication about decision-making and
the creation and delivery of written reports. The
treatment. Detailed and contemporaneous
ACR Practice Parameter for Communication of
documentation of events, discussions, and
Diagnostic Imaging Findings outlines
rationale for decisions in the radiology report
suggested formatting for reports, which
and/or elsewhere in the medical record may
includes relevant demographic information
prove helpful in court.
(e.g., patient name and identifying information,
Engaging patients (and their families, when referring physician, facility information),
appropriate) in decision-making before a examination details (e.g., type and time of
examination including contrast administration practice environment (e.g., by a trainee in a
information, time of dictation), and report teaching institution or by a general practice
content recommendations (e.g., findings, radiologist when a subspecialist radiologist is
impressions, limitations, complications). It is not immediately available). Such preliminary
acceptable for demographic information and communications should be archived, since they
examination details to be contained in the may have served as the basis of immediate
metadata associated with the report (rather clinical decisions. Institutions are expected to
than in the dictated report body itself). maintain policies for reconciling discrepancies
Radiology reports are now typically generated between preliminary and final reports and for
and transmitted electronically. discrepancies encountered upon subsequent
review of a final report. Any clinically
The final report represents the definitive
significant variation in findings or impression
documentation of the results of an imaging
between a preliminary and final interpretation
examination or procedure. It should be
should be clearly documented and reported as
proofread to minimize typographical errors and
soon as possible and in a manner that ensures
confusing or conflicting statements. The use of
receipt by the ordering or treating physician.
abbreviations or acronyms should be limited to
avoid ambiguity. The final report should be Clinical situations that may warrant nonroutine
completed in accordance with all appropriate communication include the following:
state and federal requirements (e.g.,
1. Findings that warrant immediate or urgent
Mammography Quality Standards Act). A copy
intervention. These are generally new or
of the final report should be archived by the
unexpected findings on an imaging study
imaging facility as part of the patient’s medical
that suggest life-threatening conditions or
record and be retrievable for future reference.
those that may require an immediate
Retention and distribution must be in
change in patient management. Aside from
accordance with all state and federal
risk management imperatives, The Joint
regulations and facility policies.
Commission (TJC) requires that
Nonroutine Communication professionals “report critical results of tests
and diagnostic procedures on a timely
While routine communication is typically
basis.” TJC-accredited facilities are required
carried out through institutionally established
to define critical tests and critical results
final reporting mechanisms, certain
and monitor performance in reporting those
circumstances dictate alternative
results. A critical result is defined as “any
communication mechanisms to ensure timely
result or finding that may be considered life
receipt of important diagnostic information.
threatening or that could result in severe
These include situations warranting
morbidity and require urgent or emergent
preliminary reports and results of an urgent or
clinical attention.” Examples include
other significantly important nature.
tension pneumothorax, ruptured aortic
Occasionally, a preliminary report is issued aneurysm, acute intracerebral hemorrhage,
before the final report, and may be rendered for and pneumoperitoneum. Each facility has
the purpose of directing immediate patient leeway in defining its own critical tests and
management (e.g., when old comparison critical results; there is no standard list for
images are not yet available but reporting either category. For all critical results,
cannot wait) or to meet the needs of a particular
communication requires direct contact electronically when electronic messaging
between the radiologist and the requesting tracking mechanisms are in place to make
or responding clinician or another licensed sure that information was successfully
healthcare provider responsible for that received and, when necessary,
patient’s care. In addition, communication supplemented by telephone confirmation.
is generally expected to occur within 60
Documentation of all nonroutine
minutes of the time that the observation is
communication should include the date and
made, and it must be documented. When
time of the communication, the person
the ordering physician or healthcare
reporting the information, the person receiving
provider cannot be contacted expeditiously,
the information, and a summary of or reference
it may be appropriate to convey results
to the information that was conveyed.
directly to the patient, depending on the
nature of the findings. At some institutions, Informal Communication
these critical results are deemed “Level 1
Radiologists may occasionally be asked to
results.”
provide interpretations that do not result in a
2. Findings that may not require immediate formal report but are nonetheless used to make
treatment decisions.
attention but nonetheless may seriously
impact a patient’s health, worsen over Such communications may take the form of a
time, or result in an adverse outcome.
“curbside consult” that may occur informally in
These include the following: 1) New or the reading room or during a clinical
unexpected findings that could result in conference. These circumstances often preclude
mortality or significant morbidity if not immediate documentation and may also occur
treated in a timely manner. Referred to as in suboptimal viewing conditions (e.g., no
“Level 2 results” by some institutions, these
comparison studies, no original reports, or
are less dire than critical results and
inadequate incomplete history). Informal
generally warrant communication within 12 communications carry additional inherent risk
hours. For such findings, the radiologist since the documentation of the clinician
might call the care team directly, or might initiating the informal consultation may
request a call service or assistant to call on constitute the only written record of that
his or her behalf. Examples include intra-
communication. For these reasons, informal
abdominal abscess or impending
communications are largely discouraged; when
pathological hip fracture. 2) New or such communications do occur, radiologists
unexpected findings on an imaging study should document them independently from the
that could result in significant but not referring clinician’s documentation.
immediate morbidity if not appropriately
Radiology departments are encouraged to
treated. Deemed “Level 3 results” by some
establish processes and policies for reporting
institutions, communication is not
studies performed at outside institutions.
particularly time sensitive but mechanisms
Radiologists who provide consultations of this
must be in place to ensure that these
nature are encouraged to document any
important or potentially important findings
information conveyed, including formal
are not overlooked. Examples include a
interpretations. Although formal second
newly identified lung nodule or solid renal
opinion interpretations are historically non-
mass. These findings may be reported
payable, Medicare and private payers are
increasingly reimbursing radiologists for them
References
when they are medically necessary and are
billed in accordance with payer rules. 1. American College of Radiology. ACR-SIR-
SPR Practice Parameter on Informed
5.2.5 Discoverability of Communications
Consent for Image-Guided Procedures.
In malpractice lawsuits, most communication American College of Radiology Website.
related to any part of the case—whether written https://www.acr.org/Clinical-
or oral—is considered discoverable and can be Resources/Contrast-Manual. Accessed June
used as evidence at trial. However, certain 13, 2018.
important exceptions apply. The attorney–client
2. American College of Radiology. ACR
privilege is one of the oldest recognized
Practice Parameter for Communication of
privileges for confidential communications. It
Diagnostic Imaging Findings.
encourages clients in all legal matters (not just
https://www.acr.org/-/
malpractice cases) to make full and frank
media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/
disclosures to their attorneys, who should then
communicationdiag.pdf. Accessed June
be better able to provide candid advice and
13,2018.
effective representation. Nearly all
communication between a client and his or her 3. Cooper JA. Responsible conduct of radiology
attorney is protected from discovery. For this research: part II. Regulatory requirements
reason, physicians involved in lawsuits are for human research. Radiology 2005;236:748-
strongly discouraged from speaking with any 752.
parties other than their attorneys about any
4. Lam DL, Medverd JR. How radiologists get
elements of their cases.
paid: resource-based relative value scale
Most jurisdictions also protect certain peer and the revenue cycle. AJR Am J Roentgenol
review activities from legal discovery. Peer 2013;201:947-958.
review protection laws are designed to provide
5. Schoppmann MJ, Sanders DL. HIPAA
an incentive for healthcare providers to
compliance: the law, reality, and
perform ongoing quality improvement
recommendations. J Am Coll Radiol
activities without fear of increased tort risk. As
2004;1:728-733.
a general rule, no person who participates in
6. Shields W, Hoffman T. Protecting your
any approved peer review process shall be
peer-review rights. ACR Bulletin
permitted or required to testify in any civil
2011;66(1):24.
action as to the findings, recommendations,
evaluations, opinions, or other actions of the 7. Thorwarth WT, Jr. From concept to CPT code
peer review process. However, to compensation: how the payment system
communications are only protected if they works. J Am Coll Radiol 2004;1:48-53.
occur within established peer review processes;
8. Whang JS, Baker SR, Patel R, Luk L, Castro
informal conversations with colleagues outside
A, 3rd. The causes of medical malpractice
established peer review processes, for example,
suits against radiologists in the United
are typically not protected from legal discovery.
States. Radiology 2013;266:548-554.
