Chapter 6: Core Concepts of Imaging Informatics
6.1 Standards primary HL7 standards are the ones most
frequently used to achieve systems
DICOM
interoperability.
The Digital Imaging and Communications in
The HL7 V2 messaging standard is generally
Medicine (DICOM) standard
considered to be the most widely implemented
(http://dicom.nema.org) is the international
healthcare-related standard in the world. This
standard that specifies protocols for display,
text- based standard facilitates the exchange of
transfer, storage, and processing of medical
medical data by enabling interoperability
images. The DICOM standard applies to
between many types of electronic medical
storage of both pixel-based image data and
systems that need to communicate. HL7 V3,
metadata. The metadata, located in the
while more human-readable, has been less
“DICOM header” of the image, contains
widely adopted in the industry because of its
information about the image, series, exam,
increased complexity. The newer HL7 Fast
patient, imaging facility, and scanner. The data
Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR®)
are organized into separate fields, each of
standard allows software developers to use
which has a unique identifier so that it can be
internet transactions to exchange medical data
queried directly. DICOM transactions enable
between systems, increasing the potential for
data to be queried, retrieved, and transmitted
data exchange between systems.
between systems in an organized fashion. They
also allow for information about an order to be Ontologies
transmitted between the radiology information
Ontologies are formal collections of terms and
system (RIS) and the modality (e.g., the CT,
their inherited or causal relationships. RadLex
MR, or ultrasound machine) rather than having
(http://www. radlex.org) is the largest
to be manually entered by the technologist and
radiology-specific lexicon. It contains more than
risking incorrect data entry.
68,000 terms that describe imaging anatomy,
Standard DICOM data elements are required to procedures, and pathology. A special portion of
contain specific information while private data the RadLex ontology, the RadLex Playbook,
elements can be defined by the vendor. To defines standard imaging exam names,
enable interoperability between systems, descriptions, and codes. The RadLex Playbook
vendors who implement products that use has been merged with LOINC (Logical
DICOM are expected to provide customers Observation Identifiers Names and Codes), the
with conformance statements that detail their international standard nomenclature for health
use of the DICOM standard. measurements, observations, and documents.
HL7
HL7 (http://www.hl7.org) is the international 6.2 The Reading Room Environment
standards organization responsible for
PACS
developing and maintaining standards for the
exchange, integration, sharing, and retrieval of The PACS (picture archiving and
medical information (i.e., nonimage data). The communication system) is the radiologist’s
primary tool for imaging viewing and recommends that ideal reading room ambient
interpretation. Basic components of PACS lighting fall in the range of 25 to 50 lux. This
include a workstation, display, short-term level of lighting is similar to standing under a
storage, and long-term archive. PACS street light at night in dark surroundings. The
communicates with imaging modalities using maximum gray value luminance for diagnostic
DICOM transactions, and with the RIS and/or monitors is recommended to be at least 350
EMR using HL7 transactions that are translated cd/m2 for nonmammographic interpretation
to and from DICOM. Unlike original PACS and 420 cd/m2 for mammographic
implementations that required a physical interpretation. By way of reference, top-
workstation to run, the modern PACS can be performing flat screen televisions on the market
entirely web-based and accessible on mobile in 2017 have a peak luminance upwards of 400
devices as well as on desktop thin clients. cd/m2.
VNA Compression
The development of the vendor-neutral archive Compression is used to decrease image file size
(VNA) allows data to be stored in a central to speed up transfer and decrease storage
archive that may support viewers for multiple requirements. Lossless compression is achieved
types of DICOM images (e.g., radiology, by decreasing redundant image information
cardiology, operating room, etc.), as well as for (e.g., the black background of a CT image).
non-DICOM data, including photographs and Because image content is preserved, lossless
pathology slides. Enterprise imaging relies compression can only reduce image file size by
heavily on VNA technology to facilitate approximately 3:1. Lossy compression allows
dissemination, viewing, and storage of medical for more substantial image size compression
imaging data beyond radiology. Determining (on the order of 10:1) by irreversibly discarding
how best to format and exchange the metadata unnecessary or minimally important image
(e.g., patient information, body part, date of information without significantly
acquisition, etc.) accompanying a non-DICOM compromising diagnostic quality.
image is a major challenge in enterprise
Ergonomics
imaging.
Like all individuals who spend many hours
RIS
working on a computer, radiologists are
The radiology information system (RIS) is a susceptible to repetitive strain injuries (RSI).
software application that manages all aspects of For example, carpal tunnel syndrome
an imaging exam, including order (involving the median nerve) often occurs due
reconciliation, patient scheduling and tracking, to dorsiflexion of the wrist from upward
communication with modalities and PACS, angulation of the wrist while typing. Cubital
reporting, results notification, and billing. The tunnel syndrome (involving the ulnar nerve)
RIS may be a standalone application or a can occur due to RSI at either the wrist or the
component of the electronic medical record elbow. DeQuervain tenosynovitis occurs
(EMR) application. Both PACS and RIS can be secondary to RSI of the thumb.
used to drive clinical workflow.
Workstation configurations that promote a
Image Displays neutral body position with the forearm, wrist,
and hand parallel to the floor, lumbar support,
The ACR-AAPM-SIIM technical standard
and appropriate distance between the user and Radiology systems are considered to be high-
the display can help to decrease the incidence availability (HA) systems. HA systems must have
of RSI among radiologists. the ability to perform automated recovery and
failover operations in the event of service
disruption. The uptime expectations of an HA
6.3 From Order to Report: Workflow
system can be expressed as a “number of nines.” For
Considerations
example, PACS is generally expected to perform at
“four nines”, or 99.99% uptime, which translates to
Workflow Steps
no more than approximately 50 minutes of
Medical imaging depends on interoperability
downtime a year. Fault tolerance (FT) refers to the
between many systems, including PACS, RIS,
ability of a system to continue to function if one of
EMR and imaging modalities, as data are
its components fails. To avoid single points of
transferred via DICOM and HL7 transactions.
failure, redundancy is built into essential
The process begins with an order placed in the
components of a system (e.g., servers, network
EMR. HL7 transactions communicate the order
connections, data archives, etc.) to achieve a high FT.
to the RIS (if it is a separate system). The RIS
communicates order information to the relevant
imaging modality (meaning the machine) via 6.4 Data Privacy and Security
the DICOM Modality Work List, and the
De-identification of Images
modality communicates with the PACS via
DICOM transactions. The radiologist views the De-identification involves removing protected
images on PACS and dictates the report using health information (PHI), as defined by HIPAA,
voice recognition. The reporting software then from an imaging examination such that the
sends the report to the RIS and EMR via HL7 identity of the patient cannot be directly
transactions. determined based on information contained in
the images or the metadata. However, de-
Downtime Procedures
identified images may contain information that
Downtime procedures include disaster enables an approved entity to identify the
recovery (DR) and business continuity (BC) patient using a key. In contrast, anonymization
procedures. DR policies direct activities that involves removing all PHI and other
should be followed in the event of a disaster, identifiable data from an imaging examination
such as a large-scale, unexpected, highly such that the identity of the patient is not
disruptive event, whether natural or human in revealed and cannot can be re-established in the
origin. future. PHI contained in the metadata can
typically be removed via automated de-
DR policies typically include a description of
identification processes. In some cases,
off-site data backup systems, including the
“burned-in” PHI (such as in ultrasound images)
frequency of backup cycles, and the steps
also must be removed to fully de-identify
required to restore critical data in the event of a
medical images. Because the contours of a
disruption. BC policies refer to the necessary
patient’s face can be reconstructed from CT or
systematic precautions, backups, and failover
MRI of the head, imaging that includes the face
routines required to continue to care for
is also considered PHI.
patients when a system failure (such as a power
outage) occurs under otherwise routine
working conditions.
De-identification of Report Text region of interest from an image or extracting a
subset of images from an image stack for further
De-identification of report data is less
analysis. For example, segmentation of gray matter
straightforward than de-identification of image
and white matter from MRI of the brain may be the
data, because PHI does not occur in radiology
first step to a more advanced analysis of atrophy in
reports in the same form or with the same
neurodegenerative disorders.
consistency. De- identification of report data
often requires manual review or application of Image registration involves aligning one image set
specialized algorithms. onto the coordinate space of another image set to
allow a more direct comparison of the two image
Tools for de-identification of other medical text,
sets. Deformations can be rigid (translation,
such as encounter notes or progress notes,
scaling), affine (shearing), or elastic. Elastic
generally do not work as well for radiology
deformation involves local warping of an image to
reports, because of the less frequent appearance
better align the target image with the reference
of PHI in radiology reports compared to medical
image. Elastic deformation is one type of image
text.
registration that can accommodate changes such as
Cybersecurity patient position, lung expansion, or soft tissue
Ransomware attacks occur when bad actors shape changes in aligning image sets.
encrypt files and systems and demand a ransom
3-D post-processing is a required component of CT
in exchange for the decryption key. Such attacks
and MR angiography and can supplement other
can be catastrophic to a radiology practice and
advanced imaging, such as cardiac MRI and brain
its associated hospital or health system. Typical MRI for tumor analysis. Simple 3-D post-
downtime procedures may not be sufficient for processing, such as MPRs, MIPs, and volume
recovery. Instead, a long-term analog (e.g.,
rendering, can be performed on most modern
paper-based) workflow may be necessary to
versions of PACS. More elaborate analysis such as
maintain business continuity while
curved planar reformats (CPRs), functional
compromised files and systems are isolated and
analysis, and cinematic rendering, however, may
data recovery is attempted. Eventually, any require additional thin-client software and may be
recovered data will have to be reconciled with supported by a dedicated team of experts, such as a
new data collected after the attack.
3-D lab.
6.6 Artificial Intelligence
6.5 Image Post-Processing
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the field of
Post-processing refers to image transformations computer science that gives computers the
performed after acquisition. These ability to mimic human intelligence. Machine
transformations may occur before image learning (ML) is a subfield of AI that enables
display, interpretation, or quantitative analysis. computers to learn a task without an explicit
Post-processing includes techniques such as set of instructions. Deep learning (DL) uses
image segmentation, registration, and three-
multi-layered neural networks with weighted
dimensional (3-D) post-processing using connections to analyze data, and works with
maximum intensity projections (MIPs), both images and text. AI serves as an adjunct to
multiplanar reformats (MPRs), or volume the human radiologist; at present, few
rendering. autonomous AI applications exist for radiology.
Segmentation involves isolating or extracting a
Supervised and Unsupervised Learning
Supervised learning exposes an algorithm before use for training or inference to make them
to a labeled set of training data and then suitable for input to an AI algorithm; this may
evaluates how well the resulting model include rescaling, cropping, denoising,
predicts labels on a different set of test histogram equalization, and often
data. It is important that the test set data downsampling (sometimes by as much as 10x).
not overlap the training data, so that model This decrease in image resolution may reduce
performance is not artificially exaggerated. the conspicuity of subtle findings in images
unless sufficient training examples are provided.
Unsupervised learning exposes an
algorithm to a set of data without pre- Natural Language Processing
defined labels or categories and expects the
Natural language processing (NLP) is the analysis
algorithm to organize the data.
of human language data. Common uses in
Unsupervised learning models must be
radiology reports include detection of critical
validated and may not perform as well as
findings or follow-up recommendations,
supervised models without further
longitudinal lesion monitoring, assessment of
training.
report compliance with practice requirements, or
Training AI Models radiology-pathology correlation. Text documents
are also pre-processed like images, with removal of
Generating training data for radiology
stop words and punctuation, conversion to lower
requires experts to label images or text,
case, and tokenization. Text data can be tokenized
which is time- and resource- intensive. A
by converting words and phrases to numeric
common pitfall in model training is
representations for input into deep learning models
overfitting the model to the data, such that
through a process known as embedding.
it performs very well on similar data (e.g.,
at the organization where it was trained), Deployment Challenges
but does not perform as well on data that
Major challenges in deploying AI for radiology
are different in some way (e.g., data from
include understanding how the “black box” model
another organization). Labeling images is
produces its results, ensuring that the model
task specific and can be as simple as
performs reliably in all potential applied settings
assigning a label to an entire image or
and conditions, and efficiently integrating the
study (e.g., “normal”, “abnormal”), or it
model into the clinical workflow. Once deployed,
may require an expert to use segmentation
models should be monitored to identify data drift,
tools to identify an anatomic structure or
in which model performance degrades over time
disease process. As with de-identification,
due to gradual changes in the data it processes.
labeling text data or workflow data
Additionally, the way that radiologists interact
requires different tools than labeling image
with AI should be monitored to guard against
data.
automation bias, in which the computer is always
Deep Learning for Images assumed to be more correct than the human
practitioner.
Deep learning models use neural networks
with an input layer, multiple hidden layers, Bias in AI
and an output layer to perform inference or
Bias in AI can occur due to the training data, the
make predictions. Convolutional neural
model architecture, or the conclusions drawn by
networks and recurrent neural networks are
end users based on model outputs. Statistical bias
DL algorithms often used in radiology
results when a model does not represent the true
applications. Image data are pre-processed
features of the population. One example of Natural Language Processing of
statistical bias is sampling bias, in which the Radiology Reports. Rad Clin N Am
data used to train the model do not represent 2021; 59: 919-31.
the patients to whom the model will ultimately
7. Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C,
be applied. Social bias has the potential to
Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial bias
exacerbate health disparities by adversely
in an algorithm used to manage the
affecting underrepresented populations. For
health of populations. Science 2019;
example, a model may predict better health
366(6464): 447-53.
outcomes in a patient population that does not
use healthcare resources as frequently, but may
overlook the fact that the use or lack thereof is
related to access to care rather than their state
of health.
References
1. Horii SC. Primer on computers and
information technology. Part four: A
nontechnical introduction to DICOM.
RadioGraphics 1997;17(5):1297-309.
2. Branstetter BF, Andriole KP, Devlin S,
Ranschaert ER, eds. Practical Imaging
Informatics 2nd ed., Springer New York,
NY, 2021.
3. Thrall JH, Li X, Li Q, et al.
Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning in Radiology:
Opportunities, Challenges,
Pitfalls, and Criteria for Success.
JACR 2018;15(3), 504-508.
4. Chen PH, Bodak R, Gandhi NS.
Ransomware Recovery and
Imaging Operations: Lessons
Learned and Planning
Considerations. J Digit Img 2021;
34: 731-740.
5. Chartrand G, Cheng PM,
Vorontsov E, et al. Deep
Learning: A Primer for
Radiologists. RadioGraphics 2017;
37: 2113-31.
6. Steinkamp J, Cook TS. Basic
Artificial Intelligence Techniques:
