Beowulf’s Marvelous Book of Modern American History
By Jennifer Guest

You may print copies of this book for your immediate family only. If you wish to print more than one copy of this book for a co-
op or classroom, please contact us at guesthollow@memorableplaces.com for pricing information.

Copying and Distribution Policy

No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system without prior written permission of the copyright
owner unless such copying is expressly permitted by federal copyright law, or unless it complies with the Copying and
Distribution Policy above.

Please see the end of this book for image and text credits.

Copyright in part © 2025 Guest Hollow, LLC
All rights reserved.
www.guesthollow.com
www.Facebook.com/guesthollow/

This file was created to be printed at a professional print shop such as LULU.com or a home printer that has large color ink tanks
(like the Epson EcoTank). It has wide middle margins so that you can choose what type of binding will work best for you. A link to
buy a physical copy of the book is included in your downloads. Look at the “Read this first’ file in your downloads for instructions on
how to access it.

You can also view this book on a tablet or cast it to a television or monitor If you wish to view the page spreads (2 pages at a
time), please make sure to tell your PDF reader app to separate the cover page (show it on its own line when using a 2-page view.

In the free Foxit PDF reader you will need to click an icon like this:

File Home Convert Edit Organize Comment View m

) Th rh 13 Lé O A(z
Hand Select Read Reflow Reverse Night Text Rotate Toggle

~ BE OO

Fir IM

Mode View Mode Viewer View” Ruler

For example, if done correctly, this page will show up next to the message from Beowulf like this:

Beowulf’s Marvelous Book of Modern American History
By Jennifer Guest

This book was created to be
used with Guest Hollow’s

Jr and High School Modern
American History Curriculum.
Please see our website:
GuestHollow.com

to purchase the accompanying
curriculum.

This fle was created to be printed at a pro! poner tht hes lange calor ink tanks
(ike the Epson EcoTank). It has wide midde margins so that you con choose what type of binding wil work best for you, A lnk to
buy a physical copy of the book is inckided in your downloads. Look at the "Read this first” fle m your downloads for instructions on
how to access t

You con also view this bock on a tablet or cast it to 0 television or monitor If you wish to view the page spreads (2 pages at a
time). please make sure to tell your POF reader app to separate the cover page (show t on its own Ine when using @ 2-page view

in the free Foxit PDF reader you wil need to cick

This book can also be used
independently or with any other
American history curriculum.

For example. if done correctly. ths page will show up next to the message from Beowulf tke this:

This boc s created to be
uset

ok was
id with Guest Hollow's
ind Moder

Gu
to purchase the accompanying
curriculum,

This book can also be used
independently or with ony other
American history curriculum.

\

WEEK 1 DAY 1

I

5  ———_ a

Dear Student,

As you read through this book I wrote, remember that history is about real
people. These are people who loved, who were afraid of things, who had to eat |
and got hungry, who got sick and threw up, and who had to go to the bathroom

(sometimes urgently!). Most of them had families or friends or at least a dog or |
other creature they liked or cared about, like Horatio Nelson Jackson's bulldog !

The people you will be reading about had to learn everything they knew, just like |
you are learning. They had hopes, dreams, and spent at least a little time

laughing at something or someone. They felt happy and grouchy and confused. |
They got headaches and stuffy noses. They were REAL. They truly lived, just
as you are living. |

It's easy to forget all of this when we skim so quickly over the things they did. |
Keep in mind that you can always look up more information about any of the |
people in this book. There are hundreds (maybe thousands!) of tales about their

adventures that you can read. You can spend your whole life reading about

them, and there will always be more to learn.

I'm not the best author in the world (I'm just a dog after all), but I love history,
and I hope my love of this subject comes through just a little. [ hope you enjoy
tromping through modern American history with me! Let's get our paws

muddy and fill our minds full of sights and stories!

Love,

Beowulf

I'm Puppywuppy!

FS. If you are one of the older kids reading this book, I hope you don’t mind that
a dog is narrating it. You shouldnt be biased toward dogs or cartoons, because dogs 4 le
are awesome... and so are cartoons, and history too. And you know, stuff like \ put U
that. Just read it all with an open mind and a litle imagination. ¢

—