Religious Persecution:

Sarah

‘We left Russia after that
terrible night. A huge crowd
attacked our neighborhood.
They were burning the houses
and shops and... and they even
killed some of our neighbors.
We were terrified, and Mama
had us throw whatever we
could carry into bundles. Then
we fled in the night. It's what
they wanted us to do. I am so

ashamed that I knew some of
the attackers. How could they

do this to us? We never hurt — | ©4 (Paris, 1903)

anyone! Papa's shop was

burning when we left. Allhis = ¥ Bites efder|
tools, all the work... It sickens me to think about it To Us, "America means hope for a new life
where we don't have to fear We are so tired of the fear—the stress—the hatred. We have
been told that there are no pogroms in America. That there is safety and opportunity.”

. “Le pogrom de Kichinev" by Jules Grandjean

Sarah's family were Jews. They left Russia after a horribly violent anti-Jewish pogrom. A

18

Injured Jews from the city of Khodorkiv after a pogrom

pe
YZ We V

pogrom is a violent attack on a group
of people, usually targeting a specific
ethnic or religious community.
Pogroms often involved mobs
attacking Jewish communities;
destroying their homes, businesses,
and synagogues; and sometimes even
hurting or killing people. These
attacks were driven by hatred and
prejudice and were often allowed or
even encouraged by local authorities
and the government.
There were many others like Sarah and her family who left their countries for similar religious
reasons. Even today, in some countries, following a religion different from the one endorsed by
the government is a crime.

In America, you can be a follower of any religion without persecution from the government.
The first amendment of the United States Constitution states:

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the
people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of
grievances.

Llama McRama Translation Service: Never fear student! ]

shall translate this piece

of the Constitution
for you!

Congress cannot make any laws that:
Establish a national religion.

Stop people from practicing their religion.
Limit freedom of speech or the press.
Prevent people from gathering peacefully.
Stop people from asking the government to correct problems.

It's because of this amendment, this freedom, that Sarah and millions of others made the
United States their home.