Economic Opportunity: Joseph
*This story is about a real person!

Joseph Cavalieri lived in the beautiful countryside of Dugenta, Italy. But to him, Dugenta was a
dead end. There weren't enough jobs in the rural area to support a family. Italy was in crisis.
The country faced an enormous debt, had scarce resources, and almost no industries or
transportation networks except in limited areas far away from Joseph's hometown. Joseph's
family as well as most of the other rural citizens were poor and forced to pay heavy taxes.
“For nothing!” he often said to his brothen “Why are we paying so much for nothing?! We
barely have enough for ourselves! °

Then, one spring, a railroad recruiter came by the village with promises of abundant work in
America.

The slick man was all smiles and energy. He addressed a group of men, Joseph among them. ‘1
work for the railroad, and we need strong, hardworking men like you. They're building railroads
all across the country—connecting cities, towns, and opportunities. You'll get steady work and
fair pay. Enough to send money back home and even start saving for a better life! And here's
the best part! We'll take care of your travel. The railroad company needs workers so badly,
they're offering passage for you and your family. You can pay it back slowly once you re settled
and earning. Imagine a new life, where you're not scraping by. A home with enough food, clothes
for your children, and maybe even a bit of land someday!"

The man leaned forward and stabbed his finger toward the men. His enthusiasm was infectious.
‘T promise you, the minute you step foot in America, there'll be a job waiting for you. And it's
not just about the work. Think about the future: your children growing up in a land of riches,
with schooling and possibilities you can only dream of here.”

Joseph made up his mind right then and there that he would move to America. He was the first
to sign a work contract and was followed by several others. He felt like he was flying as he
rushed home to tell his wife Christina who was pregnant with their first child. Imagine! That
child was going to be an American!

34
The strapping 23-year-old Italian with a dark head of curly hair arrived in New York with
Christina and their new baby, Mary Kate. Christina clutched rosy little Mary to her chest and
stared at the city stretching before hen The little family would only be staying here a short
time while they waited for the train that would take them to Joseph's job. The three, wide-

eyed, walked to a boarding house about a mile away from the wharf in a neighborhood known
as Little Italy.

As they walked the streets of the city, a tapestry of languages assaulted their ears: English,
Yiddish, Polish, German, and a dozen others. The vibrant neighborhood of their destination was
packed with throngs of market stalls, barefoot children weaving in and out of the crowd, and
women with baskets slung over their arms procuring (geting) the day's dinner As there were
so many Italians living here, it felt a little like home, and that was comforting.

While staying at the boarding house, Christina met Violet, a young but very bright teenager
with a shining spirit of determination. Violet had just secured a job at a bustling garment
factory, where countless women stitched their futures into the fabric of America. Violet was
excited that she would be moving into a tenement apartment shared with another family the
next afternoon after work.

Christina would have liked to settle into a home right away, too, but her little family was heading
to Colorado. She was sad that she'd be leaving her first friend in this new country in a matter
of days.

Because so many immigrants settled in the cities where the jobs were instead of moving to
more rural areas like Joseph and Christina, many American cities became even more crowded
until they were bursting at the seams. This affected some of the living conditions, especially for
people like Violet who didn't have enough money to travel elsewhere or funds to settle into a
nicer home.

Violet was excited about moving into a tenement, but her excitement vanished after just a few
days w when she realized that life there wasn't idl like she had imagined. Let's see ewny..

a =] Mberry Street, New York City a around 1900 =

tae Sate

aw =

BY DETROIT P
NY tenement buildings with
laundry drying outside

vin
hu

aS Fi
LZ f

ma he

vy,
4 ‘