LIFE IN THE BIG CITY TENEMENTS

A tenement is a type of apartment building that was common in cities during the late 1800s
and early 1900s. Immigrants and working-class families crowded into these buildings that lined
the streets and alleys of New York and other big cities.

Some tenements were single-family homes that were later divided into multiple tiny apartments
to shelter the growing population. Others were built and run by greedy landlords who cared
more about making money than the people who were paying the rent.

Violet rented her room, barely bigger than a
closet, from a family of 5. It could have been 325 square feet is about as big as a
worse. Sometimes 10 or more people were school bus or a one-car garage!

packed into tiny 325-square-foot apartments,

with barely enough space to move, let alone live
comfortably.

Privacy was nonexistent, and disease spread rapidly in such close quarters. If one person had a
cough, it wasn't long before almost everyone else did as well.

These buildings were often poorly constructed and lacked basic amenities like indoor plumbing.

36
Sanitation was a significant issue. Communal water taps that must be shared were often
squeezed into the tiny spaces between buildings or in the hallways. Some buildings had no reliable
running water at all, so it was difficult if not impossible for people to bathe and wash up.

Toilets were in the dark, damp corners of the building's hallways or courtyards and were
typically shared by multiple families who had to wait for their turn to use them. The shared
toilets were often dirty and smelly, posing serious health and disease risks. Have you ever seen
areally dirty public toilet? These toilets were sometimes much worse!

Many times, instead of toilets, there were outhouses in the tiny outdoor courtyards. Outhouses
were little wooden buildings (similar in size to modern portable toilets) that usually had a wooden
board with a hole cut out of the middle over a pit dug in the ground. Waste would fall into this pit
and eventually build up until it was pumped out and hauled away. People also used them like trash
cans, dumping garbage into the pits on top of the human waste- like rotting food or dead
animals. The foul smell rising from these pits was often so powerful that it made people gag.

Instead of waiting in line or running down multiple stairs and outdoors to an outhouse, some
people would use chamber pots. A chamber pot is a little portable pot you pee or poop in and
then dump out somewhere- either into a toilet, an outhouse, or a communal waste pile.
Sometimes chamber pots were dumped right outside or into an air shaft.

Two officials of the New York City
Tenement House Department inspect
a tenement room, circa 1900

Air shafts were added to

Airshaft of a dumbbell tenement, New York | buildings in the late 1880s

City, taken from the roof, circa 1900 when it was required (at
least in New York City) for
windows to open up to the
outside of the building. This
was done for health and
safety reasons. If you have
a window, you can get fresh
air and light. That's much
nicer than living in stuffy
darkness. You also have a
way to escape a building if
there is a fire.

|
Yon og rie >

° atw wittr
one sroccone eae | pom yenamnee gee | peer’

There was already a law
requiring one window per
apartment, but landlords
got around this by installing
windows indoors. For
example, an apartment

_ would have a window
opening up to the indoor
hallway or perhaps would

* have a window between two
rooms. | hat was obviously
not what was intended by the original law! Windows were supposed to provide air and light to
the apartments, not just fulfill the law’s literal requirements!

Building developers were now being forced to put windows on the outside of the building, but
they still wanted to use as much building space as possible. How could they cram apartments
into their buildings while still meeting the “one window must face the outside” rule? The
developers and builders decided to construct skinny air shafts throughout the buildings. Then
they added tiny windows. These windows were often so small that a person could not fit
through them. Now each apartment had a window, but if you opened it up, instead of getting a
view of the sky, you had a view of brick siding and another window right across the way that
was often so close, you could reach out and touch it!

These air shafts didn't provide a lot of fresh air and light, but they did provide a convenient
place to dump trash, human waste, and anything else someone wanted to get rid of. All that
waste and garbage built up at the bottom of the shaft where rats scuttered about and a foul
stench arose. Sometimes the litter in the air shafts was so deep that it blocked the bottom
windows. In fact, at one tenement, the refuse piled up so high that it saved a woman's life!

38
The following newspaper article is a true story!

Largest Daily

Circulation
135 789 WEEKDAYS

VOL. 127 - NO. 39

Woman saved by airshaft garbage!

Mary Olson, an intemperate Irishwoman, was very upset when her husband came home
late. The sounds of their fighting could be heard several apartments away. When her
husband went to work on Friday night, Mary was greatly excited and paced about her
apartment shouting and breaking crockery. She was such a nuisance to others in the
tenement that the janitor was sent for to help. He was about to admonish the woman,
when she flung herself down the narrow air shaft which passed by her bedroom window.
After falling 35 feet, she landed on the heap of rubbish at the bottom. She was unhurt
but still angry as a spitting cat.

* Adapted from a real New York Times newspaper article from May 31, 1885

With nearly useless windows, people often preferred to keep them tightly shut, so light and
fresh air were scarce. Since rooms were dimly lit, people relied on oil lamps or candles, which
posed a fire hazard. There were few fire regulations and a terrible lack of adequate fire
escapes (metal stairs or a system of ladders that allow people to escape building fires).
Overcrowding also made it difficult for people to evacuate safely in case of an emergency.
Tragically, many tenement fires resulted in loss of life.

Lack of ventilation also led to hot, stifling conditions during the summen °...often at night, when
the small bedrooms opening upon the “air shaft” are so close and ill- ventilated that sleep is
impossible, mattresses are dragged upon the floor of the parlon and there the family sleep, all
together in one room. In summer the small bedrooms are so hot and stifling that a large part of
the tenement-house population sleep on the roofs, the sidewalks, and fire escapes.” Quote
from Extracts from the Report of the Tenement-House Commission, New York, 1901

While some people were able to escape their apartments during the workday, many others
stayed inside all day and worked from home, turning their homes into little factories and
sweatshops: cracking nuts and removing them from the shells and then stuffing them in sacks,
making fabric flowers for hats and decorations, sewing clothes, and doing other jobs that
employed all members of the family, even the little children.

Sweatshops get their name from the tough, unfair working conditions inside them. The word
sweat comes from the idea of working so hard that you sweat a lot, often in a hot, crowded

39
space. The name highlights how hard people had to work in these unpleasant conditions, often
just to make enough to survive.

Let's look back at a litte family of three living in a tenement on Mott Street in New York:
The Romano Family

Paulo sat cross-legged on his bench, stitching away for dear life. He pursed his lips and
screwed up his mouth into all sorts of odd shapes with the effort, for it was an effort. He was
only eight, but small for his age, and he sat there sewing like a real little tailon He was
struggling with a difficult seam. He held the needle and felt along the edge of the material in
quite a grown-up way, and pulled the thread just as far as his short arm would reach. His
mother sat on a stool by the window where she could help him when he got his thread into a
snar\, as it did once in a while, or when the needle had to be threaded. Then she dropped her
own sewing, patted him on the head, and told him he was a good boy.

Little Josef, his baby brothen babbled from his pallet on the floon clacking wooden spools
together and gnawing on them with his emerging teeth.

Paulo felt very proud that he was able to help his mothen and he worked carefully and
faithfully so that the boss should find no fault. The shouts of the boys in the block, pitching
pennies and tumbling down the street, came echoing in through the tiny window open to the air
shaft. Normally they left it closed, but today the heat in the little room was so thick that his
mother finally relented and threw it open. When she did, the foul smell of garbage and urine
floated in with a little rush of ain The little boy soured thinking about it for a moment. Paulo
wanted to be outside playing, but of course, he had to keep sewing. His supper was at stake.

Serta

n N.Y. made artificial roses in a dirty, poorly lighted tenement

os kitchen. They sometimes worked at night. Pauline, 6 years old, worked after
school, Peten 8 worked until 8 p.m., Mike, 12 years old, worked until 10 p.m.

He supposed he was blessed in many ways. Some of the newsboys who were even younger than
him had no home at all and slept on the street grates in a huddle.

Other boys rented a room from the Newsboys’ Lodging-house. It cost 5 cents for the privilege
of a roof overhead or 10 cents to get an entire bed to themselves.

He and his mother were making pants for the shop on Stranton Street—little knickerbockers
for boys of Paulo's own age. "12 pants for ten cents,” he said, counting on his fingers. Mother
brought the material for the pants to their apartment once a week in a big bundle which she
carried home on her head. They must have buttons put on, fourteen on each pain the bottoms
turned up, and a ribbon sewed fast to the back seam inside. That was called finishing.

When work was brisk—and it was not always so since there had been such frequent strikes in
Stanton Street—the two working together could make the rent money. Sometimes they could
even earn a bit extra since Paulo was learning and getting a stronger grip on the needle week
by week. The rent was six dollars a month for their dingy room, in which it was twilight even on
the brightest days. At one side of the apartment there was a dark little cubbyhole where it
was always midnight with just enough room for a bed of old boards. Paulo slept there while his
mother made her bed on the floor of the “kitchen” as they called it, with little Josef.

A strike in the early 1900s was when workers stopped doing their jobs to protest unfair
conditions. This could be because they werent getting paid enough, had to work too many
hours, or their workplaces were unsafe. By going on strike, workers hoped to force their
bosses to make beneficial changes. During a strike, workers would refuse to work until their
demands were met. Strikes were risky because people could lose their jobs or face violence,
but the strikes helped bring attention to workers’ rights and eventually led to better working
conditions. Some modern-day workers also go on strike, usually to argue for higher pay and

better benefits.

There were just the three of them: Maria, Paulo, and baby Josef There used to be foun but
one stormy night Paulo's father Antonio didn't come home. Papa's brother came knocking at
the door alone, and the story he told made the poor home darker and drearier than it had been
already. Papa had been lost in the harbor miles from shore, after a wave had upset his crew's
little boat. He was never seen again.

Paulo and his mother had to quickly dry their tears and get to work. After Antonio's
disappearance, there was to be little else for them. The Mott Street tenements didn’t provide
the luxury of grieving; among the many other things they lacked. Now Paulo's life was lived
mainly sitting on a hard bench plying a needle and thread. His routine of work was varied by the
household duties, which he shared with his mother There were the meals to get, few and plain
as they were. Sometimes Paulo even helped cook, and not infrequently, when a building was
being torn down in the neighborhood, he furnished the fuel for cooking as well. Those were his
off days, when he put the needle away and foraged with the other children, dragging old
beams, and carrying burdens far beyond his years.

WI
Paulo wanted to go to school, but how would they survive if he didn't do his share of the
sewing? Maybe Mama would take in a boarder like the Nowaks down the hall. Their boarder
was named Violet, and she sometimes ruffled his hair playfully when he passed her in the hall.

One day, while brooding a bit, Paulo went up to the roof to gather in the wash flapping in the
wind on the laundry line. There he saw a man with a camera taking a picture of Mrs. Gambino
who had come up with her children to escape the heat.

Photograph of a family on the roof of a
Mott Street tenement taken by Jacob Riis.

This man was named Jacob Riis, and he was a muckraken