The
Saga of King Olaf which led
to a lifetime affection for
Scandinavian stories.

Imagine Theodore, having to
stay in for the day due to his
asthma, reading his beloved
books while curled up in the
study with a gentle warm
fire flickering in the grate.
Books allowed him to go on
adventures of the mind
during the times when his
body was frail and unable to
handle the normal rough and
tumble adventures of a boy
his age.

¢
i A i
7 YS =— D\ J
> ¢ ' \y 4 >
* — ; ‘i ~
z : a = = Taras ES >
an a. y ¢
ETS ERS I EOC ae Sy hs Pe A ah Ny

pa
AS
fs

iS

hv

fy

i

is

f

EDS Le

CEE

Let's pause our story for a
moment to read [he Saga of
King Olaf and see firsthand
the very poem that inspired
the young boy:

SDD anes

PRES

! The Saga of King Olaf by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Queen Sigrid the Haughty sat proud and aloft
Inher chamber that looked over meadow and croft.
Heart's dearest,

Why dost thou sorrow so?

CY PRIDE

y The floor with tassels of fir was besprent,
Filling the room with their fragrant scent.

She heard the birds sing, she saw the sun shine,

4 The air of summer was sweeter than wine.

Like a sword without scabbard the bright river lay
Between her own kingdom and Norroway.

But Olaf the King had sued for her hand,

The sword would be sheathed, the river be spanned.
| Her maidens were seated aroundherknee,

Working bright figures in tapestry.

And one was singing the ancient rune
Of Brynhilda’s love and the wrath of Gudrun.

e Andthroughit, androundit, and overit all
Sounded incessant the waterfall.

l The Queenin her hand held aring of gold,
( From the door of Ladé's Temple old.
(

King Olaf had sent her this wedding gift,
But her thoughts as arrows were keen and swift.

WT BRS

Ns She had given the ring to her goldsmiths twain,
Who smiled, as they handedit back again.

And Sigrid the Queen, inher haughty way,
Said, “Why do you smile, my goldsmiths, say?"

“or

And they answered: “O Queen! if the truth must be told,
The ringis of copper and not of gold!"

The lightning flashed o'er her forehead and cheek,
She only murmured, she did not speak:

“Tf inhis gifts he can faithless be, :
There willbe no goldin his love to me. "

BOLLE PR) EOI

tras

A footstep was heardon the outer stain
Andin strode King Olaf withroyalain

He kissed the Queen's hand, and he whispered of love,
>) Andswore tobe true as the stars are above.

a

But she smiled with contempt as she answered: “O King,
Will youswearit, as Odin once swore, onthe ring?”

_ Andthe King: “O speaknot of Odin to me,
fi The wife of King Olaf a Christian must be. "

Looking straight at the King, withher level brows,
She said, “[keep true to my faith and my vows.

Then the face of King Olaf was darkened with gloom,

He rose in his anger and strode through the room.

“Why, then, should] care fo have thee?" he said, - -
( ‘A faded old woman, aheathenish jade!

___ Hiszealwas stronger than fear or love,
~ Andhe struck the Queenin the face with his glove.

| Then forth from the chamber in anger he fled,
And the wooden stairway shook with his tread.

Queen Sigrid the Haughty said under her breath,
“This insult, King Olaf’ shall be thy death!”

d Heart's dearest,
Why dost thou sorrow so?

Theodore’s parents warmly encouraged his love of books, never requiring him to read
something he didn’t like, unless it was for his homeschooling studies. Besides reading, Theodore
enjoyed and excelled in geography, history, French, and German, but struggled in math and
Latin.

— Just because you aren't good at something doesn't mean you are good for nothing! Next time
_ you are having a hard time learning something, remember that Theodore struggled, too!

3T KW 7 FRVEAVCORK

= One of the subjects he dearly loved was biology. His parents supported the many collections he
put together with all the enthusiasm of a boy with a passion for the natural world.

The first specimen he entered into the “Roosevelt Museum of Natural History” was a dead seal
~ head he begged of f a shopkeeper at the local market. Theodore filled his family’s home with
4 \\ various preserved creatures, trom insects to birds, fueling his lifelong passion for nature and

science. Once, while spending the summer in Germany, he collected hedgehogs and other little
creatures like snakes and salamanders that caused quite a ruckus when they escaped from
the partially closed dresser drawers!

Theodore’s fathen a man of action and determination, believed that his son could overcome his
weak body with effort and discipline. “You must make your body,” Theodore Sn famously told
him, and young Theodore took that advice to heart. It all began with a couple of boys and a bit
of bullying. In Theodore’s own words:

Ahhh! Don't bother this studious young person with the original text.
Lovely student, I shall simplify this immediately and serve it up for thy
reading pleasure. I shall keep Theodore’s meaning intact, of course!

“When I was young, I was a sickly kid with no natural strength or toughness, and since I spent
most of my time at home, I wasn’t used to dealing with other boys, especially the rougher ones.
I was nervous and shy. But I had always admired brave people-whether it was the soldiers
from Valley Forge or the heroes in my favorite books. My Southern ancestors and my own
father were also men I looked up to for their courage and ability to stand up for themselves. I
really wanted to be like them, but until I was about fourteen, this was just something I
daydreamed about.

Then something happened that made a big difference. I had an asthma attack and was sent of f
to Moosehead Lake by myself On the stagecoach ride there, I met two boys around my age
who were much more confident and a bit more mischievous. I'm sure they were good-hearted,
but they were still typical boys—they quickly realized I would be an easy target, and they made
it their mission to tease and bother me. The worst part was that when I finally tried to fight
back, I found out that either one of them could easily handle me without much effort. They
didn’t really hurt me, but they made sure I couldn't fight back effectively.

That experience taught me something that no amount of advice could. I realized I didn’t want to
be helpless again, and since I wasnt naturally strong, I decided I'd have to work to change that.
With my father’s full support, I started learning how to box. °

From that moment on, Theodore pushed himself physically, determined not to allow his asthma
to define who he was. He embraced a rigorous exercise regime, boxing, and horseback riding,
which transformed him into a symbol of vigor and strength, eventually becoming the robust
outdoorsman he is remembered as today.

Teddy Roosevelt's childhood was a time of exploration, growth, and resilience. His distinctive
upbringing, combined with his curiosity and determination, shaped him into a remarkable leader
The boy who roamed the woods barefoot collecting hedgehogs would one day become one of
the most influential presidents in American history.

56
In many ways, Theodore’s childhood reflects the essence of his presidency: a mix of intellectual
curiosity, rugged determination, and an unshakable belief in pushing oneself to the limits. From
the tragedy of McKinley's assassination, a new chapter in American history began, led by a
president who believed in the power of change and the promise of a brighter future.

Theodore was the youngest U.S. president at just 42 years old. He became a strong leader in
the Progressive Movement, pushing for changes to make life better and the government fairer

for everyone.