MUCKRAKERS WEEK 1DAY 5—

Muckrakers were investigative journalists in the early 1900s who exposed corruption, social
injustices, and abuses of powen They got their name from President Theodore Roosevelt, who
in 1906 quoted a classic 1678 book called Pilgrim's Progress, saying:

",..you may recall the description of the Man with the Muck-rake, the man who could look no
way but downward with the muck-rake in his hands; who was offered a celestial crown for his
muck-rake, but who would neither look up nor regard the crown he was offered, but continued

to rake to himself the filth of the floor”

42
In this context, the man in the story is raking up muck, which is animal poop.

While cautioning about possible pitfalls of keeping one's attention “on the muck’, Roosevelt said
there was a great benefit to this type of reporting, saying,

‘There are, in the body politic, economic and social, many and grave evils, and there is urgent
necessity for the sternest war upon them. There should be relentiess exposure of and attack
upon every evil man whether politician or business man, every evil practice, whether in politics, in
business, or in social life. I hail as a benefactor every writer or speaker every man who, on the
platform, or in book, magazine, or newspaper with merciless severity makes such attack,
provided always that he in his turn remembers that the attack is of use only if it is absolutely
truthful. °

[ Llama McRama translation service: \

“There are many great evils in politics, business, and
society that we need to wage war against. I believe that

every writer and speaker who brings to light these
_\ tere things are doing a great service, but only if they |

are 100% truthful.”

Jacob Riis was one of those people waging a war and trying to make a difference for people
steeped in poverty. He originally worked for the New-York Tribune as a police reporter from a
little press of fice on Mulberry Street, which was nicknamed “Death's Thoroughfare’ (a
thoroughfare is a street) because if passed through the heart of the New York slums. Those
horrific slums were called this because they led to the death of many, whether by crime or
disease, or because it was so hard to survive as a fresh immigrant. It was here where Jacob
saw such terrible squalor and decided to do something about it by exposing the truth to the
better- off public.

Greek and Latin roots: Squalor comes from the Latin word squales which means filthy.

Every day Jacob navigated the streets of New York visiting the tenements, taking pictures and
notes, and at night his pen would scratch all the sights and smells of the day onto paper and
turn those notes into books, articles, and speeches given at churches.

Have you ever heard the phrase, ‘The pen is mightier than the sword’? This is how Jacob was
using his pen and his camera-to fight the evil he saw all around him. When he saw Mrs.
Gambino on the roof with her family, he saw yet another opportunity to show people what the
life of many immigrants and poor city dwellers was like. He also took pictures of boys like Paulo
who should have been in school, but instead were working or sleeping in the streets. Even today
his pictures speak to us and tell a story— just as they did to all the people who saw and read
about them in the magazines and newspapers of the day.

Many other muckrakers of the time risked their safety and worked hard to bring important
issues to light. They were not afraid to be around the dirty and downtrodden or bad situations.

43
They wanted to show the truth of living conditions and company practices to everyone, like
shining a light in the darkness.

IDA TARBELL EXPOSED THE}
UNFAIR PRACTICES OF THE |
STANDARD OIL COMPANY, |

LEADING TO ITS BREAKUP.

Muckrakers were the mouthpieces of