THEODORE BECOMES THE PRESIDENT WEEK 2 DAY 1
Theodore Roosevelt was President: September 1901 - March 1909

In 1901, the Pan-American Exposition was a major event, filled with exciting exhibits and shows
spread across 342 acres—about the size of 2.5 Disneylands! This world’s fair celebrated the
achievements and cultures of the Western Hemisphere and showcased the latest inventions
and technologies. It also aimed to promote friendship between the countries of North, Central,
and South America, especially since the Spanish-American War had ended a few years earlier

There was so much to see! At the exhibit of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, several Sioux and
Iroquois Indian chiefs attended with displays of their traditional dwellings.

48
Electric lights powered by the nearby Niagara Falls blazed across the exhibit buildings and
decorated the great electric tower The lights were like magic! Thomas Edison (the inventor of
the light bulb) was there and filmed a pan of it at night.

Crowds streamed into the grand Temple of Music to get a glimpse of President McKinley who
was attending a public reception. Among the crowd was a man named Leon Czolgosz who
wended his way in line to shake the president's hand.

Root words: The word wend comes from wendh, a word that traces back to what linguists
(people who study language) call Proto-Indo-European. Proto-Indo-European (PIE) is the
name for a language believed to be the common ancestor of many modern languages, like
English, Latin, Greek, and more. Calling PIE “hypothetical” means it's a reconstructed language.
Linguists think it existed because of the similarities between its descendant languages, but
there are no written records of it. They've pieced PIE together by comparing related
languages, like English and Latin. It's an educated guess based on lots of research, but no one
has ever actually heard PIE spoken.

Anyway, the root word wendh means fo turn, wind, or weave. It's closely related to the word
wander

That is just what Leon was doing- weaving in and out among the members of the crowd until he
found his place in line. Finally, he approached the president whose great bulk shadowed the
American flag that hung behind him.

;

crime mannan mane BIRDSEYE VIEW OF THE PAN-AMERICAN EXPOSITION, BUFFALO, MAY 1 TO NOVEMBER 1, 1901. verre nena
As McKinley extended his hand, Leon
stepped forward, concealing a revolver
under a handkerchief. In a tragic
moment, he fired two shots at the
president. The crowd was stunned,
and chaos erupted. The man who had
been standing in line behind Leon
slammed into the assassin, reaching
for the gun.

McKinley clutched his chest while
nearby detectives and his secretary
ushered him to a chair ‘Tm not hurt
gentlemen. No need for a fuss,” he

said to the worried men surrounding Didi in
him, but the blood welling up onto his ; ki ™ it

ht

a

jacket told a different story. oo Rs
McKinley entering the Temple of Music

McKinley was rushed to the Exhibition on September 6 1901, shortly before

hospital, but despite the doctors best shots were fired

efforts, he succumbed to his injuries. | ma NS

If he had been shot today, he would ‘=
have likely survived with no issues, but

back then doctors did not have the same lifesaving tools or skills they do now. In fact, one of
the attending doctors shoved his hand inside McKinley's stomach, hunting for the bullet blindly
with his fingers. It was a disaster Although McKinley rallied a bit, his internal wounds became

infected and began to poison his blood. He died 8 days after the shooting.

With McKinley's death, Vice President Theodore Roosevelt was thrust into the presidency.
Roosevelt, known for his boundless energy and larger-than-life personality, was ready to take
on the challenges ahead. He was a man of action, and his presidency marked the beginning of a
new era in American politics.