THE SQUARE DEAL WEEK 2 DAY 3

The Square Deal was President Theodore Roosevelt's plan to make things fair for everyone—
workers, businesses, and consumers. He believed that everyone should have an equal
opportunity to succeed, no matter their background.

Here's an excerpt from a speech explaining Theodore’s political _ /

beliefs and goals. Called The New Nationalism, it was delivered during rate >
his 1912 presidential campaign after he left the Republican Party and Cy A’ \
created the new Progressive Party (nicknamed the Bull Moose we x =
Party). Even though we are discussing his presidency from 1901- \ i
1909 right now, the speech captures Theodore’s core political 7 i =
beliefs, so it's worth mentioning at this point in our narrative (story). =z

=~ cS

‘I stand for the square deal. But when I say that I am for the square deal/ipnean not merely
that I stand for fair play under the present rules of the game, but that I stand for having
those rules changed so as to work for a more substantial equality of opportunity and
of reward for equally good service. ...

When I say I want a square deal for the poor man, I do not mean that I
want a square deal for the man who remains poor because he has not
got the energy to work for himself If a man who has had a chance will
not make good, then he has got to quit. ...

The national Government belongs to the whole American people, and

where the whole American people are interested, that interest can be

guarded effectively only by the national Government. The betterment

which we seek must be accomplished, I believe, mainly through
the national Government.

I believe in shaping the ends of government to protect

property as well as human welfare. Normally, and in the long

run, the ends are the same; but whenever the alternative
must be faced, I am for men and not for property...

The prime problem of our nation is to get the right type of good
citizenship, and, to get it, we must have progress, and our public men must be genuinely

progressive. °
5/7
Llama McRama Translation Service to the rescue!

‘T believe in the square deal, which means fairness for everyone. But it's not
just about playing fair with the current rules; it's about changing those rules to
make sure everyone has a fair chance and gets rewarded for their hard work.

When I say I want a square deal for the poor I mean for those who are willing
to work hard to improve their lives. IF someone has had opportunities but
doesnt make an effort, then they cant expect help.

The national Government belongs to all Americans, and it's the best way to
protect everyone's interests. We need the government to help make things
better for everyone. I believe the government should protect both property
and people's well-being. Usually, these goals go hand in hand, but if we have to choose, people
are more important than property.

Our main challenge is to create good citizens, and to do that, we need progress. Our leaders
must be truly committed to making positive changes. °

The Square Deal focused on three main ideas, often called the “Three C's’:
Control of Corporations:

Roosevelt wanted to make sure big companies, or “trusts, didnt get too powerful and take
advantage of people. He earned the nickname “Trust Buster’ for his efforts to break up large
monopolies and restore competition in the marketplace.

Consumer Protection:

Roosevelt believed people should have safe products. Roosevelt pushed for laws that made food
and medicine safer like the Pure Food and Drug Act and the Meat Inspection Act.

Conservation of Natural Resources:

Roosevelt loved nature and wanted to protect it. One of the most memorable stories related to
Roosevelt's conservation efforts happened in 1903, when he and Muir took a three-day
camping trip in Yosemite National Park. Over three days, the pair camped under the towering
sequoias in Mariposa Grove, woke up covered in a dusting of snow at Glacier Point, and explored
the breathtaking Yosemite Valley. The two slept on beds made from pine boughs and had long
conversations into the night under the sparkle of stars. The sound of a crackling campfire was
the music that lulled them to sleep.

After this trip, Roosevelt committed to preserve the wilderness as a natural treasure for
future generations and pushed Congress to pass laws to protect natural areas. Over 230
million acres were set aside for national parks, forests, and wildlife areas.

58
Other Projects

Roosevelt wasnt just about
improving labor conditions and
supporting workers’ rights. He
also fought hard against
corruption, working to uncover
and punish it. On the world
stage, he made big moves like
pushing forward the
construction of the Panama
Canal, which connected the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans
and helped boost trade and
military movement.