WHO WAS THEODORE ROOSEVELT? WEEK 2 DAY 2

In 1858, Theodore Roosevelt was born into a wealthy New York family. Known affectionately
as ‘leedie,” young Theodore struggled with severe asthma. In his autobiography, he wrote:

T was a sickly, delicate boy, suffered much from asthma, and frequently had to be taken away
on trips to find a place where I could breathe. One of my memories is of my father walking up
and down the room with me in his arms at night when I was a very small person, and of sitting
up in bed gasping, with my father and mother trying to help me. °

Theodore spent his early life in a brownstone house in Manhattan getting into mischief and
grumbling over Sundays when he had fo wear clean clothes and keep neat.

50
One time a cut-glass prism fell from the chandelier Theodore hastily grabbed it and stuffed it
into his pocket, because he thought it was strikingly beautiful. He spent the next several days
pulling out his treasure in secret to gaze at it admiringly, all the while feeling guilty and fearing
he'd get in trouble for stealing. He never shared if he got in trouble or not!

Theodore spent his springs and summers in the country and loved it beyond anything, as he

hated the city.

"We were always wildly eager to get to the country
when spring came, and very sad when in the late fall
the family moved back to town. In the country we of
course had all kinds of pets—cats, dogs, rabbits, a
coon, and a sorrel Shetland pony named General
Grant. °

In the country he and his siblings ran around barefoot
picking apples and catching frogs, watching the
haying, and gathering chestnuts from the edge of
sunny pastures. They pretended to be Indians and
stained their clothes with poke-cherry juice, building
wigwams in the woods.

Although he would rather be in the country, the city

Theodore at 44 years old had its own charms as well - like at Christmas.

‘Christmas was an occasion of literally delirious joy. In
the evening, we hung up our stockings—or rather the
biggest stockings we could borrow from the grown-
ups—and before dawn we trooped in to open them while sitting on father’s and mother s bed;
and the bigger presents were arranged, those for each child on its own table, in the drawing-
room, the doors to which were thrown open after breakfast. I never knew anyone else have
what seemed to me such attractive Christmases, and in the next generation I tried to
reproduce them exactly for my own children. °

From an early age, Theodore admired and adored his father who was deeply committed to
helping others and preventing cruelty to children and animals. He often brought young Teedie
along to help serve meals at the Newsboys’ Lodging-House, teaching him the importance of
kindness and service.

The Newsboys’ Lodging-House was established in 1886 by the Children’s Aid Society. It was
designed as a combination home and school for poor boys, particularly newsboys and bootblacks.
The building provided shelter food, and education for them. It was a safe place in lieu (instead)
of the wild streets.

5]
a Newsboys in Hartford, Connecticut in
1909. The youngest boy is 7 years old.

=>. & -& %

Newsboys (also called newsies) were -e boys, sometimes as young as 5 or 6 years old who hawked
(sold) newspapers from bundled stacks purchased from publishers. Most of them were ragged,
dirty, and homeless. They had to sell all their papers, or they wouldn't make a profit. This led to
some faking injuries for pity or shouting out false headlines and begging for tips.

Bootblacks were young boys who shined and
polished shoes to earn pennies.

Back then, if you didn't have parents or if you
' ran away from home because of abuse, there
weren't many options for survival. Orphanages
existed, but they were often harsh and
overcrowded. They had strict rules and severe
discipline, with little care or kindness shown to

i the children living there.

Another option was the orphan trains, a
program that operated from 1854 to 1929.
These trains took children from crowded cities
in the East to rural foster homes in the West.
While this gave many children a chance at a
new home, it often meant being separated
from siblings and adjusting to a new life where
they felt like outsiders. Some adoptive families were kind and caring, but others only adopted
children to use them to work like slaves on their farms.

52

| A young bootblack shines shoes
The Newsboys’ Lodging-House was a safe alternative for orphans and runaways. It had a
dormitory where boys could sleep for just a nickel a night, and for a dime, they could have their
own bed. The lodging house also provided food and a basic education. It was an essential refuge
for many young boys who worked long hours on the streets to earn a living.

Theodore and his father frequently visited the house to help the boys. It was through actions
like these that Theodore saw first-hand the poverty and struggles of his fellow Americans-
just children like himself, but poon hungry, and trying to make their way in the world without
parental guidance.

Even at a young age, Theodore began to develop compassion for others, inspired by his father’s
kindness and the things he witnessed firsthand. Without realizing it, he had discovered one of
his future lifelong missions:
defending and protecting the
vulnerable.

Like many other children of
his era, Theodore was
homeschooled. He devoured
magazines like Our Young
Folks, books like Little
Women and poems like