RABBIT TRAIL: THE PANAMA CANAL

The dream of a canal linking the Atlantic and Pacific oceans was nothing
new-but it took the daring spirit of the early 1900s along with WEEK 2 DAY 4 °
Theodore’s vision to make it a reality. A canal cutting through Central =
America would save ships thousands of miles and weeks of dangerous travel around South
America’s southern tip, but building it would be one of the biggest engineering challenges the
world had ever seen.

The story of the Panama Canal began with the French in the 1880s. Led by Ferdinand de
Lesseps, the mastermind behind Egypt's Suez Canal, they set out to carve a path through
Panama. But Panama wasn't Egypt. Panama's tropical jungles were tangled with vegetation,
beset by intense rains that turned everything to soupy mud, and—-worst of all—plagued by
diseases like yellow fever and malaria that spread through mosquito bites. Workers fell ill by the
thousands, and eventually the French gave up, leaving the project unfinished and costing over

22,000 lives.

The Panama Canal cuts through Panama
in Central America.

SSS

5q_
Then came Theodore Roosevelt, America’s bold and unrelenting president. Roosevelt saw the
canal as the key to America's future powen a lifeline for the U.S. Navy, and a symbol of the
country's strength and progress. So, in 1904, the United States took over where the French
had left off. But first, they had to tackle the biggest enemy—disease.

American engineers and workers arrived to find the same deadly conditions that had defeated
the French. Yellow fever infected the workers, and no one knew exactly how it spread. Then
came a breakthrough: Dr Walter Reed, a U.S. Army docton proved that mosquitoes were the
real culprits. Not swamp gas, foul ain or soiled clothing from those afflicted with the disease, as
people had thought for centuries— just tiny, persistent mosquitoes.

Armed with this knowledge, another doctor named William Gorgas led a full-scale battle against
the mosquitoes in Panama. Crews drained swamps, fumigated homes (filled them with poison
gas to kill the mosquitoes), and covered every standing pool of water fo stop the mosquitoes in
their tracks.

The fight was intense, but effective, and cases of yellow fever and malaria plummeted, allowing
workers to press on.

Crews used the chemicals sulfur and pyrethrum while fumigating to create a thick, mosquito
killing smoke. They used so much that they exhausted the entire U.S. supply! There wasn't any
left!

Finally, the grueling construction began. Workers battled not just disease but the land itself
They hacked through thick jungle, blasted through mountains,

and cleared rivers that threatened to flood the worksite. —

Engineers devised a massive system of locks to raise and
lower ships over Panama's rugged terrain. This lock system

was an engineering marvel! For years workers labored, and

each blast, dig, and lock brought them closer to Roosevelt's dream.

One lesser known but impactful pro ject was Roosevelt's involvement in

creating scholarships for Chinese students to study in the United States. This initiative came
about after the Boxer Rebellion, an anti-foreign, anti-Christian uprising in China from 1899 to

1901. You will see a brief mention of this rebellion again laten as a young Herbert Hoover was
right there in China when it was happening!

When the rebellion was stopped by international forces and U.S. troops, China had to pay a lot
of money to the countries involved, including the United States.

Instead of keeping all the money, Roosevelt gave some back to China and used it to create
scholarships. [he Boxer Indemnity Scholarship let Chinese students study in the U.S., building a
stronger connection between the two countries. Roosevelt believed this would help both nations
understand each other better and support future Chinese leaders, showing his hope for
America to have a positive role in the world.

60
The Big Stick Policy WEEK 2 DAY 5

Another thing Roosevelt was known for was the Big Stick Policy, which is also sometimes called
Big Stick Diplomacy.

Diplomacy is the way countries talk to each other to solve problems, make agreements, and

build good relationships without fighting. It's kind of like when you try to work things out with a

friend instead of arguing. Diplomats, the people who work in diplomacy, represent their
countries and

meet with
A famous cartoon of Roosevelt leaders from
and his “big stick” as he stomps other places to

around the Caribbean Sea, 1904

discuss important
issues, like trade,
peace, or helping
each othen The
goals of
diplomacy are to
find solutions
that everyone
can agree on,

@ keeping peace
“G= and cooperation
between nations.

The Big Stick
policy was
President
Theodore
Roosevelt's idea for how the United States should deal with other countries. Roosevelt liked to
say, “Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go fan” What he meant was that the U.S.
should try to solve problems peacefully first (that's the “speak softly” part), but should also
have a strong military ready just in case (that's the ‘big stick’).

-——

THE BIG STICK IN THE CARIBBEAN SEA

Roosevelt used this policy to maintain peace in places like Latin America and the Caribbean. If a
country was unstable or causing problems, the U.S. would try to resolve the issue peacefully,
but it was clear that the U.S. military was ready to step in if necessary. Roosevelt believed this
approach would help keep orden avoid wars, and protect smaller countries.

Silly Stuff

Roosevelt got involved in more than just foreign affairs, big projects, and important matters.
He seemed to feel it was the government's right to get involved in just about anything that
struck his fancy and that he believed needed improvement.

6]
For example, in a letter to the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury L.M. Shaw, Theodore wrote
saying the American Liberty Head gold coins were ugly:

T think the state of our coinage is artistically of atrocious hideousness. Would it be possible,
without asking permission of Congress, to employ a man like Saint-Gaudens to give us a coinage
which would have some beauty?*

Shaw told him there were some coins whose designs could be changed without Congress
approval, and so Theodore arranged for his friend Augustus Saint-Gaudens, a renowned
sculpton to design the $20 Double Eagle gold coin for the U.S. Mint, widely regarded as one of
the most beautiful American coins ever produced.

House Speaker Joseph Gurney
Cannon once remarked on
Roosevelt's desire for executive
control, saying, “That fellow at
the other end of the avenue
wants everything from the birth

of Christ to the death of the
devil."

Cannon's remark was a
hyperbolic statement suggesting that Roosevelt was seeking to exert control over all aspects
of American life, from the very beginning of history to the end of time. He pointed out that
Roosevelt tended to involve himself in many aspects of government and society, regardless of
how big or small the issue was.

Something that is hyperbolic is an exaggerated statement or claim that isnt meant to be taken
literally. It's of ten used to emphasize a point in a dramatic or humorous way. For example,
saying “I'm so hungry I could eat a horse” is a hyperbole. Hyperbole is a Greek word that
literally means to throw beyond or above from hyper meaning beyond or above normal and bole
meaning to throw.

Biographer H.W. Brands wrote that even Roosevelt's friends sometimes wondered if there
was any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update, or improve. For
example, besides commissioning a new $20 gold coin, Theodore tried to change the rules of
American football, enforce martial arts classes at the U.S. Naval Academy, revise disciplinary
rules, and even order simplified spellings for 300 words—though he later rescinded (canceled)
the latter after ridicule from the press and a protest from the House.

*The following was adapted from a real New York Times article from August 26, 1706!

President Roosevelt is the laughingstock of literary London today, that having nothing more
important to do, has undertaken the task of reconstructing the English language. The
humorists have been turned loose and are writing about him in every paper across the country.

62
For instance, the little half penny sheet The Sun reported:

President Roosevelt (or is it Rusvelt?) is doing his best to help the nations (or is it
nashuns) by attempting (atemting?) to reform the spelling of the English
language (langwidge?). No doubt his intentions are gud, but we must admit we
are reel amused by this spelling kraze! Let's look at some of his new sujestshuns!

Addressed---------- adrest
Croppeds= == 2 =, == cropt
PIRCO steers ee o ae fixt
Gatiges== ==> === 2s gage
Thorough- ----------- thoro

is : wie f ee = =
| a

Despite some silly things, progress and change were occurring across the nation. During
Theodore’s presidency, America began driving itself into the modern age, literally...

WEEK 3 DAY 1

1903 THE FIRST CROSS-COUNTRY ROAD TRIP

In 1903, a man named Horatio Nelson Jackson did something totally crazy for the time: he
decided to drive across the entire country. Most people thought that horseless carriages were
just a passing fad and a plaything of the rich. They certainly couldn't be trusted to drive very
far-maybe into the next town at the most?

Cars were getting faster and more powerful, but there were a few challenges that stood in
the way of them being widely adopted. One of the most obvious hurdles was how tough it was
to drive long distances, especially in the rugged West, where good roads were practically
nonexistent, and most were just dirt paths. Back then, there were only 150 miles of paved
roads across the entire country. Compare that to today where there are over 2,844,000
miles of paved roads and 1,317,000 miles that are unpaved!

Cars were also still totally unreliable, new machines. After two failed attempts by other drivers,
a bet propelled an automobile pioneer to break the cross-country barrien

Horatio leaned forward in the plush chair at the University Club of San Francisco. Like most
clubs of its time, membership was limited fo men, and any proposed member had to have
completed at least two years at university, which was somewhat uncommon at the time. He and
several of his wealthy and well-educated friends were sitting around a table having a heated
discussion.

63
One of them swirled a drink in a glass and said, “Automobiles will never amount to anything! They
are quite an amusement, but that's it. They aren't practical. Trains will be the means by which
people travel across this country for time immemorial. Not cars!"

Horatio didn't agree. “The only reason a transcontinental journey hasn't been made is because
there were no cars capable of doing so until now!”

Laughter broke out around the table and heads shook. No, no. There were no cars, even now,
that could drive so far! How absurd!

Horatio couldn't convince his friends with words,
but surely, he could convince them with action!
"Tl bet you $50 I can do it!” The man to his left
chuckled. “Very welll I accept the bet!" and the
rest of the men smirked, quite sure that
Horatio would lose.

$50 in 1903 is worth about $1,800
USD in 2024.

Horatio wasn't a man to sit around. As soon as the bet was made, he marched right out of the
club and sought out his chauffeun Sewall Crocker

“Crocker! Get me a car that can travel across the country! Oh, and would you like to come
along?"

Horatio then launched into an explanation of the bet he made. “You can be my mechanic and
backup driver! Think of it! We'll go down in automobile history!”

Crocken being a jolly and adventurous young man, agreed wholeheartedly. “Alright! I'll do it! The
only automobile I know that is capable of such a feat, though, is the 20-horsepower Winton
Touring Can"

“Very well,” replied Horatio. “You go and get the can and I'll arrange all the other matters.’

Horsepower is a unit of measurement used to quantify the power of engines. It was originally
defined by engineer James Watt to compare the power output of steam engines to the work
done by horses. Watt came up with the term after observing that a horse could turn a mil
wheel about 144 times an houn which led to his calculation that one horsepower could move
550 pounds one foot in one second. Modern cars have an average horsepower of 200 hp.

Crocker immediately went to the Winton agents to buy a Winton, but they were out of stock
and the ones that were on order from the factory were already spoken fon

“Never mind! I'll find another!” Crocker found a man who owned one and bought it for quite a bit
more than it was worth. That didn't matter According to Horatio, a car must be had, no
matter the cost!

May 23" was the big day. The can which had been christened Vermont after Horatio’s home

64
state, was piled high with every supply Crocker suggested, plus more that Horatio
deemed necessary for the long trip.

sated

LEE = <Seer> = —_— ae

(/

*
r

From the Journal of Horatio Nelson Jackson

May 23 We left San Francisco i
today without much fuss. My \
wife is taking the train |
back East tonight, ;
and I'm hoping she
has a smoother
journey than
what Crocker and
I are likely to
have. For a while,
everything was
going splendidly-
until just 15 miles
out, boom! The
car blew a tire! Of course, we only
had one spare, which Crocker quickly installed, but
here's to hoping it lasts the rest of the 2,900 miles ahead
of us. We re spending the night in Tracy and will set out again in
the morning.

This is the actual car
Horatio and Crocker
drove.

May 24 = Today, we made it to Sacramento, where we ran into a bit of a snag.

Apparently, the mountain passes through the Sierras are still closed off by snow, and
even the locals said that not even a mountain horse could make it through. Well, I'm
certainly not about fo sit around waiting for snow fo melt, so Crocker and I decided to
detour north to Oregon. Well find another route through the mountains there.

Last night, we discovered our side lanterns were too dim for traveling at night.
Crocken resourceful as even managed to buy a large spotlight. He mounted it on the
front of the can and now we re ready to light up the road like a steam engine!

May 25 Today, we suffered a small tragedy: our cooking gear fell off the can
and we didnt even hear it hit the ground because of the noise of the engine. It's i
probably scattered somewhere on the roadside now.

Then, around midday, we got lost. The roads are barely more than faint tracks
here, and it's impossible to tell which way to go. We finally spotted a farmhouse |
and asked an aproned woman for directions. She was quite delirious with }

admiration over the can since she had not seen one before. She gave us :
directions: “Take the westerly road and keep going until you see a blue house |

with a red barn. Can't miss it!"

a RA. rem 96 none =e Oe =
= 6 SOL fe “

2 eat tr sa ae

bo ~ a ae - roy yor ae i a ee SS a i eS Ce ee ~ awe = Se ee ve. hee ETON Eo oe n on Oe
cE a Sa IA TT RDI Gl omar en aD ome Ea FEL IN ad rg gs weed AeA

1 Fi

Well, it turns out she sent us the wrong way-deliberately! She wanted her sister's
family to get a look at our motor can Crocker thinks we've driven 108 miles out of
our way just to be put on display for a few farm children. I suppose it’s something
they ll be telling their grandchildren one day!

May 28 Disaster struck again. Our spare tire blew, and then two more followed.
We ve decided to stay put in Altura while we wait for replacements to be delivered. |
managed to find a telegraph of fice and wired San Francisco to send some right away.
At this rate, the car might be falling apart faster than we can fix it, but we'll press
on! While we wait, Crocker and I have been giving rides to the locals in exchange for
tickets to a Wild West show. It’s a bit of a bizarre trade, but it’s keeping us busy
while we re stuck here.

June! The tires never arrived in Altura, and I couldn't stand sitting around
waiting. We ve pressed on by patching them up with rope wound around the wheels
and will look for some elsewhere.

: The journey towards Oregon has been nothing short of rough. The terrain has
forced us to haul the car across deep streams using block and tackle-it's slow and
grueling work. Somewhere along the way, I managed to lose a pair of my glasses.
Then, incredibly, I lost another pair shortly after At this rate, I'll be lucky if I can still
see by the time we reach the East Coast!

June 3 Today we hit a stretch of road that crossed private property. The old
ee farmer who owned the land charged

us a $4 toll for the privilege of

crossing his rocky, miserable excuse $4 in 1903's money is worth about $140
for a road! I grumbled the entire way. USD today.

It hardly seemed fair to pay that
much for such an awful route, but
4 what choice did we have?

June 10 Disaster struck again. The car broke down, and we had to be towed by

-@ a cowboy on horseback to a nearby ranch. Crocker worked his magic and made the |
{| . | repairs, but we lost all our gasoline due to a fuel leak. With no other choice, I rented i
F & a bicycle for Crocken who rode 25 miles to Burns, Oregon, to fetch fuel. Of course,

he got a flat tire on the bike (what is it with us and flat tires?!!), but he eventually
returned with 4 gallons of gasoline.

f- The cost? Nearly twenty dollars!
o $20 in 1903's money is worth over $700 Cuitradeodel z y
ie USD today, hae
Qs Riss ae

eo a ee - ees Lee ere et eae = TIPS - os ———— —_— 86 oe my ee p ae is
. Oe RE ee a In Fe pena ret ain sleet een == aes SEI OO Nn OE ES PIER om oe TST eg Rn RS TF

June 13 Somewhere near Caldwell, Idaho, we acquired a new traveling companion—a Va
: bulldog named Bud. I've wanted a dog since Sacramento, and this little guy cost me a hefty
i $15. The papers are already running all sorts of wild stories about how we got him, but he’s
\ ours now. The only issue is the dust—poor Bud's eyes get irritated by the alkali flats we keep
crossing. I ended up fitting him with a pair of

eee goggles to protect his eyes. He’s
ae . quite the sight with those on!

June 14 = Bud had abit of a

scare today when he drank some
bad water and got sick, but
thankfully, he seems to be pulling
through. The goggles are staying
on the cheerful little fellow,
though!

|
" | j
Ly I
aA

| Ay June 15 Today, somewhere in
| KS Idaho, I lost my coat—and with it,
4 ‘ most of our money. I had no

Td ddl

choice but to wire my wife and
ask her to send more money to
Cheyenne, Wyoming. It's

: humiliating, but we can't
continue without it.

June 16 Asif things

has | could 't get worse, before
SO eo CAR RIAGE _ reaching Cheyenne, the car's
«MOTOR wheel bearings gave out.

Crocker managed to convince
a farmer to let us take the
wheel bearings from his
mowing machine. The man was
skeptical, but Crocker’s charm
and desperation must've
worked in our favor The man is
a mechanical genius.

-

Ss

Pk
an,

fl
YZ

ter ty Oe Se ———— ~~ eS an et ee ee eee
Dn gn Or a tw eet at Se ee oe a ee ee LE — -

TS |
Saieudeheemenmemenienaa a
_ Bent:

ee celia

SE INT ay LEE Ree ana N ge ees b

REELS PATON 5 eH TEE AN

aaa ie Paw oat a

ans RES RA
Sa
7

liga) oa

ee

Saunas ater noe es.
= shyt)

?

‘sp dittled Sh... se &
Per SRT eo

ae i oe

SARIN ECW aeainbne =
- ‘;
“4 Sun

“

ee me icine ee ee

So gn REO Oe aT OS en ESOS RD re A pre A LN EE ote tial AE Aa 2 FE ea ET ae es igs A RARE NE re meee

WEEK 3 DAY 2 }

June 22 At Granger WY we found ourselves trailing behind what the locals called a
‘cloud burst." The roads ahead had been completely washed out, leaving nothing but thick,
impassable mud. We had no choice but to stop and cut sagebrush, laying it down in the
muck to give the car enough traction to move forward. .

To make matters worse, we lost our cooking gear and provisions, and there wasn't a soul in
sight. We went 36 hours without a single bite to eat. Just when we thought our luck had
run out, we stumbled upon a lone sheepherder The man, kind beyond words, cooked us a
feast of mutton and boiled corn. It felt like heaven sitting by the campfire with Bud licking
my fingers in thanks. Though it was a simple meal, it felt like the finest dinner I've ever had.

The man refused to take any money for his generosity, so I gave him my rifle as a token of
our gratitude. I'll be honest-if he had asked for anything else we had, except for the can
I think I would've given it to him without a second thought!

June 23 \Ne reached Medicine Bow today, and I was hoping to stock up on gasoline.
The problem? There's only one shop in the entire town, and the storekeepen seeing we
were low on fuel, wasted no time in taking advantage of the situation.
He made me pay $5.25 for just 5 gallons! I told him
straight to ; his face that it was nothing
short of a highway
robbery, but what choice
did I have? The
automobile didn't seem to
mind the overpriced
gasoline, and from
there, we made our
way to Laramie
without further

incident.

July 2 After
making excellent

speed for about

eighteen miles,
disaster struck.
There was a
sudden crash, and
the car came to a
* — a complete, dead stop. My
a heart sank as we unscrewed the cover to &
the crankcase, only to discover that the stud bolts of the

4 ee ene

SS - — . CY, Se Sl re Wey ee Oe - re ss _ sare . "
= sa Pe Nigger ene are re a ren SS in tel hE a A Fs nr et ese Mane 3 ne
eee
SIFTING LEP ES: iss SS cn

F

SS ee

ai

—— a a a

-— ast = ok r

other connecting rod had broken. I cannot fully describe the sinking feeling I had in that
moment—it was as if all our progress had come to a grinding halt, literally and figuratively.
With a heavy heart, I sent a telegraph home: “Delayed here for five days.” I also wired for
the necessary parts to be sent at once.

Fortunately, Mr Willard, who was in charge of a nearby grading crew, kindly pulled our car
back two miles to his camp, where he did his best to make us comfortable. The kindness of
strangers has been our saving grace on this trip, time and time again.

July 5 Everywhere we go, people keep telling us how unlucky we are with the timing of
our journey. Apparently, this year has seen more rain than anyone can remember and it’s
been wreaking havoc on the roads.

After finally completing our repairs, we left Archer feeling optimistic and made it to
Nebraska. We were promised good roads there, but we quickly found them to be in
absolutely terrible condition. The constant rains had turned the roads into a quagmire, so
we had to veer north and follow the foothills across the state.

The journey was grueling. The rain had left the landscape full of sloughs and “buffalo
wallows —deep sinkholes that seemed to appear at every turn. Nearly every day, we found
ourselves using our block-and-tackle to pull the car free from the mud. We figured out a
trick, though: by anchoring the block-and-tackle and attaching the end of the rope to the
brake drum of the rear wheel, we can use the car's engine like a winch to pull itself out of
trouble.

July 6 Today was one of the hardest days yet. We had to pull the car out of the mud
seventeen times. At one point, Crocker and I were standing in mud and water up to our
knees, and after all that effort, we only managed to cover sixteen miles by day's end. The
ground was so bad that we had to dig the wheels out with a pick and shovel more than once.
Twice, we even had to call in teams of horses to help us get the car free.

Bud, as always, was a loyal companion- goggles on and ready for anything, even though |
think the mud tired him out as much as it did us! What a dirty dog! What a day.

July 12 — At long last, we made it to Omaha, Nebraska! From here on out, things took a
turn for the betten We finally encountered some paved roads, and for the first time in
weeks, the driving felt smooth and easy. The journey wasn't without its final bit of
excitement, though. Just east of Buffalo, New York, the Vermont hit a hidden obstacle in
the road, and all three of us—Crocken Bud, and myself—were thrown from the car!
Thankfully, no one was hurt, and we continued on our way.

July 26 We didit! After 64 days, 12 hours, and 30 minutes, we've finally arrived in
New York City. We've crossed the entire continent, from San Francisco to New York,
becoming the first automobile to accomplish such a feat.

FR SS FS TE ae aan ER I tN EER TE OL

7

pase mortem

aed

+ Pen

4
.

— —-
- ip = ne
a Aten

; ‘But against all odds, we made it.

4  ————————
|

Ged estimates that I've spent about $8,000 on

this journey—an eye-watering amount. Yet, every
penny was worth it for the adventure of a lifetime!

{ | When we rolled into New York, we were welcomed as national heroes. We've
proven to the world that the automobile isn't just some fleeting trend—it has the potential to
_revolutionize travel across this great country! Oh, and I won the bet, by golly!

Bia ck) DEADWOOT {i Fe Ee
Hilly {2 ©

2
’
\
.
s
" .
< St ~Sonthce LF
Jas ’ Ue Ake
ah = es ved fis r GXka, 0
. oi ees | aS
A XU = : sg vaueng feta wit
=e £ 4 i MEx Ik ng 0
SS a eS
Sy mites 1

TRANSCONTINENTAL ROUTES

AUTOMOBILES

Complete to 1907

a PR. " pit 3 a a 9 _ =

$284. 50 Usp S worth

| “Along t he way, we burned eich c over 800 gallons of asain dealt with cpus
{ breakdowns, searched high and low for spare parts, and relied on the kindness of stran
} pull us out of the mud more times than I can even remember

in 209 2y

1) 1 Jacksoa and Crocker
2 Fetch and Krarup

4 Whitman and Carris
b-7 5 Huss and Wigle

7 Magargel and Fassett
8 “ ‘
b]

9 Gehre and Canfield
<<] 10 Whitman and Carris
‘| 11 Little and Haggerty

1903
1903

3 Whitman and Hammond 1903

1904
1905

| 6 Megarge! and Stanchfivld 1905

1905
1905-6
1906
1906
1906

—_—-——

-_-—: .
. —_——

eo

a2

OR inet

About

mmr’
aed

o

ee a

NE eT eee OT NE ett
’

Se ee eee

Horatio and Crocker's achievement completely changed the way Americans thought about
long-distance travel. Suddenly, it seemed possible—even desirable—fo traverse (cross) the
country in cars instead of trains. Within a decade, plans for a coast-to-coast highway were in
motion. By the late 1910s and early 1920s, a new wave of vacationers, armed with touring
cars and camping gear hit the roads, marking the beginning of the era of transcontinental
motoring.

People were ready to hit the roads, and soon aften they began taking to the skies as well.
1903 THE WRIGHT BROTHERS’ FIRST FLIGHT

Around the same time Horatio Jackson and Sewall Crocker were revolutionizing how Americans
thought about cars, two brothers from Ohio were quietly working on an even bolder idea:
flying. Wilbur and Orville Wright, bicycle mechanics with a passion for invention, were
determined to crack the mystery of powered flight-something most people considered nothing
more than a fanciful dream.

The Wright brothers spent years tinkering, designing, and testing kites before heading to the
windy dunes of Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, to try out gliders. They studied birds in flight,
experimented with control systems, and tirelessly worked to get their dreams off the ground—
literally. Despite numerous setbacks, crashes, and skepticism from almost everyone, they
persevered.

Through careful observation, Wilbur noticed that birds adjusted the angle of their wingtips to
roll their bodies right or left. This revelation sparked an idea: "Why not do the same with a
flying machine?” They envisioned a plane that could ‘bank’ or ‘lean’ into turns, just like birds in
the sky or people riding bicycles—an experience they both knew well.

One day, while idly twisting a long inner-tube box in their bicycle shop, Wilbur came up with the
idea of wing-warping. Now he knew just how he would give the gliders the agility they needed to
fly smoothly and safely!

The brothers tested their design and added an engine they built in their bicycle shop to turn a
propeller with blades just over 8 feet long.

On December 17, 1903, early in the morning and in front of just a handful of witnesses, their
odd-looking machine called the Wright Flyer sputtered to life. It was a flimsy-looking craft,
made of wood and fabric, with Wilber as the pilot lying flat on his stomach to minimize drag. Yet
what happened next would change the world! The Flyer lifted off the ground and stayed in the
air for 12 incredible seconds, covering a distance of 120 feet—about the length of a modern
jets wing.

It may not sound like much, but it was monumental. In those few seconds, the Wright brothers
had done what people had only dreamed of : they had achieved controlled, powered flight. Their
plane was wobbly, fragile, and barely airborne-but it flew. That was enough to prove that
human flight was possible.

|
This small, shaky triumph would pave the way for modern aviation. Those 12 seconds marked
the dawn of a new era for aviation, transforming travel and reshaping the future of warfare.
In the years that followed, airplanes would connect people and places in ways that had once
seemed unimaginable.

ene ~e oni - = . a > ee ace
Fs .

The Wright Flyer's first flight in 1903. Orville was the pilot and Wilber ran alongside.

There were other events shaking things up during this time period...literally.

1906 THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE WEEK 3 DAY 3

On the morning of April 18, 1906, just as dawn was breaking over San Francisco, the ground
began to tremble violently. People were jolted awake as their houses shook, and buildings
swayed and shuddered. A 7.9 magnitude earthquake rippled through the city and sent shock
waves that could be felt hundreds of miles away. The quake lasted less than a minute, but it
left unimaginable destruction in its wake.

Buildings that once towered proudly over the streets crumbled into rubble. Entire walls peeled
off brick homes, leaving the insides visible like big open doll houses. Massive cracks split the
roads, and gas lines broke open, hissing into the early morning silence. It wasn't just the shaking
that threatened the city—fires broke out almost immediately, ignited by broken gas mains and
electrical wires sparking. San Francisco was an old, wooden city, and soon the flames were
leaping from building to building, turning blocks into fiery ruins.

The fire raged for days, spreading uncontrollably as the city struggled to contain it. With no
72
water pressure from damaged pipes, firefighters were nearly helpless and tried to use
dynamite to create firebreaks. Their use of dynamite caused more fires! Some people set their
houses on fire on purpose when they found out their insurance would not pay for earthquake
damage but would pay for fire damage. Relentless blazes devoured entire neighborhoods and
left almost nothing but ashes and smoke.

When the fires finally burned out, San Francisco was unrecognizable. Over 80% of the city
had been destroyed, and around 3,000 people had lost their lives. Tens of thousands of
residents were left homeless, camping out in parks or any open spaces they could find. Some of
those camps were still in place 2 years later! Despite the devastation, people rallied together
As relief efforts poured in, San Francisco slowly began to rebuild from the ashes, determined
to rise stronger than before.

Devastation from the San Francisco earthquake

revealed just how vulnerable cities could be to natural disasters. At the time, San Francisco
was a major hub on the West Coast, bustling with people, businesses, and new development.
The quake’s destruction highlighted the need for safer building standards, and it led to changes
in construction practices that would make buildings more resistant to earthquakes. This event
essentially laid the foundation for modern earthquake engineering, especially in areas with high
seismic (earthquake) activity, such as California.

The disaster also changed how cities prepared for emergencies. The response in San Francisco
was chaotic and uncoordinated, like when the firemen tried to use dynamite to control the fire
but instead caused more fires! This taught cities across the country the importance of having
emergency plans, better communication, and coordinated efforts between firefighters, police,

13
and other services.

On a scientific level, the earthquake spurred major advancements in the study of seismic
activity. Geologists began studying and mapping earthquake zones. This earthquake marked the
beginning of earthquake science in the U.S., eventually leading fo innovations in earthquake
detection and prediction methods that continue to save lives today.

Economically, the earthquake and fires devastated San Francisco, but the city's rapid rebuilding
became a symbol of resilience and determination. The city was almost entirely rebuilt within a
decade, proving that communities could bounce back from disaster This spirit inspired other
American cities and contributed to the country's broader ‘can-do’ attitude in the 20th
century.

1906 THE PURE FOOD, DRUG, AND MEAT
INSPECTION ACTS

While San Francisco was reeling from the earthquake's impact, a different kind of upheaval
was shaking the foundations of the food industry.

In the early 1900s, Americans had little idea what was really in their food or medicine. The
food industry was rife with (full of) shocking and dangerous practices. Unscrupulous
manufacturers and meatpackers cut corners in ways that endangered the health of millions.

Greek and Latin roots: Unscrupulous comes from the Old English prefix un meaning not and the
Latin word scrupus meaning a sharp stone or a source of anxiety or uneasiness, a pang of
conscience. People who are “scrupulous” may feel uncomfortable when their moral values are
tested-it's like the annoying feeling of a sharp stone in your shoe as you walk. In contrast,
someone who is unscrupulous doesn t experience these pangs of conscience and can do wrong
or dishonest things without feeling guilty.

Food around this time was often laced with harmful chemicals, fillers, and
preservatives. Milk, for example, was sometimes watered down and mixed
with chalk or plaster to give it a more appealing color while formaldehyde,
a chemical used to embalm (preserve) dead bodies for burial, was added
as a preservative. It was also sometimes thinned with water to increase
the amount of money they could get from selling it. One time in
Indiana some milk was thinned with dirty pond water
There were literally worms wiggling in it!

Candy, often marketed to children, was colored
with toxic dyes that contained arsenic or lead,
creating treats that looked sweet but were, in
fact, poisonous.

74
In 1902, a chemist named Harvey Washington Wiley was hired by Congress to study some of
the chemicals that were being added to foods to see if they were safe. Wiley gathered a group
of 12 volunteer men. These men were given 3
free and delicious meals a day, 7 days a week,
cooked by a professional chef and $5 a month. $5 in 1902 is worth about $183 USD in
The men were not allowed to eat any other food 902.

or snacks—only what was prepared for them.

For these volunteers, it was like eating at a very

fancy and expensive restaurant paid for by the government! The catch was that some of the
food given to some of the men would contain additives and preservatives commonly used at the
time, to see if they were safe or if the men would have reactions to them. The men were not
told if they were given the normal or the altered food. They had basically signed up to be
poisoned, and that is why they became known as the Poison Squad.

The bravery of the Poison Squad helped uncover that some food additives were harmful. Their
work showed that these additives should not only be listed on food labels but that some of them
should be menos’ ctegethen

Tis oi: oa oo The Poison Squad (above) and a leHer from someone
Pe a SR ea interested in volunteering for the study

—o : o see CEE: aR

your experinents on dist. I

have a stomach can stand anything. I have a Stomach that

wan ieiios YO Ue I am affliced with 7-sevon diseases,

Never went to a doctor for 15 years. They told ma. 15 years age
‘that T could not. live 8 months. .What do you think of it?

nites

My Stomach can gid anything, .

a ay
= a

ie ce ; Yours truly,
Perhaps the most revolting food conditions were found in the meatpacking industry. In filthy,
unsanitary slaughterhouses (where the animals were killed for meat), spoiled meat that had
turned green or slimy was routinely mixed with fresh meat, disguised by adding harmful
preservatives like borax or other chemicals to mask the rancid smell.

Rats often infested the meatpacking plants, and it wasn't uncommon for rat carcasses, along
with dirt and sawdust from the dirty floors, to be ground up with the meat and packed into
sausages. There were even reports of workers losing fingers or hands while operating
dangerous machinery, with the severed limbs sometimes ending up in the meat products that
went to market.

Upton Sinclair's 1906 novel The Jungle famously exposed these horrifying conditions to the
public. Sinclair described how diseased, contaminated cattle were butchered alongside healthy
ones, and meat intended for human consumption was sometimes stored in dark, filthy areas
where it became infested with vermin. Workers sloshed through blood, filth, and rotten scraps,
using dull, unsanitary knives to process the meat. These revelations painted a grim picture of
an industry in which profit was prioritized over human safety.

Sinclair's vivid and grotesque descriptions of packinghouse practices outraged the public and

A)
i

]

THE LODGER aAnp ¢

"i :

t *) 7 q = fie? = % ’ ’

7 |
|

i 1}

ts

really pushed Roosevelt fo act.
10 D I\EAT. se 4 H
:

ope.
TONGUE

/ [ . «A

Roosevelt, always a man of science and reason, didn't just take the novel at face value. He
sent federal investigators into the slaughterhouses to confirm if the claims were true. The
results were just as horrifying as the book described. Roosevelt knew something had to
change-and fast.

76
With his usual determination, Roosevelt threw his support behind two critical pieces of
legislation: the Pure Food and Drug Act and the Meat Inspection Act. These laws were
designed to clean up the food and drug industries.

The Pure Food and Drug Act set federal standards for food and medicine, ensuring that
dangerous ingredients like lead and formaldehyde would no longer be hidden in products. It also
required proper labeling, so people knew what they were buying.

The Meat Inspection Act took things a step further by requiring federal inspectors to oversee
the meatpacking plants, making sure the processing was clean, and that the meat was safe to
eat. Roosevelt fought hard to push these reforms through Congress, even though some
businesses argued that these laws would hurt profits.

While Roosevelt was busy pushing for reforms in food safety, a different kind of revolution was
brewing in the world of transportation.

WEEK 3 DAY 4

Horatio Nelson Jackson had shown the world that a car could take you far beyond the city
limits and into the heart of America, but cars were still something that only the wealthy could
afford.

In 1908, arevolutionary figure named Henry Ford unveiled a breakthrough that would put
America on wheels: the Model T.

What really set the Model T apart was how Ford produced it. He didn't just want to build cars;
he wanted to make them fast and cheap, so more people could join the ranks of car owners.
Enter the assembly line! This innovative way of building cars transformed how things were
made. Instead of a single craftsman building a car from start to finish, each worker focused on
a specific task, making the process efficient and lightning fast. Cars rolled of f the line like
hotcakes!

/7/
The Model T was affordable, easy to maintain, and built tough enough to conquer the rough,
unpaved roads that crisscrossed the country.

Suddenly, owning a car wasn't just a dream for the rich; farmers, factory workers, and
everyday folks could finally afford their own set of wheels. Families could pack up and hit the
open road for the first time, adventuring to new places and creating unforgettable memories
and opening up new job opportunities. The Model T didn't just change transportation; it changed
the very fabric of American life, making the freedom of the open road accessible to all. By the
time production wrapped up in 1927, Ford had sold more than 15 million Model T's!

Horatio's epic road trip, the Wright brothers’ first flight, and the Model T's debut weren't just
milestones; they were the beginnings of a new era. They marked the start of modern travel as
we know it, bringing people closer together and shrinking the world in ways that were once
unimaginable.

1909 THEODORE STEPS DOWN AND TAFT IS
ELECTED

Theodore Roosevelt announced that he would
follow tradition and not seek to be reelected in
1908. Though he quickly regretted that
statement, he felt like he had to stand by his
word. The tradition of U.S. presidents serving
no more than two terms began with George
Washington, the nation’s first president.
After serving two terms, Washington
voluntarily stepped down, even though many
people wanted him to continue. He believed
that the presidency should not be a lifetime
position, like a monarchy, and that stepping
down would keep one person from holding too
much power His decision set an unofficial
standard for future presidents.

Following Washington's example, every
president afterward until Franklin D.

Roosevelt in the 1940s respected this two-
term tradition, even though it wasn’t a law.

Though he wasn't going to run for president for a 3rd time, Theodore was determined to
choose his own successor He decided his Secretary of Wan William Howard Taft, was the
perfect candidate to continue his progressive policies and reforms. Taft had been his friend
since 1890 and a loyal supporter of everything Roosevelt did during his presidency.

78
One evening the Tafts were dinner guests at the White House. After their meal, the three
retired to the library and the president threw himself into a chain He closed his eyes and began
to speak in a spooky voice.

“T have the ability to see the future! [ see a man weighing 350 pounds. There is something
hanging over his head. I can't quite see what it is... Wait! It looks like it could be the presidency!
Or is it the chief justiceship of the Supreme Court?"

“Make it the presidency,” said Mrs. Taft.
“Make it the chief justiceship, said Mn Taft.

Taft, a gentle giant with a love for law and a knack for diplomacy, was a bit hesitant to be
president. However with Roosevelt's enthusiastic prodding and the support of the Republican
Party, he decided to run.

Theodore immediately stepped into action like a whirlwind telling Taft what he should and
shouldn't do during the campaign. He gave Taft so much advice that people joked TAFT stood
for “Take advice from Theodore.”

The campaign trail was a whirlwind of speeches, rallies, and debates. Taft, with his calm
demeanor and thoughtful approach, contrasted sharply with his opponent, William Jennings
Bryan, a fiery orator and three-time presidential candidate representing the Democratic
Party. Bryan's passionate speeches and promises of sweeping reforms captivated many, but
Taft's steady and reliable image won over the majority of voters.

As election day approached, the excitement reached a fever pitch. Newspapers were filled
with headlines, and people gathered in town squares fo discuss the candidates. Finally, on
November 3, 1908, the votes were cast, and the results were in: William Howard Taft had

won! \

William Howard Taft was President: March 1909 - March 1913 Z= ag A

The nation celebrated Taft's victory, and Theodore was thrilled to see his friend succeed him,
but that quickly soured. Theodore was immediately offended when Taft credited his success in
winning the presidency not only to Theodore, but also to his half-brothen Charles.

“Can you believe he's giving credit to Charles!¢ I'm the one who did all the work! If it wasnt for
me, he would have never of been elected! I'm disgusted with his lack of gratitude!” Theodore
muttered sharply to his wife and a small gathering of friends who were celebrating Taft's
victory.

Several weeks later Theodore was storming about with his voice raised in angen “Taft picked
his own cabinet members and didn't even bother to ask me for my thoughts about any of them!”

19
Theodore had always seen Taft as a malleable piece of clay, ready to be shaped into his own
image. Hed envisioned a successor who would follow in his footsteps, a loyal disciple carrying the
torch of his progressive policies. He saw Taft as someone who would ask him for advice and
allow himself to be guided by him.

Greek and Latin roots: Malleable comes from the Latin word malleare meaning to beat with a
hammer. If something is malleable it's soft and pliable. If a person is malleable, they are easily
influenced and shaped by someone else's ideas.

After the election though, it seemed
that Taft, once so eager to please,
started to forge his own path without
Theodore’s input. This is not what
Theodore had envisioned! Taft was
supposed to do things his way, not be his
own person! The relationship continued
to roll downhill and politics in the
Republican party began to get fiery as
the two men withdrew their support
from one another

1911 THE TRIANGLE
a B SHIRTWAIST

oo utgoing US
president Teddy Roosevelt hands responsibility (in | _ ;
form of a baby that looks like Roosevelt labeled Politics weren't the only things catching

fire. A terrible tragedy struck the

Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York

City on March 25, 1911.

The wind was blustery that day and
blew stray bits of trash down the
streets. Vendors stood by their little
carts full of fresh fruit, vegetables,
and other items, calling out, “hot pretzels!” and “roasted chestnuts!"

Newsboys shouted the latest headlines, waving newspapers to the throngs passing by. “A group
of Republicans have endorsed Roosevelt as the next president for 1912 even though he said he
wouldn't run again! Read all about it!”

Children played on stoops and in the narrow alleys, and adults hurried about pulling their coats a
bit tighter as streetcars clattered past.

A boy bent down to pick up a penny in the street (what a treasure!) and ducked past a car
filled with the well-to-do Lochowicz family. Their chauffeur honked at the boy and waved at him

80
good-naturedly. Little Emily, sitting in her father’s lap, watched the boy run by with sleepy eyes.

Coal smoke from a nearby factory drifted in with the wind and mixed with the subtle stench of
horse manure. The boy with the penny ran on until he reached the candy shop just across the
corner from the Asch Building.

The Asch Building was the home of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory occupying the eighth, ninth,
and tenth floors. It was alive with the hum of sewing machines and the chatter of young
workers. Inside, warm and tucked away from the spring chill, hundreds of women, mostly young
immigrants, toiled to produce shirtwaists—a popular type of women’s button-down blouse.

Violet was sitting at the cutting table working shears around a pretty fabric and thinking about
Mrs. Nowak who had stayed home ill with the children today. She hoped she wasn't going to

catch their cold. She wanted to go with her friend Essie to the nickelodeon to watch the
moving pictures.

In the early 1900s, movie theaters were often called nickelodeons. The name comes from the
cost of admission, which was typically a nickel (five cents), and odeion, a Greek word meaning
theater Nickelodeons were very popular and made it possible for many people to en joy films,
even on a budget. They showed short silent films and provided a fun, affordable escape from
daily life.

Today was Violet's first day at work. Well, it was a trial really-today she'd do a bit of cutting
and tomorrow she'd sew. The manager |

would officially hire her afterwards,
but in the meantime, she'd earn
toward her official wages which
would be paid on Sunday. She had
worked the last 5 years at another
garment factory, but her best
friend Essie had convinced her to
look for employment here where
the working conditions were

better and more modern. Violet

was already appreciative of the
light streaming in the windows vs.
the semi-darkness she was used

to working in at her other job. The
darkness gave her so many
headaches from squinting. Essie was
off in another corner sewing, and every once in a while, she looked back with a cheerful wave
at her friend, pointing to the windows and grinning. Violet knew what she was thinking: ‘See, I
told you so!

Around 4:40 PM, as the end of the workday neared, Violet noticed one of the foremen
8]
lighting a cigarette and snuffing out the match with his two fingers. He tossed it in the bin of
fabric scraps beneath the table. Violet frowned. Smoking wasn't allowed, but apparently some
of the workers did it anyway. The smell of burning suddenly curled into the ain For a moment,

Violet thought it was just the cigarette which the man was half hiding behind his jacket but
then flames suddenly danced across the table.

Violet shrieked and dropped her scissors. The other girls jumped up as well, in a panic. Fire was
spreading quickly, fueled by hundreds of pounds of flammable cotton waste littering the table.
It chased the fleeing workers across the room licking up the table legs and devouring everything
in its path. Panic and desperation set
in as everyone seemed to realize at
once the seriousness of the situation.

Violet pelted toward the Green
Street stairway exit and managed to
slip through. It was a good thing she
did because searing flames followed
her and blocked the way almost
immediately. Choking smoke was filling
the air and she could see Essie’s pale
face through the flames. She waved
her arm at her friend even as she

backed away from the scorching
heat. “Essie! Run to the other exit!”

Essie nodded and turned to rush to
the Washington Place stairway, but
she and the others who had the
same idea found to their horror that
the door was locked. Management
was afraid that some of the women
would take unauthorized breaks or
steal some of the fabric and tools.
They had locked it earlier with the
plan of checking the women’s purses
at the end of the workday before
letting them go. The foreman with
the key had already escaped by

taking a freight elevator and left the women trapped.

In desperation, Essie pushed her way to the fire escape, but it was already filled with women
making their way down. Suddenly the flimsy metal structure buckled and collapsed with a
sickening wrench from the weight of the fleeing workers and the intense heat of the fire. Essie
turned her head so as not to see the falling bodies. She lifted an arm to try and cover her face

82
while running to the elevators, but they were no longer working.

The flames and smoke engulfed the factory. Some workers, realizing there was no other
escape, leaped from the windows. Essie and another girl stood coughing and choking with dirty
tears streaming down their faces. She was afraid to jump. There was nowhere to go. What

should she do?

Firefighters arrived swiftly, but their ladders could only reach the seventh floon and the fire
was on the 8th (and above). They set up nets, hoping to catch desperate jumpers, but the
impact was too great for most to survive.

By the time the fire was extinguished, 146 workers had perished, most of them young women,
including sweet Essie who had been overcome by the smoke and flames. The horrific event sent
shock waves through the nation, and public outcry for justice and reform followed. This
tragedy highlighted the dire need for improved safety regulations and labor laws.

Muckrakers helped spread the news of such horrible disasters like the Triangle Shirtwaist
Factory fire and progressives seized that news to spread their agendas. They believed in the
power of science and technology to improve society and saw information about stories like this
one as the key to getting people and the government to build a smarter more advanced future
by writing new laws and teaching people a different and better way to live.

Out of the ashes of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire rose a wave of labor reforms and new
laws. The catastrophe led to the creation of fire safety codes, better building inspections, and

other rules to protect workers. RABBIT TRAIL: FIGURATIVE
LANGUAGE

The phrase ‘out of the ashes’ is an example of figurative

language. Figurative language uses words in creative ways to add
drama or emotion to writing. In this case, ‘out of the ashes’ isn't
meant to be taken literally. It doesnt mean that something was
physically made from ashes. Instead, the ashes represent the

aftermath of the fire, including the damage, the loss, and the
rabbit trail

tragedy. Saying that new laws rose ‘out of the ashes’ means that the
tragedy inspired people to make changes. It is a way of showing that
something positive (the reforms) came from something terrible (the
fire).

WEEK 4 DAY 1
FEBRUARY 3, 1913: THE TAXING 16TH AMENDMENT
The United States was on the brink of a significant change that would affect the incomes of
Americans across the country. In the corridors of powen a group of determined lawmakers

began pushing for something that would change the financial landscape forever: the 16th
Amendment.

83
Before we move on, let's take a moment to talk about the concept of income tax. Imagine you
get an allowance every week for doing chores. Let's say you get $10 each week. Now imagine
your parents say, ‘We're going to take a part of your allowance to help pay for things
everyone in the house uses, like the internet, electricity, and snacks.”

The part they take is kind of like an income tax. When adults work and earn money, they have
to give a part of their earnings to the government-some to the state (in most cases) and some
to the federal government.

State governments use this money to pay for things that everyone in the state uses or
benefits from, like public schools, parks, roads, police, firefighters, and prisons.

Not all states collect income tax! Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming have no income taxes (as of 2025)! They get
the money they need in other ways, like sales taxes on items at stores, property taxes (which
homeowners pay each year), and other types of taxes.

The federal government uses taxes to pay for things like the military, health insurance
programs, social security (payments to retired workers), loans for college students, subsidies
(financial help) for farmers, and lots of other things.

Before 1913, there was no federal income tax and the only states that had an income tax
were Hawaii (which wasn't an official state yet), Wisconsin, and Mississippi. That means that
most people were able to keep all the money they earned from working and didn't have to pay
any of it to the government.

But, in the early 1900s, the country was changing. Industrialization was in Full swing, cities
were growing, and people were thinking about wealth differently. Big factories were popping up,
more people were moving to cities, and some people (like the business tycoons) were getting
very, very rich. While big companies and wealthy business owners were making huge amounts
of money, many others were struggling to afford the things they needed.

At that time, the government got most of its money by taxing goods (items you buy) imported
from other countries. This type of tax is called a tariff Tariffs make imported things more
expensive, encouraging people to buy locally-made products instead. Some of the imports that
were taxed at the time were:

¢ Fabrics, clothing, and other textiles like wool and silk
¢ Some imported foods like sugan tea, coffee, and spices
¢ Items like steel, glass, and wood which were needed for expanding cities and businesses

¢ Jewelry, fine china, and other luxury goods were taxed at higher rates, since these were
considered non-essential items

84
Fine china is a type of fancy dishware
made from high-quality porcelain. It's
known for being very durable and
having a shiny, smooth surface. People
usually use it for special occasions, but
some also collect it or use it as
decoration. The name ‘china’ comes
from where this special porcelain was
first made. Over 2,000 years ago,
during the Han dynasty, Chinese
artisans figured out how to create
porcelain using a special

The government took the money earned from
tariffs and spent it on whatever it needed. This
is how the government functioned for over 100

type of clay called kaolin
years: and other materials like
But the tides were turning. Progressive bone ash. When
leaders, like President Taft, thought the old tax European traders saw
system wasnt fain Taft thought tariffs made this amazing porcelain in
things harder for poor and middle-class people the 1600s, they were
because it made imports more expensive. He impressed by its beauty and strength
thought it was harder for them to afford to and started calling it "china" because
purchase things they needed, and that they it came from that region.
ended up spending a big part of their income

just on necessities. Meanwhile, wealthy people
and big businesses kept growing richer and didn't feel the extra costs as much.

Taft and other progressives believed that an income tax, where people pay based on how much
they earn, was a fairer way to share the costs of running the country.

For years, the idea of an income tax had been a contentious issue. The government tried to
implement income taxes during the Civil Wan but those efforts faced significant opposition and
legal challenges. Many believed that an income tax would be unfair and burdensome.

Greek and Latin roots: Contentious comes from the Latin word contentio meaning a dispute,
stretching, struggle, or tension.

Here are some arguments against an income tax:

In a free country wealth and money belong to the people who earn it. Why should people work
hard to earn money if they aren't allowed to keep it?

Also, people and businesses tend to use money more efficiently than the government. When
regular people and businesses have money, they have to be careful about how they spend it.
They plan and budget, which helps them grow their savings or invest in things like new
equipment or new pro jects.

85
If people have to pay taxes, they have less money to invest in their businesses and