1912 SPOILER ALERT: WOODROW WILSON GETS

With the 16th Amendment in place, the stage was set for big changes in how government and
the country functioned. America was gearing up for the election of 1912 to decide who would
steer things forward in one of the most exciting and unpredictable
elections ever!

The stage was set for a showdown between three strong candidates.
Let's peek into the past to see a bit of their campaigning!

William Taft: Well, here I am-your current president, representing
the good old Republican Party! Now, I know my approach might
seem a bit, shall we say, careful, but I believe in running

this country with a steady hand. Rules? I'm all about ‘em.
There's a reason we follow them, and it's to keep things
safe and orderly, wouldn't you agree?

I'm not one for the government poking around in
everyone's business. Too much control? No, thank
youl I like to think that a bit
of distance lets people
live their lives without the
government breathing
down their necks. And let's talk about the economy—keeping it
strong and steady is key. My aim is simple: keep this nation moving
forward, but without flipping everything upside down.
| Progress, yes, but no drastic leaps of f the cliff!

ys
Basta, - ig a

I will not stand aside and have
Roosevelt take over again! He has
become much too progressive!

Theodore Roosevelt: You all know
me as your former president. |
~~ wasn't planning on running for a

L

i ee
- “Look up, not down—

—_ third term, but honestly, [can't | rash Panag! Beiackw ana
Campaign button . , a8 lend @ Hebd.
fecal just sit back and watch Taft Founders’ D
stumble along... The man means well, I'm sure of it, but he means well he eS ae y
feebly! He doesn't have the grit, the fire, or the know-how to lead. And THE :
right now, more than even this country needs strong, decisive leadership. Progressive
Taft just isn't up to the task! Party

CYGACES PNP couern) 228
yeago ys

7E2 si

That's why I've created an entirely new political party to get things done
called the Progressive Party! |

Campaign ribbon

89
The Progressive Party was nicknamed the “Bull Moose Party” because during the 1912
presidential campaign, when asked if he was fit to be president, Roosevelt famously replied that
he felt “as strong as a bull moose.” This statement captured his robust and energetic
personality, and the nickname stuck.

Theodore Roosevelt: I believe in a government that doesn't dilly dally around! I'm all for a
strong, centralized government with enough muscle to take on the big businesses and keep
them in line. Why? Because someone has to make sure the little guy isnt trampled under the
boots of monopolies and trusts!

I say the federal government has a duty fo step in, address social and economic issues, and lend
a hand where it’s needed. That means fighting for labor rights, supporting social welfare, and
making sure every American has a fair shot. A strong America is one where we re working

together to tackle our challenges—and I think the government has a major role to play in that
fight!

Woodrow Wilson: Hello! I'm with the Democratic Party. I know a lot of
you don't know me, but I was a college professon the president of
Princeton University, and most recently governor of New Jersey.

Let me tell you about my plan, which is called New Freedom. My goal is
to open up opportunities for everyone by creating fair
competition. Right now, monopolies— those big, powerful
companies that control entire industries—are making it
tough for small businesses to succeed. I believe in
breaking them up so that everyone has a fair chance to
thrive.

I'm also pushing to lower tariffs, those taxes on goods
"coming into the country, so everyday
Americans can afford what they
need without high prices. And,

unlike some others, I don't want the government to stick its nose too

deeply into the economy. My aim is to keep government limited but

effective, so it helps where it should but doesnt stifle growth.

The ‘New Freedom’ is about clearing the way for hardworking Americans
to succeed without unfair obstacles. '

But wait! There was a 4th candidate as welll

Eugene Debs: Greetings! I'm here speaking as a proud
member of the Socialist Party. My vision is a nation where
fairness and equality are at the core of everything we do. I
believe that the working class, the people who put in the long

q0
hours and hard labor deserve a much larger share of the wealth they create. That's why I'm
fighting for public ownership of major industries. If the people own these industries, then the
profits go back to the people, not to the wealthy few at the Top.

I'm also committed to making sure everyone has access to basic needs, like healthcare,
education, and housing. The government should work to support these essentials, so every
American can live a life of dignity, not just those who can afford it. I believe we should stand
togethen united as workers, to build a society where everyone shares in prosperity, not just a
select few.

Eugene Debs didn't get many votes because, at the time, socialism was a very new and
controversial idea in America. Debs ideas were viewed as radical and bad for the country by
many Americans who were more used to capitalism and private business ownership. He also
wasn t very well known and didn't have a strong and large following like the other candidates.

Socialism is an economic and political system where the government or the community owns and

controls the means of production (the factories and other organizations that make most of the
goods for the country). They also own services (like hospitals, schools, police, etc.). It's like the

government has control over most things instead of private companies, similar to a monopoly.

Capitalism is an economic system where individuals and businesses own and control the means of
production and services instead of the government. The goal is for businesses to make a profit
by producing goods and services that people want. It's like the opposite of a monopoly with many
businesses competing and coming up with new ideas. As we discussed before about monopolies,
competition between businesses is a good thing for customers.

When Election Day came there was a split in the Republican vote. Many Republicans who might
have voted for laft ended up voting for Roosevelt instead.

Because the Republican vote was divided between Taft and Roosevelt, Wilson was able to win

with a smaller percentage of the overall vote. Wilson secured 41.8% of the popular vote, while
Roosevelt got 27.4%, and laft received 23.2%

1912 U.S. Presidential Election Popular Vote Percentages

So, because Roosevelt and Taft split
41.8% the votes that would normally go to a
single Republican candidate, Wilson
had a much easier path to victory
and ended up winning the election.

Woodrow Wilson was President:

March 1913 - March 1921

Percentage of Popular Vote

Wilson (Democratic) Roosevelt (Progressive) Taft (Republican)

71