1914 A SPARK IN SARAJEVO CATCHES THE WORLD
ON FIRE: WORLD WAR 1 \Weex 4 pay 3

Imagine Europe in 1914 as a room filled with fireworks and dynamite, all piled up. It's calm for
now, but everyone knows that even a tiny spark could set the whole place off’ Why? Well,
for years, countries in Europe had been getting into little arguments and rivalries, and the
tension kept building up, like steam in a boiling pot.

For a long time, Europe was in a careful balance, with powerful countries keeping each other
in check. Over time, some of the old, strong countries started to weaken, while others grew
more powerful. This threw everything off-balance. Imagine a stack of blocks leaning on
each other-if you take away a big block that’s holding everything up, the whole stack is
going to come tumbling down.

The big block in the stack of blocks that made up Europe was the Ottoman Empire.

An empire is different from a
country because an empire is
a large group of territories or
nations controlled by one
central powen often called an
“emperor” or a ruling
government. In an empire, one
country controls several other
lands or territories, which
could be far away or spread
over a large area and filled
with people of different
cultures, languages, and
traditions.

The Ottoman Empire in 1800

For example, the British Empire was centered in Britain, but it controlled countries and
territories all over the world, like India, Canada, Australia, and parts of Africa. These
territories were governed by Britain, even though they had their own unique cultures and
identities.

This is a map of
the British Empire
in the 1920s.

A country, on the other hand, is a single nation with its own government, laws, and usually a
defined group of people who share a similar culture, language, or identity. Countries are
independent and make their own decisions without being ruled by another nation. So, while a
country stands alone, an empire is a group of different places all ruled by one central power

The Ottoman empire ruled over parts of Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa for
hundreds of years. But by the late 1800s and early 1900s, the empire was getting weaker
and losing control over some of its lands. This created a lot of areas in the Balkans that
were no longer ruled by anyone.

As the Ottoman Empire started losing control over places like Bosnia, Serbia, and Greece,
other countries in Europe saw this as a chance to expand their own power It's like a group
of hungry children sitting around a few unclaimed slices of cake. It won't be long before each
starts to grab the pieces for themselves or squabble over what's left.

Austria-Hungary and Russia both wanted control over the Balkans. This competition made
them rivals, each wanting to influence the area.

Ty) ‘iG a minute-what is this about countries trying to take control of other owest
T

Tha hat doesn't seem to happen as much today,

Ve, oh

4

Back in the 1800s and early 1900s, many powerful countries Fi mM
\

. SN
thought it was normal to take over other lands and territories. This DY

was called imperialism. ¢ Wor q

Greek and Latin roots: Imperialism comes from the Latin word imperium meaning authority,
control, or power. When you attach ism (the suffix or last part of the word imperialism) to a
word, in some cases it means the act of (or the practice of). So, imperialism is the act of
exercising authority, control, or power

Countries believed that expanding their territory made them stronger and more important on
the world stage. It was kind of like competition, where countries wanted to see who could
control the most land and resources. They believed this made them powerful and wealthy.

Controlling new lands meant access to valuable resources like gold, spices, timben and oil. For
example, Britain controlled India, which was rich in resources, and this made Britain even
wealthien Countries felt that by taking over new lands, they could get more materials to
grow their economies.

Belief in Superiority: Many European countries believed they were more advanced and
thought it was their “duty” to “civilize” people in other parts of the world. They thought they
were helping by spreading their culture and language. Today, we understand that this
thinking was biased and unfain but at the time, many leaders felt it was a valid reason to
take over other lands.

qu
European nations like Britain, France, and Germany were all locked in fierce competition,
each wanting to be seen as the biggest and strongest. Part of this meant having vast
empires filled with colonies, so they scrambled to grab as much land as possible around the
world, especially in places like Africa and Asia. Each country worried that if they didn't claim
these territories, some rival would, so it became a race to see who could control the most
land. This imperialist drive to collect territories fueled conflicts and distrust, adding to the
growing tensions among these nations.

Today, however the world has changed, and countries usually don't take over others like
they did back then (although there is still a bit of that going on). Here's why:

After World War 2, countries created organizations like the United Nations (UN), which set
up rules against taking over other countries by force. Now countries can face consequences
like economic sanctions (punishments), if they try to invade or take over another nation.

Many people today believe that every country has the right to govern itself and decide its
own future. Most nations now respect each other's independence, recognizing that taking
over another country’s land isn't fair or right.

Most countries today also realize they can benefit more by trading and working together
rather than taking over territory. Nations can buy resources they need, rather than trying
to conquer places that have them. This cooperation helps prevent conflicts.

Back to history: In the early 1900s, there were areas of land that used to be controlled by
the Ottoman Empire that were up for grabs, and as I mentioned earlien Austria-Hungary
and Russia stepped in to claim it for themselves.

Russia:

Iam here to protect Serbia and the other Slav states! I am just the
big, friendly Russian big brother!

Now, you see this little spot here called the Bosporus Strait? That

waterway is super important to me. I need it so [ can sail my

ships on the Black Sea and into the Mediterranean. Right now

the Ottomans control it, but that's fine by me because

they're not strong enough to give me trouble. But if the
Slavic country of Bulgaria gets too powerful and takes
over that area, they might block my path. I can't allow
that!

And don't forget! I've got my eye on some land over here
in northeastern Anatolia, too. Sure, my buddies in the
Balkans want to expand, but hey, I've got my own plans! It’s a balancing act, being the big
protector But a bear's gotta do what a bear's gotta do to keep everything in check!

q5
Austria-Hungary:

Ahem, I am Austria-Hungary, and the Balkans are my concern! You
see, I'm a bit of a patchwork myself, with all kinds of different
people-Germans, Hungarians, Czechs, and more-all living within
my empire. It’s like a family with a lot of cousins who don't
always get along. So, stability is my top priority; | simply
cannot afford any more trouble.

Now, these Balkan territories—Serbia, Bosnia, and

the rest—are right on my doorstep. If they get too
ambitious, especially Serbia, they could stir up the Slavs
within my empire, and that would make everything quite...
chaotic. I can't have Serbia encouraging my own Slavic
people to seek independence. That would be like lighting a
match in a room full of powder kegs.

I'll admit, I have my eye on these lands myself When the Ottoman Empire started losing its
grip here, I stepped in and took control of Bosnia. After all, if anyone is going to expand in
the Balkans, it should be me—not Russia or some independent Slavic powen

So, I'm in a bit of a balancing act. [ need to keep these Balkan nations under control, protect
my own borders, and ensure that my diverse empire remains intact. If that means clashing
with Russia or keeping a firm grip on Serbia, then so be it. This empire of mine may be
complicated, but I intend to keep it together

To make things more complicated, the countries in Europe had formed teams, kind of like ‘if
you mess with my friend, you mess with me.”

There were two big teams: the Triple Entente, with France, Russia, and Britain, and the
Triple Alliance, with Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy.

The problem was, if one country was to get into a fight, their friends had to join in, too. So,
a small skirmish could turn into a big brawl really quickly.

Then there was nationalism—pride in your country or people. Different groups of people in
Europe were all shouting, ‘My country is the best!”

In the Balkans—a region with lots of different cultures and countries~many ethnic groups
were tired of being ruled by empires like Austria-Hungary.

Definition: Ethnic refers to a group of people who share a common culture, language,
religion, traditions, or history. For example, being Italian, Jewish, or Han Chinese are
examples of ethnic groups. An ethnic group shares a culture and heritage.

96
[Triple Alliance C JAid
[4Triple Entente [Treaty
[The Balkans L[_JAlliance

Ottoman )
Turkey

Why should the “big boys’ like Austria-Hungary or Russia step in and take control of what
should belong to these little groups? They wanted their own independence. For example,
there was a group called the Black Hand in Serbia that wanted Bosnia, which was controlled
by Austria-Hungary, to be free. They were willing to do anything to make that happen-even
if through violence.

Militarism was a big part of the tension, too. Countries were strengthening their armies and
navies, preparing as if war could erupt at any moment. It was like a neighborhood where
each resident builds the strongest, most formidable fortress, ready to defend against any
potential threat. Germany and Britain, for example, were competing to see who could have
the strongest navy. Everyone was ready for a fight, even if they didn't really want one to
happen.

On top of all that, Europe was in an “arms race.” Germany and Britain were racing to see
who could build the most powerful navy. This made everyone
nervous, because when you re collecting weapons, it starts to
look like you're getting ready for a fight.

So, with all these things (alliances, nationalism, militarism, and
imperialism), Europe was like a room full of fireworks, waiting
for someone to strike a match. That match came on a sunny
June day in Sarajevo, when a young man shot Archduke Franz
Ferdinand, the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne.

The assassin (who was part of a group called Young Bosnia),
Gavrilo Princip, hoped that killing Franz Ferdinand, the heir to
the Austro-Hungarian throne, would create chaos in Austria-
Hungary and weaken its control over the Balkans.

Gavrilo Princip

q/
He believed that the
assassination would inspire a
revolt, bringing attention to
the struggle for independence
and helping to unite all Slavic
people in the region.

Austria-Hungary was furious
and declared war on Serbia,
where the assassins were
from. Russia, Serbia's
supporten jumped in to help,
and then Germany, Austria-
Hungary's supporten jumped
in too. Before long, everyone's
allies got involved, and the
small spark turned into the
giant explosion that we now

A I =} I c | [=] | E
venice To Berlin 7” Budapest * S. i] Vinnitsa Ye ‘eri 4
a f Dedreczen a Se -
Trieste Caen 2 “A Poltava®
Any -. \ )
v % ‘\, Ekoterinosiav ;
4} MY ji 4
~ f BN
i : Odessa,
%%; RS T° aa = Why, 3 \
& is ss 55 FA OF ArOv )
r \ i ’ ude A Kerch ‘ é
We Pe . eae SS =
\ wh Fe \ wae . Sr ofS 2
ial “ RAS ° J v / 3 ¢ a ui
aes . E iy a wostopol _-“ i ‘
ITALY oe i f= evs d S “Sa oN
| \ f~ le E = ct: Z A Cc Ke N A) \
= i aioe See % i.
f Y: a _Sotonlke Cy = Sf ate aa
G TiN a = gp ; nn
s GREECE | RO . Slips ; > 6s
1QONIAN SEA ah = ‘ "Wel \
a ae RieeeaH 0 ; oo ee, iflis |
ie ae y \ 5 — & Na 5a
) . “athens
fai iS GAL OTTOM AW | |
al aa o8 Re ov {ry
Vik KF =
* i e a . mh
oO. SEK |
Bee, ‘ |

This map shows Serbia in 1914 and the countries around it. You can
also see part of what used to be Austria-Hungary. That empire no
longer exists. After it collapsed at the end of World War I, its land
was divided among several new countries. Today, pieces of it are part
of Austria, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy, Poland, Ukraine, Romania, Serbia, an
Montenegro.

rons am were:

TURKISH RAIL SYSTEM
200

SCALE OF MILES

A |

98
At the beginning of World War 1, the United States wanted nothing to do with the
international conflict. Many people thought, “Why should we send our soldiers into a war
that's not ours?” The United States hadn't even been a country for 150 years yet, and

Americans had no desire to get tangled up in another continent's fight! This was Europe's
problem and had nothing do with the United States.

President Woodrow Wilson stood in front of the U.S. Senate and
made a speech about why the United States would be neutral
and not take sides in the war or get involved.