RABBIT TRAIL: THE U.S. SENATE

The U.S. Senate is one of the two chambers of the United
States Congress, the other being the House of
Representatives. Togethen they make the laws for the
country. Here's how it works:

The Senate represents each state equally. Every state, no matter its size, has two
senators. This means there are a total of 100 senators. Senators are elected to serve for
six-year terms. They can be re-elected for multiple terms.

Any treaties made by the President with other countries must be approved by the Senate.

Confirming appointments: The Senate must approve many of the President's appointments,
such as the appointment of judges, ambassadors, and Cabinet members.

If the House of Representatives impeaches (charges with misconduct) a President or other
federal officials, the Senate holds the trial to decide whether to remove them from office.

This is the end of the
rabbit trail!

‘The people of the United States are drawn from many nations, and chiefly from the nations
now at war It is natural and inevitable that there should be the utmost variety of sympathy
and desire among them with regard to the issues and circumstances of the conflict. Some
will wish one nation, others another to succeed in the momentous struggle.

Senators meet in the Capitol building in Washington, D.C.
to debate and vote on proposed laws. They play an
important role in shaping the country’s policies and
ensuring that all states have an equal voice in the
federal government.

Wilson said in his speech:

Such divisions among us would be fatal to our peace of mind and might seriously stand in the
way of the proper performance of our duty as the one great nation at peace...

99
The United States must be neutral in fact as well as in name during these days that are to
try men's souls, ”

Llama McRama translation service:

The United States is made up of people from many different
countries, and a lot of those countries are now at wan It’s only
natural that Americans might feel differently regarding which
country they want to “win.” Some may support one side, while others
support anothen

But if we start dividing ourselves over who should win, it could disrupt
our peace and keep us from doing what's best as a country. lo stay
strong, the U.S. must remain truly neutral, not just in words, but in
action, during these challenging times.

Americans were watching the chaos unfold from afan but for now, they would just read
about it in the newspapers and discuss it over the dinner table while men far away bled and
died and fought with new things like tanks, planes, and poison gas.