WRAPPING UP 1900-1919 WEEK 5 DAY 4

The years 1900-1919 had been a rollercoaster of change and transformation. Massive
factories ran around the clock, churning out inventions and goods as fast as the machines
could manage. Technology was changing daily life. Cities were growing taller and widen packed
with newcomers from all over the world, each bringing pieces of their cultures that would
blend and shape American life in new ways.

120
As this new century took off, people's voices grew louder Women rallied and marched
through the streets, demanding the right to vote. Factory workers, miners, and laborers
banded togethen insisting on beter pay and safer working conditions, sometimes even
striking and risking their jobs to make a point. It was a time of courage and determination,
as people fought for the kind of future they wanted.

But America's path toward the 1920s wasn’t all triumphs. When World War 1 broke out,
families watched with heavy hearts as young men shipped off to Europe, leaving behind
friends, families, and sweethearts. The war brought harsh reality home; when soldiers
returned, many were scarred-physically and emotionally—by what they had seen. And as if
that wasn't enough, just as the war ended, the Spanish flu swept through, a silent killer
that didn't care about borders. It took lives quickly, leaving towns and cities reeling, hospitals
overwhelmed, and families grieving.

Yet, as the Spanish flu finally faded, America seemed to shake of f the sorrow and grief,
ready for something new. By the end of 1919, the country was like a coiled spring, ready to
leap into a new age. The 1920s were just around the cornen and they promised an era of
booming prosperity, wild new music, and cultural freedom. Jazz would fill smoky clubs, women
would bob their hair and raise their hemlines, and people would dance into the night with a
thrill that felt almost rebellious. It was a time for breaking boundaries, and America was
ready.

Beneath the excitement though, there were cracks in the foundation. Economic risks and
social tensions lay hidden, foreshadowing struggles that no one wanted to see. As America
prepared to soar into the 1920s, it was clear this new era would be unforgettable—but it
wasn t going to end easily.

Before we move on, let's look at some of the American inventions of the first 19 years of
the 20th century!

Kids in the early

1900s: Lola,
Olive, Blanche,

and Norman.