THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE WEEK 7 DAY 2

Someone else was about to get away from it all, too. James ‘Jimmy’ Tillman grew up in the
rural South, where life was tough for black people. Even though slavery had ended after the
Civil War in 1865, black Americans, such as Jimmy, still faced many challenges. Many were
trapped in a system called sharecropping, where black farmers rented land from white
landowners in exchange for part of their crops. This system kept many families in debt and
poverty. On top of this, the Jim Crow laws made life even harder

Jim Crow laws were rules in the South that kept black people and white people separate.
These laws made it clear that black people were not to be treated as equal to white people.
They couldn't live in the same neighborhoods, go to the same schools, or even eat at the
same restaurants. Everything was separated by race.

The word Jim Crow comes from a song-and-dance caricature of black people performed by
a white actor who painted his face black. Jim Crow began to be used as a derogatory
(unkind and negative) word to call black people.

140
A Ku Klux Klan gathering in Muncie Indiana in 1922

Besides unfair laws, groups like the Ku Klux Klan (also called the KKK), used violence and
threats to make black people afraid. The KKK believed white people were better than all
other races, especially black people. The Klan was formed in the South in the late 1800s,
after the Civil Wan when African Americans were gaining new rights. The Klan didn't like
these changes and wanted to stop them. They wore white robes and hoods to hide their
faces, and they carried out violent acts, like burning crosses, threatening, and even killing
people.

When Black soldiers returned home from World War 1 and demanded equal rights after
serving their country, the Ku Klux Klan responded by harassing them and using violence. The
Klan wanted to remind the soldiers that they were expected to be content with the way
things were and that they shouldn't push for more rights or freedoms.

Jimmy grew up in this tough and unfair world, watching his family struggle. He and his
brothers and sisters helped Momma and Pop with the sharecropping, so they only attended
school from late fall to the early spring. The rest of the time they had to work in the fields.

Jimmy loved school. Not just because it was a break from all the back-breaking labor but
because he loved learning new things. Mom said he was a drought-struck sponge soaking up
every little drop of learning within reach. Her eyes always shined with pride when he brought
home his report cards.

As he walked to school, Jimmy passed by the beautiful brick building with the big glass
windows that was the white kids’ school. His own school, on the other hand, was a small,
drafty wooden building with old shutters that opened straight to the outside. The white kids
had piles of new books with shiny covers and neat desks in rows. Jimmy's school had old,
worn-out discards with torn covers and rough hand-hewn wooden benches fo sit on. It’s not
that he wasnt grateful for what he had, but Jimmy couldn't help but feel envious, and even
angry.

When he went to town to pick up some groceries for Grandma, he passed the water
fountains marked “Colored” and “White.” If he ever dared to use the “White” one, some
white boys would surely beat him. In bad weather he'd sometimes take the trolley through

14]
A school for black children in White Plains, Georgia

late 2

town. Blacks had to squash themselves in the back as far as they could go while whites sat in

the front.
It wasn't fain It wasn't right. That was how life was, though.

This all went on and on until Jimmy was 17 and then, one day, Mom handed him a letter from

Uncle Alfred.

Dear Jimmy,

You re almost a man now, and I figure you don’t want to spend the rest of your life picking
cotton with your folks. Why don't you come up here to Harlem and stay with me? I've got a
job waiting for you at the club.

Love, Uncle Alfy

Lots of black Americans in the south started moving up north to Harlem, a lively
neighborhood in New York City sandwiched in between the Hudson and Harlem rivers. These
people were part of what was eventually called the First Great Migration, where over 1
million black Americans moved from the rural south to big cities in the North and West.

142
In the 1920s, Harlem was full of new opportunities where black artists, musicians, and
writers were creating something new and exciting. This became known as the Harlem
Renaissance as music, art, literature, and social change flourished in the community.

Jimmy sat at the table eating a supper of collards, beans, and ribs, with Uncle Alfy’s letter
folded up neatly by his napkin. His sister Sally was peeking at him from beneath her lovely
lashes and making faces. She knew something big was about to happen.

Jimmy picked up the letter and looked toward Momma and Pop across the table. His words
tumbled out of him in a
rush.

"So, Lum, well I got this
letter from Uncle Alfred.
He's inviting me to come up
and stay with him and work
at his club."

Momma's eyebrows lifted.
“Baby Boy James it's so
far away...

Sally giggled and repeated
Jimmy's nickname,
“Baaaaaaaaaaaaaby
Boooy.” Jimmy kicked her
playfully under the table.
His little brothers Amos and Elijah just kept shoveling beans into their mouths, totally
unconcerned with the conversation and racing toward the next helping before someone else
could get it.

Jimmy's father set his fork down and gave his wife a meaningful look. “Son, if there's a
chance for a better life, you should take it. I've talked to Alfred, and he's right. This place
isn't for you. I'm sick to death of the treatment round here. We can't afford to go
ourselves, but Alfred said he'll wire the money for your travel and put you up when you get
there.”

Jimmy knew his father would never ask for help, so he immediately offered. ‘T'll save a big
chunk of my paychecks and send it down. I've heard the pay is double or more what it is
here. [ won't need much for myself.”

Jimmy's father shook his head slowly. “I really appreciate that, son. I do. But you should set
it aside for something biggen maybe for college or to start your own business someday. Make
something of yourself We'll figure out how to save and scrape by here, but...” He trailed

of f, leaving the sentence hanging in the ain They all knew the truth—none of them would be

143
able to make that kind of leap. This was Jimmy's chance and his chance alone.

Jimmy's mother dabbed at her mouth with a napkin and rose to start washing up, her chair
scraping and squeaking on the floor “Well! You've got a lot of packing to do! I'll help you
figure out your travel arrangements tomorrow morning and Pop will put in a call to Alfred.”

Jimmy was beaming, but at the same time his stomach was twisting. How could he be so
happy and sad at the same time? This was a chance to leave behind the pain of the South
and build a life where he could finally follow his dreams. But he was leaving Momma and Pop

and the kids and Grandma. He was nervous. He was excited. He didn’t quite know how he
felt!

Next thing he knew, Sally had her arms around him with her face buried in his shirt. His
brothers stopped eating long enough to give him a long, silent look. Likely they were jealous.
Although he was too big for it, Jimmy stuck out his tongue at them. Both boys broke out into
bright and silly smiles.

A month later Jimmy stood on the crowded streets of Harlem, his suitcase in hand, looking
up at the tall brownstone buildings that lined the streets. He stood and checked the address
on the slip of paper from his pocket and then checked his watch, a gift from Grandma,
before he left. Uncle Alfy should be here any moment.

Jimmy couldn't believe he had really arrived! He took a deep breath, feeling the excitement
that pulsed through the streets. He had heard so much about Harlem before coming, like

The Lafayette Theater in Harlem

144
how it was a place where black culture
thrived, where music, art, and literature
came together in a way that was powerful
and new. Harlem wasn't just a neighborhood;
it was the center of something big.

Alfred had been sending Jimmy letters about
life in Harlem on a regular basis. He wrote
about the jazz clubs, the writers circles, and
the art galleries. He wrote about the rising
stars of the African American community—
people like Langston Hughes, the poet, who
was becoming famous for his words that
captured the black experience with raw
emotion. Or Zora Neale Hurston, who was
telling stories of black life in a way that no one had before. Alfred told him about people like
Duke Ellington and Bessie Smith who were making waves in jazz music. Now, Jimmy was
standing right here in the midst of it. For real.

The crisp air was filled with the sound of laughter and the beat of the music from a distant
building. Some delicious smell of cooking wafted by on the breeze. The rhythm of the city
was like nothing he had ever heard in the small southern town from which he came.

“Jimmy!” a familiar booming voice called out.

Jimmy turned around and saw his Uncle Alfred waving from the front steps of a nearby
brownstone. Alfred was a tall, imposing man with a big smile and a hand always ready for a
firm handshake. He was wearing a crisp suit, his shoes polished to perfection.

“Uncle Alfy!" Jimmy exclaimed, his face lighting up with relief “I made it!”
“Welcome to Harlem, my boy,” Alfred said, pulling him into a nearly rib cracking big hug.

Alfred had been living in Harlem for a few years now, and he had made a small fortune as a
manager of a jazz club. Over the years, he had seen Harlem grow from a working-class
neighborhood to one of the most famous cultural hubs in America.

“Well, what do you think?” Alfred asked, gesturing to the busy streets around them with a
huge and happy grin.

“T've never seen anything like it,” Jimmy said, his eyes wide with amazement. He had heard
stories, but standing here, in the middle of the hustle and bustle, it was even better than he
had imagined. ‘ls it always like this?” Alfred chuckled. “More or less. Harlem's been growing
for years. This neighborhood started as a place for working-class families, but over time, it’s
become the heart of Negro culture. The best jazz musicians, the greatest artists, writers,

145
and thinkers—Harlem has become their home. People come here from all over the country,
looking for something different. Something betten’

Jimmy nodded and gripped the handle on his suitcase tighter

The streets of Harlem in the 1920s were alive in ways that were almost impossible to
describe. The rhythm of jazz music spilled from every corner-places like the Cotton Club
and the Apollo Theater where the best African American performers dazzled crowds night
after night. Harlem was a place where black people weren't just surviving but thriving.
Where they could escape the limitations that had been placed on them by the South and
express themselves.

Alfred guided Jimmy down the street, pointing out the places that had made Harlem famous.
“You see that building over there?” he said, pointing to a grand structure. “That's the Apollo
Theater One of the most famous places in Harlem. You'll see the best of the best perform
there. Some really famous people started right there on that stage. I imagine there will be
many more to come!"

They continued walking, and Alfred stopped in front of a small café. “This is where you'll Find
the best sandwiches, and over there is the Savoy Ballroom. It’s the best place to dance if
you don t want to be in a stuffy hall or a smoke-filled cellar club. Did a bit of the Texas
Tommy in there, myself.” Then he winked and twirled around as if his arms were holding a
pretend dance partnen

Jimmy's eyes sparkled. He'd never been to any type of dance hall. “I've heard of that.
That's the dance with the fast moves, right?”

“Yep,” Alfred laughed. “It’s the latest craze. Harlem's always got something new.”

As they came up to Alfred's building, Jimmy couldn't help but feel a sense of pride. He felt
like what was happening here was about creating something new, something that would be
remembered for generations. In Harlem, the old world of segregation and oppression was
being replaced with a new world of possibilities.

Alfred unlocked the door and ushered his nephew into a modest apartment. “Room to the
right is yours. Go ahead and put your suitcase away. I'll take you out tonight and introduce
you around, and tomorrow we'll go over some job-related business. ”

As night fell, the city came alive even more. The lights in Harlem flickered on, and the
muffled sound of jazz grew louder Jimmy and Alfred made their way toward a small club,
the entrance guarded by a doorman who nodded as they passed. Inside, the club was
buzzing with people talking, laughing, and dancing. Music filled every corner of the room, and
Jimmy felt like he was living in a dream.

“You see, Jimmy,” Alfred said as they sat down at a table, “this is why people come to

146
Harlem. It's not just about escaping the past. It's about making a future, creating
something new, and showing the world who we really are. I'm going to start you out small,
just waiting tables and such, but we'll make a manager out of you eventually, if you work

hard.”

Jimmy took a deep breath, feeling the warmth of the room and the excitement in the ain “I
can't thank you enough Uncle Alfy. °

And as the jazz band played into the night, Jimmy knew this was only the beginning of his
journey. Harlem was not just a place; it was a movement, and he was ready to be part of it.