THE ELECTION OF 1920 WEEK 6 DAY 4

If you remember Theodore Roosevelt had split of f the Republican party in 1912 to make his
own party of progressives. That didn't last too long. When Woodrow Wilson won the
presidency in 1916, the old bull moose re joined the Republicans.

When 1919 rolled around, Theodore had had enough of sitting on the sidelines and watching
things being done in what he deemed the entirely wrong way. He was ready to grab the reins
up yet again and run for president. “If they take me, they'll have to take me without a single
modification of the things that I have always stood for!" he said in his typically forceful and
exuberant way.

Perhaps he could have won, but that January, the breathing problems he
had as a child struck that night as he went to bed. His body, already
weakened from illnesses he d picked up while mucking through the
South American jungle several years earlien couldn't hold on.

“The old lion is dead,” his son Archibald telegraphed. Woodrow
Wilson's vice president, Thomas R. Marshall, said that “Death had to

take Roosevelt sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have
been a fight.”

Theodore had been the favorite of the Republicans. Now who
would they choose?

Back then, presidential candidates were chosen behind closed
doors. After days of arguing and rounds of voting that went
nowhere, party leaders found themselves in a tight spot. They
needed a candidate everyone could agree on—someone who
wouldn't make too many waves. That's when the name of a former
newspaper editor from Ohio and a current senator came up:

Warren G. Harding.

Party insiders thought Harding s easygoing, “everyman” style might
just win over a public tired of the turmoil after World War 1 and

the Spanish flu pandemic. He became the compromise choice, winning
the nomination and surprising almost everyone.
When asked about his goals for the country, Harding promised a “return to normalcy.”
Normalcy wasn't even believed to be a real word at the time by many, but Americans loved it.
“Normalcy” sounded comforting after years of wan disease, and unrest.

"He's using a made-up word!” snickered a senator to his son Josiah, a student at the local
college.

4 — > ae t ie ; = eee
E . & ‘ad a aa oo = .

Josiah’s mouth curved into a gentle smile. “It’s a real word Pops, but it’s used in math.”

Josiah's mothen who was extremely well-read, shook her head while busily flipping through
pages of a fat and heavy book. “Not just that, darling. I've read it used in this context
before in the papers. People shouldn't jump to the conclusion that Harding should be ridiculed
for using an uncommon word. He didn't make it up. It’s right here in the dictionary!” Her
finger pointed to one of the pages in case they wanted to see.

Josiah’s father’s eyebrows popped up the way they often did when he was surprised or
proven wrong. Well, well, you're right! I bet he'll get the credit though as if it’s an invention
of his own.”

And that's just how it was. People to this day still think Harding invented the word normalcy.
No matten it was the perfect word to use at the time.

People didn't just criticize Harding's word choice. They didn’t love his way of giving speeches
or his writing skills, eithen He was no Theodore Roosevelt who spoke and penned impassioned
words that made you think and feel. Harding was... a bit boring.

One journalist (H.L. Mencken) stated:
136
"he writes the worst English I have ever encountered. It reminds me of a string of wet
sponges; it reminds me of tattered washing on the line; it reminds me of stale bean soup, of
college yells, of dogs barking idiotically through endless nights. It is so bad that a sort of
grandeur creeps into it. It drags itself out of the dark abysm (I was about to write abscess!)
of pish, and crawls insanely up the topmost pinnacle of posh. It is rumble and bumble. It is

flap and doodle. It is balder and dash.

his whole inaugural address reeked with just such nonsense. The thing started off with an
error in English in its very first sentence. It bristled with words misused: civic for

civil, luring for alluring, womanhood for women, referendum for reference, even task for
problem. “The task is to be solved’-—what could be worse?”

There were others who also tore the poor man apart with unkind criticism. Remember the
next time someone criticizes your writing or speech: you can still go on to do great things, as

Harding did!

President Woodrow Wilson wanted to run against Harding and try to win a 3rd term, but
during the last part of his presidency, he had a stroke and became completely paralyzed on
one side of his body, with only partial vision in a single eye. For weeks he was stuck in bed,
with only his wife, Edith, and his doctor allowed to visit. Edith carried on business as usual,
choosing which documents to read aloud to her husband and taking charge of all his

communication. Since she pretty much ran things at the time, some have called Edith “the
first female President of the United States."

The Democrats decided that would not do at all and chose a man named James Cox as their

candidate, leaving Wilson in the dust. The American people were tired of Wilson, though, and
when they saw Cox, they thought of Wilson. They want a clean slate and new leadership. No,
Cox was not the man for the job.
It was time to put a different ‘
party in charge of the country. us

4 Cole

Socialist Eugene Debs ran again
this time, too. Remember him
from the 1912 election? He was
campaigning from prison for
speaking out against the war! Not eer. NG
many took him seriously. A man in "An 20 Qe Te
prison winning the election? Not US ee. = A Noh
likely. mee a _ rs

It was Harding who rode a huge iS y/ Wee

wave of popularity. This election Y/ pps YUWIs.X

was the first presidential race ~ Cartoon showing Eugene Debs running for president from
after the 19th Amendment prison in the 1920 election.

137
THE OFFIInL REPUBLICAN cAmPRIgN Sone passed, giving women the right to vote across the

HARDING country. Millions of women, eager to participate in

shaping the nation’s future, registered and went to
You re The Man For Us the polls, enamored with Harding's promise of peace
yo UN and prosperity. They helped tip the balance toward

Harding, and he won in a landslide.

Warren G. Harding was President:
March 1921 - August 2, 1923

| ANYTHING GOES IN THE

y ROARING AND REBELLIOUS
! ul uae 20S ‘WEEK 7 DAY 1
Words and Music by

He) In a small apartment in New York City, Lucy sat on
AL JOLSON 30 the edge of her bed, flipping through the pages of a

fashion magazine filled with pictures of flappers and
the latest clubs. The sounds of lively music drifted in from the street below. Someone was
playing a jazz record on their Victrola.

Lucy turned to her best friend Dorothy who was sitting cross-legged on the floor “] want to
wear a dress like this to the next dance!” she said and pointed to one particularly slinky
sequined creation. She had a hint of rebellion in her voice. Her mother would never allow it in
a million years - there was way too much skin exposed. You could see the lady's arms and
legs! So scandalous!

Dorothy looked up; and Lucy wasn’t sure if it was in admiration or disapproval.

Lucy leaned back and sighed, “It's like everyone is getting to
break all the old rules except for me. Robert just got
back from the wan and he said things are different
now. He said that when he was overseas, he
realized life is too short to worry about old
traditions. People don't care as much about
what others think. They just want to have
fun!"

Just then, the door swung open, and
Lucy's older sister Helen walked in. “What
are you two plotting in here?” she asked
with a grin while leaning against the
doorframe.

Lucy sighed dramatically, “I was talking to
Dorothy about flappers. They are soooo000
glamorous. °

138
Valentino! Josef’s going to pick us up in his brother
Paulo's automobile! I was going to invite you but
never mind!"

Helen shook her head. Her little sister was bent on
finding trouble, like hanging out with Josef; whom
she knew sometimes ran errands for the local
gangsters. It's how his big brother Paulo made most

of his money - smuggling alcohol to local speakeasies.

Lucy was right, times were changing, but Helen
wasnt sure if that was a good thing or not.

On one hand, there were new and amazing things
that had arrived on the scene like popup toasters,
washing machines, radios, and refrigerators.
Electricity had changed life in so many ways! The
arts were flourishing with new styles like Art Deco
and jazz was exploding into neighborhoods, born on
a tide of famous musicians from Harlem.

One the other hand, there were the flappers—
young women who loved to dance, party, and enjoy

Helen frowned. “Lucy, they are disgusting.
They drink and smoke and look like boys with
those ridiculous bobs. “She flipped a thick braid
over her shoulder for emphasis - to show that
she certainly did not have boyish hair Lucy
returned her sister's frown with a certain
viciousness. ‘Go away. You're no fun. Times
are changing! You're just part of the old
crowd and old traditions. I'm going to be a
modern woman.

Helen chuckled while turning to walk back into
the hall, "Well first you have to grow out of
being a little girl.”

Lucy yelled after hen ‘I'm not a little girl!” and
then as if to prove it, “We're going to the
movies to see the new film with Rudolph

Modern Perfume-
Scented Thrill-

Seekers—

The modern jazz-mad
girl at her dizziest pace.
She—they are the prod-
igal daughters.

GLORIA
SWANSON

“Prodigal
Daughiers’’

bk? Paramount Picture”
\

The Ri ; Ne } Wy

Revels; the Ui aE" Mb g

This movie explored themes of youthful
rebellion and the clash between

traditional values and the emerging
flapper culture of the Jazz Age.

Af

All Week—Starting Monday

139

their lives on their own terms. Flappers cut their hair into boyish bobs and wore daring knee-
length dresses that glittered with sequins. They embraced a bold new look and attitude,
often seen smoking cigarettes and sipping cocktails at speakeasies. These new, independent
women re jected tradition as well as religion and got newly available jobs to support
themselves instead of relying on a husband fo provide for them.

Helen just couldnt relate to those women. She was getting ready to leave the city and move
to the heartland of America with her fiancé, John, who had once worked on the railroads of
Colorado. They planned to join his uncle Robert in Oklahoma, where he was making a fortune
from the oil boom. Robert was going to finance a small farm for the couple. All Helen wanted
was to make a good, simple life and have a bunch of babies, not strut about wrapped up in
the glitter and glamour of a flapper’s life.

Robert was putting ideas in Lucy's head. After coming back from the wan he just wanted to
forget about the horror and live it up, making up for lost time while he was still young. That
seemed to be the consensus among many of the young people in the city.

Greek and Latin roots: Consensus comes from the Latin word com meaning with or together
and sentire meaning to feel. When there is a consensus, people feel the same or agree
about something.

So many people were rejecting strict social rules and saying “anything goes’ with a spirit of
freedom and rebellion.

Well, soon Lucy wouldn't be Helen's problem anymore. Leave her to Robert and Mama.
Helen was getting married soon and was going to get away from it all.