AUGUST 2, 19235: FROM TRAGEDY TO TRANSITION

It was a warm summer evening in 1923 when President Warren G. Harding was traveling
down the West Coast. He had been feeling sick for several days, and just that morning, the
doctors had insisted he stay in bed to rest.

A couple of days later the doctors allowed him to sit up but still urged him to stay in bed. It
was a tough blow for Harding, especially since he had to cancel his planned appearance in
Oregon, a key stop on his trip. Now, he was stuck in a hotel room, his work piling up as he
waited to get betten It was frustrating to feel so helpless.

Mr President, you must rest,” Dn Sawyer said firmly, his expression serious. “Your health

148
comes first. I fear that your heart is weak right now, and you have pneumonia. We'll give
you some caffeine and digitalis, which should help ease your symptoms."

Caffeine was given to President Harding while he experienced heart
issues and pneumonia because it has certain effects that can help in
emergencies. Caffeine is a stimulant, which means it can temporarily
increase heart rate and blood pressure, helping to improve circulation
and give a quick energy boost. This was important in Harding's case
because he was very weak due to his ilness. The caffeine might have d
him the strength he needed fo survive. Howeven it's a risky An
treatment, especially for someone with heart problems, because A / Se
too much caffeine can make things worse, causing irregular . f
heartbeats or other complications.

Digitalis is a medicine made from the foxglove plant, which is a
type of flower People have used this plant for centuries to
treat heart problems. The chemicals in the plant help strengthen
the heart muscle and improve its pumping ability. Chemicals from
the foxglove plant can be used as medicine, but the plant
itself is very poisonous to humans and animals. If someone
eats it, it can make them very sick and even cause death.

Harding sighed, gazing out the window at the bustling city
below and feeling quite grumpy. ‘l understand, Doctor But
there's so much [ need to do. The people are counting on me.”

Foxglove

Dr Sawyer nodded sympathetically. “I know, sit But you cant help them if you're not well.
Please, take this time to recover I'm ordering you fo continue your stay in bed. We'll make
sure the hotel sees to your needs. °

Harding nodded reluctantly, then let out a harsh cough. Alright,” he said hoarsely, his voice
raspy from the phlegm in his chest and throat. “But as soon as I'm able, I need to get back
to work.

As the days went by, Harding rested, but his mind was constantly preoccupied with the work
piling up. He didn't have time for this! That evening, propped up in bed with an extra coverlet,
despite the warm room, he stared out at the sparkling city lights through the window.

Florence, his wife, sat beside him while holding a magazine. She smiled and gently patted his
hand.

“T know you re dying of boredom, my love, she said, her voice soft with affection. “Here, let
me read you this article from the Saturday Evening Post. It's about you-"A Calm Review of
a Calm Man. It's quite flattering.” She smiled, proud of the way the country admired her
husband, and opened the magazine. With a bright, clear voice, she began reading aloud.

149
Suddenly, a violent cough shook Harding's body, and
Florence stopped, her face filled with concern.
Harding weakly waved her on. “That's good. Go
ahead, read some more.

Then, without warning, Harding twisted in pain,
gasped, and collapsed. The magazine Florence had
been holding slipped unheeded from her hands and
fluttered to the floor as she rushed to call the
doctors who were staying in a nearby room.
“Please, doctors! Help!”

By the time the doctors arrived, it was too late.
The president was dead.

Vice President Calvin Coolidge was visiting his
parents in their small, humble home in Vermont.
The house was a bit old-fashioned as it had no
electricity or telephone, but that added to the peace and
charm of it. It was nice to get away from work and the modern world for a few days and
visit with Mother and Daddy. Coolidge
almost felt like a boy, tucked in his childhood
bed listening to the soft rustlings of the
night coming in through the open window.
The air was cool, and he could hear the
soft chirping of a cricket somewhere in the
house. It was a comforting sound in the
stillness of the night. Coolidge lay in bed,
very close to sleep, when suddenly, an
anxious knocking at the front door
thundered through the house. Despite his
tiredness, Coolidge sat up lightning fast, his
mind racing. Who could be at the door at
this late hour?

He arrived at the front door with his
father not far behind. Coolidge threw the
door open, heedless of the fact that he
was standing barefoot and in his pajamas.
A messenger stood, breathless, with wide
eyes. Mr Coolidge,” the messenger said, ‘I
have urgent news. The President has
passed away,

Coolidge's was shocked, but his calm demeanor didnt waver He ushered the young man
inside, who was spilling the news of Harding's death in a torrent of rushed words. Without
hesitation, Calvin's fathen who served as a justice of the peace, administered the oath of
office to his son right there in the parlon by the dim glow of a kerosene lamp. There were no
grand ceremonies, no crowds or cameras, just a simple and profound moment in the small
Vermont home with the sound of the ticking clock in the room marking the passing of time.

And then, the new President of the United States returned to bed.

Calvin Coolidge was president: August 2, 1923 - March 1929 WEEK 7 DAY 4