WHEN THE BOOM WENT BUST WEEK 8 DAY 2

On October 24, 1929, the U.S. stock market crashed, ushering in a dark decade in world
history. Hoover's popularity tumbled and ruined his chances for reelection.

y ») Gory to interrupt but hold on! [ have no idea what a stock s. )

i

7

4

/ MS Ah! Let me explain before we go on with our story. The stock market (py wy
is like a big, busy store where people buy and sell tiny pieces of Z
companies. These pieces are called stocks. Think of a stock like a little a

(

ticket that says, ‘I own a tiny part of this company.’

PD 3

When you buy a stock, you get a share of that company. You are ‘investing’ in it. If the \’
company does well, the value of your stock goes up, and you can make money. But if the
company doesnt do well, the value goes
pasaeas eases SRE: LEME, Kz ae ay down and you lose money.

The 1920s were a time of great wealth
and excess. People were buying cars,
radios, and other new gadgets.

> Businesses were booming, people were
Teel ee Gm Maltin ye’ Se making lots of money, and everyone felt

>
DIME SAV /INGS AND TRUST “COMPANY.

ht pd iviijeucoyn Se vich. There was a feeling that the good
A stock certificate from the 1920s ps m= __ times would never end. It seemed like
-~- ®E —_everyone was living the high life—people
were going on lavish vacations, living in big
houses, and flaunting (showing of f) their
new fortunes with glittering and
glamorous lifestyles. It felt like nothing

could go wrong. That's why the 1920s are known as the Roaring Twenties. The decade was

=>
HIS ERT Pian Ww hel SUtbe dN \GeR EES iy He rene

170
roaring with prosperity and enthusiasm!

Companies were booming, and everyone wanted a slice of the profits. Many people started
buying stocks, hoping to get rich fast. If they didnt have enough money to buy the stocks,

=== Acrowd gathers outside the Stock Exchange
after the crash

theyd borrow it, betting that the
prices would keep rising. Their plan
was to sell the stocks at a higher
price and use the profit to pay
back the borrowed money.

People got a bit too excited and
didn't think about the fact that
things can't always go up foreven
It's like building a tower with
blocks—you can keep adding more,
but if you add too many too quickly,
the whole thing might come crashing
down. Another way to think about it
is that the stock market sometimes
acts like a bubble. It starts small
and grows bigger and biggen but

eventually, it gets too big and
bursts— POP!

In October 1929, there were some
smart investors who realized this as
they saw stock prices getting way
too high, much higher than the
actual value of the companies. They
began to sell their stocks and stock
prices began to fall. This started to
make people nervous. They feared

that this could be the beginning of a crash and more joined in selling their stocks to avoid

bigger losses.

Once the panic began, fear spread quickly. Investors lost trust in the market, which made
things even worse. More people started selling their stocks in panic, and the prices
plummeted. It was like a domino effect, with one person's fear triggering another's.

Businesses, banks, and regular people all got caught up in the frenzy.

Now, everyone scrambled to sell their stocks. With so many people trying to sell at once,
stock prices dropped quickly, which made people even more anxious. Eventually, it got so bad
that when they tried to sell, no one was willing to buy. People lost a lot of money very quickly.

17
Now some people had nothing at all! To make it worse, many who had borrowed money to buy
stocks couldnt pay it back and were now horribly in debt.

It wasn't just people who suffered. Many banks had invested a lot of their money into the
stock market, and when it crashed, those investments lost a lot of value. At the same time,
investors who had borrowed money to buy stocks weren't paying back their loans, since they
had no funds to do so. Suddenly banks were running out of money!

This forced many banks to close, and people who had their savings in those banks lost
everything. Back then, there wasn't any insurance to protect people's money, which made
everyone really scared. Banks that hadn't closed yet were suddenly beset by hundreds of
people trying to withdraw their money before it was gone. These were called bank runs,
because people were running to the bank, hoping to get their money. It was almost like a
race to get to the bank first. Bank runs caused even more banks fo close. As banks closed,
businesses that depended on them for loans couldn't get the money they needed.

c. “1¢

AMERICA ee
UNION |

»
-_

A bank run. This bank went out of business in 1931. es 54

ba he

Now there was a ripple effect. Businesses that needed to borrow money couldn't get any
and had to close. Businesses that didn't need to borrow money also suffered. Now that

172
people had lost their money in the stock market and during the bank runs, they couldn't buy
anything other than the very barest of necessities. When businesses couldn't sell their
goods, they had to close. That made thousands and eventually millions of people lose their
jobs, which made even more people struggle to buy anything other than what they absolutely
had to. Millions of people were plunged into poverty and despair

The good times were oven Some people lost every cent they had. Some people lost their
jobs. Others lost their homes. Some people took their lives. It was not a good way to start

the 1930s.