WHO WAS HERBERT HOOVER?

Hoover was born in 1874 in a small town in lowa and was a round and plump little baby with a

sweet temperament. He almost didn't make it past toddlerhood. When he was 2 years old,

he had a terrible attack of croup. Herbert's father frantically ran to call the village
doctors.

3-year-old Hoover

Croup is a common illness that usually affects young children. It's
caused by a virus that makes the airway (the tubes that carry
air to and from the lungs) swell up. This swelling makes it harder
for a child to breathe and causes a cough that sounds like a
barking seal.

After gasping and violently coughing until he ran out of breath,
little Herbert lay deathly still. A wailing rent the household as his
mother cried out that her little son was dead. Herbert's eyes
were gently pressed closed and pennies set on top of them (a
common practice at the time to keep a dead person's eyes shut).
A sheet was draped over the tiny, still body. As the family
gathered to pray over his body, his uncle, a docton burst into the
room, threw off the sheet, and resuscitated the little boy!

165
Life after that in the Hoover household was cheerful as Herbert grew into a mischievous
and laughing boy. He spent his early years exploring groves of wildwood, hunting for coral
fossils along the local railroad track, and sledding with whoops of joy in the winter

Herbert's family were devout Quakers, so he was forbidden to carry a gun. Looking for
adventure, he shot prairie chickens and pigeons using a bow and arrows with local Indian
boys.

Sometimes he rode across the countryside in his father’s buggy, feet dangling from the
back. Herbert got stuck in the muddy ruts of the unpaved roads so many times that his
father called him “Papa's little stick in the mud.*

Papa died, though, of a sudden heart attack when Herbert was 6. Herbert's mother Hulda
was left caring for her 3 children, working as a seamstress to earn extra money. The family
of four was plunged into poverty. Hulda was so tight with money that she couldn't even
afford the postage to send a letter Hoover never forgot what it was like to be so poor

Four years laten the widow was struck with pneumonia and typhoid fever. She died.

Typhoid fever is a serious illness caused by bacteria and is spread by eating or drinking food
or water contaminated with the poop of an infected person. The disease can spread when
food is washed with contaminated water or when people don't wash their hands properly.
Before antibiotics, typhoid was of ten deadly as it caused internal bleeding and organ
damage. Those affected often become delirious and dehydrated.

Now the once sunny boy was an orphan doomed to a gloomy existence as he and his siblings
were shuffled to different relatives homes. Tad, the oldest Hoover boy wrote a poem about

this time:

We were orphans three

Bert and I and little Marie.

Hoover spent the rest of his childhood working hard on his uncle's farm, where the mood
was often stern, and work defined the day. Uncle John was harsh, demanding, and possibly
took advantage of the boy, assigning him never-ending chores. Though Hoover was lonely, he
grew strong tending the land—planting and harvesting onions, clearing stumps, chopping
wood, and caring for the family’s horses.

Though he could barely remember his parents, their absence, along with his uncle's cold,
distant presence, shaped Hoover's character and stayed with him forever

When Herbert turned 13, he dropped out of school to become an office assistant for his
uncle's business. Though he never attended high school, he was determined to learn. Late
nights were spent poring over books and taking classes in bookkeeping, typing, and math. You
might say that he “homeschooled” himself!

166
By the time he was 16, Herbert caught wind of something extraordinary: a brand-new,
tuition-free university called Stanford. “I'm getting out of here and going, he declared with
conviction. ‘I've had enough of Uncle John!” When he took the entrance exams, though, the
results were a blow! He failed every single one, except math!

Hoover packed his things and set of f for California, anyway. He'd suffered enough blows in

life. It was time to take things in hand and work for what he wanted. He signed up for

tutoring and, after much hard work, was admitted that fall as one of the youngest students
at the school. He decided fo pursue a degree
in geology, likely inspired by his fond memories
of hunting fossils near his childhood home.

After graduating in 1895, Hoover made his
way to the goldfields of Western Australia,
likely eager to put as much distance as
possible between himself and his past. He
quickly earned a reputation as an expert
mining engineen traveling the world to tackle
complex challenges in the industry. Perhaps all
those years of labor counted for something.
Hoover knew how to throw himself into his
work!

“Mr Hoover we need you in China,” one of his
business contacts said over the phone, years
later urging him to take on an enormous gold
mining project. Hoover didn't hesitate, but it

Herbert Hoover in 1898 (at the age of 23), was just his luck that he arrived right as the
photographed in Perth, Western Australia Boxer Rebellion broke out.

The Boxer Rebellion was a major event in

Chinese history that took place between 1899
and 1901. A group of Chinese people, known as the “Boxers, grew frustrated with foreign
countries coming into China and taking control. They wanted to rid the country of foreign
influence, especially from Europeans and Americans, and stop the missionaries who were
spreading Christianity.

These rebels were called "Boxers" because they were skilled in martial arts, like kung fu,
and believed their training gave them special powers that made them invincible. They thought
they could drive out the foreign armies with their strength, even claiming that millions of
soldiers would come down from heaven to help them purify China.

Feeling that China's leaders were too weak and had allowed too much foreign influence, the
Boxers decided to take action. They began attacking foreign businesses, setting churches

167
on fire, and killing Christians. Over 30,000 Christians lost their lives during the uprising.
The Boxers believed that these attacks would push the foreigners out and restore China's
strength.

Soon, the foreign countries heard about the violence, and a motley army of soldiers from
countries like Britain, France, Germany, and Japan came together to stop the Boxers and
protect their people living and working in China.

Troops of the Eight-Nation Alliance (except Russia) that fought against the Boxer Rebellion in China,

1900. From the left: Britain, United States, Australia, India, Germany, France, Austria-Hungary, Italy, \
and Japan. \

ik

|

“Motley” means made up of many different types or parts, often in a way that seems
unusual or varied. For example, a motley group of people could include people of different
ages, backgrounds, and interests all coming together It's of ten used to describe something
that is colorful or mixed in a way that stands out.

There was one major battle called the
Battle of Tientsin, one of the bloodiest
battles of the entire conflict, where
both sides fought for control of a city.
Guess who was right in the middle of it
all? Herbert Hoover and his new wife
Lou! Hoover was kept busy building
barricades and organizing food supplies,
while his wife worked in the hospital
taking care of injured soldiers.

By the time World War 1 broke out,
168

Hoover's wife, Lou, standing at a barricade next to a cannon

ss. ate
Hoover had already built a reputation as a problem-solven When the war began, he was
back in the states and was appointed head of the U.S. Food Administration, where he led
efforts to ensure that both American and European civilians were well-fed during the
conflict. World War 1 had sparked a global food crisis, causing food prices to soar and
leading to food riots and starvation in the countries involved in the wan Determined to avoid
rationing, Hoover established set days for people to avoid eating specified foods and save
them for soldiers’ rations: meatless Mondays, wheatless Wednesdays, and “when in doubt,
eat potatoes’.

OF that time in his life, Hoover stated, ‘I did not realize it at the moment, but my career was
over forever I was on the slippery road of public life. °

And so, it was. Hoover was now involved in the government, and that involvement grew year
by year until he finally found himself as President of the United States in 1929.

Herbert Hoover was President: March 1929 - March 1933

The day he became president, Hoover told
the American people:

“One of the oldest and perhaps the noblest
of human aspirations has been the abolition
of poverty. By poverty I mean the grinding by
undernourishment, cold, and ignorance, and
fear of old age of those who have the will to
work. We in America today are nearer to
the final triumph over poverty than ever
before in the history of any land. The
poorhouse is vanishing from among us. We
have not yet reached the goal, but, given a
chance to go forward with the policies of the
last 8 years, we shall soon with the help of
God be in sight of the day when poverty will
be banished from this Nation.”

You can imagine how those memories of his
mother scrimping and saving, and the tough
years with his uncle, came flooding back

when he spoke those words.

It is ironic that just months into his presidency, the unimaginable happened-the stock
market crash of October 1929, which quickly spiraled into the Great Depression.

169
Irony is like a surprise twist in a story. It's when something happens that's the opposite of
what youd expect. For example: A fire station burns down. That's ironic! A place meant to
put out fires is itself on fire!

Here’s another example: A lifeguard drowns. It's ironic when someone whose job is to save
lives ends up losing their own.

Sometimes irony can be funny, and sometimes it can be sad or surprising. In this case, it was
ironic that Hooven who had suffered crushing poverty as a boy after his father died, and
who wanted to get rid of it in the United States, would almost immediately see the entire
country thrown into a horrible economic depression where money became tight for millions
across the country.