SILENT CAL STEPS
DOWN WEEK 8 DAY 1

President Calvin Coolidge was a man of few
words, so few in fact that he was
nicknamed Silent Cal. One day a woman in
Washington said to him, “I made a bet
today that | could get more than two
words out of you.” Calvin replied, “You
lose.” He later denied the comment, but
others claimed they had indeed heard him
say it. No matter whether it really
happened or not, the little story
successfully summed up his reserved
nature.

Alice Longworth, the oldest daughter of
Theodore Roosevelt, hung out in the social
circles of Washington and was known for
her wit and humor One day she
commented on Calvin's silent personality,
“When he wished he were elsewhere, he
pursed his lips, folded his arms, and said
nothing. He looked then precisely as though
he had been weaned on a pickle.”

1644

WARNER BROS.SUPREME TRIUMPH

AL JOLSON
JAZZ SINGER

Na WARNEROIAND
A a: Rosenblatt

..he had been
weaned on a
pickle.

As the 1928 presidential election approached, Coolidge stayed true to his quiet nature,
offering only a simple statement: ‘| do not choose to run.’ When reporters hounded him for
more details, he calmly replied, “There will be nothing more from this office today."

His wife Grace was stunned. When discussing her husband's announcement with a senaton
she said, “Isnt that just like the man!? He never gave me the slightest intimation of his
intention. I had no idea.”

Now the Republicans needed to choose someone else to run. They chose Herbert Hoover
who was the Secretary of Commerce.

The Secretary of Commerce is a top government official who advises the president about
everything related to commerce (buying, selling, trade, and the economy). The Secretary
works to create jobs, make trade with other countries easien and collect important
information about the economy. Hoover had been working at the job ever since former
President Harding appointed him.

Coolidge didn't approve of Hoover's nomination. ‘For six years that man has given me
unsolicited advice—all of it bad!”

Perhaps if Coolidge had been a man of more words, he might have said more, but he didn't,
and Hoover won the election.