THE GREAT DEPRESSION WEEK 8 DAY 3

In 1932, Harlem wasn't the lively, vibrant place Jimmy had arrived at in what seemed like
just a few short years earlien The streets, once filled with the music of jazz, the chatter
of the wealthy socialites, and the clinking of glasses in the clubs, were now quiet, the air
heavy with worry.

The club had closed its doors months ago. The high society folks were no longer spending
leisurely evenings dining and dancing. The musicians had left, and the performers had no
work. Jimmy had been out of a job for months, and every day felt like the weight of the
world was pressing on him.

He stood on the corner of 125th Street, watching the breadline stretch down the block,
filled with men and women, old and young, some with children in tow, waiting for a loaf of
bread to get them through another day. Jimmy didn't join the line. He didnt want to stand
there, begging for food. He couldn't bear the shame. He went back to his apartment after
an unsuccessful day of looking for a new job.

“Jimmy, we're gonna have to stand in one of those lines soon. We re running low on
everything.’ said his wife, Ella, who stood beside him. Her voice was gentle but full of
concern. She held their young daughten Ruby, close to her chest. Ruby was only two, and
her big brown eyes watched her parents huddled at the dining table. Ella took Jimmy's hand
in hers. “Any nibbles for work?"

Jimmy shook his head. ‘I'll find something, Ella. I swean I'll figure something out. Just... not
today.” The city was crawling with people out of work, people who once held good jobs, who
had worked hard all their lives. Now, they had nothing.

During the Depression, Harlem faced an unemployment rate of 50%, with half of its
residents unable to find work.

175
Ella's eyes brimmed with tears despite her trying not to cry. “The rent is due. I already dont
know how I'm going to pay Aunt Josie back for last month. What are we going to do?”

Jimmy just shrugged his shoulders, mute and defeated.

Ella did what she could. She made every scrap of food last as long as possible. She took up
mending clothes for neighbors, trying to bring in a little bit of money. She made Ruby a new
little dress out of a flour sack. It wasn't much, but it helped. She'd always been a strong
woman, but Jimmy could see the strain in her eyes.

One night, as they sat in their small apartment, dimly lit by a single lamp, Jimmy stared at
Ruby as she played with a homemade rag doll. Her happy toddler chatter filled the room, a
reminder of better days. She reminded Jimmy of his little sister Sally when she was little.

Then, reality intruded on Jimmy's thoughts. Mr Eton was giving the family one more week
before they were out on the street. Jimmy hadn't been able to find a way to make the rent.
They'd already sold their valuables just to put food on the table and pay the other bills.
They'd even sold their precious wedding bands. There wasn't anything left!

4 - . - _ _——
°< ey Ea > "hes Sa) eel . ty ”

vt

al = Unemployed men queued outside a depression soup kitchen opened in Chicago by
me ie the gangster Al Capone, 1931
ae eT Sa = a eh eae

bls

176
‘T cant keep doing this, Ella,” Jimmy said, his voice breaking. “I can't stand watching you
struggle like this. I promised you a better life than this. I promised Ruby.”

Ella put down the mending she was working on and came over to him. She took his hand.
“Jimmy, I know you're trying. We'll get through this. We have each other And Ruby, she
needs you to stay strong. I need you to stay strong.”

But Jimmy wasnt sure how much longer he could stay strong. He had no job, no prospects,

and his uncle had left town to return to the south, even though there weren't any jobs down
there, eithen It felt like a long, dark tunnel, with no light at the end.

A week later Jimmy found himself at a nearby breadline, his shoulders hunched as he waited
in line. He hadn't told Ella. He didn't want her to see him like this, but he knew he had no
choice. His hands were shaking.

As he stood there, he noticed other men around him-some he recognized, others he didn't.
Some had suits that were now torn and dirty, and some wore coats that had seen better
days. They all had the same haunted look in their eyes. The world had changed. Dreams of
prosperity and security had faded, and now they were just trying to get through another
day.

Jimmy stepped forward to the window, where a kind woman handed him a small bag of
groceries and a single sack of bread. ‘Here you go, son, she said with a small smile. “Take
care of yourself."

“Thank you,” Jimmy murmured, barely able to look at her

When he got home, Ella didn't say a word. She just took the groceries from him and placed
them on the table. She didn't need to ask how things had gone. They both knew.

A week later the little family was out on the streets and ended up in the shantytown that
had sprung up along the Great Lawn of Central Park. A roughly painted sign was tacked up
on one of the shelters with the word “Hooverville” across it.

Hoovervilles were mockingly named after President Hooven who was blamed for the
Depression’s misery. These makeshift shantytowns sprung up in parks and empty lots all over
the country. The homes in these poor gatherings of people were small, crumbling shelters
made from anything people could find—wooden planks, corrugated metal, and tarpapen with
leaks in the roofs that made everything damp and cold. Most of them had no source of
running waten and toilets were usually just a hole dug into the ground to squat oven

People used Hoover's name in other derogatory (negative) ways too. ‘Hoover blankets
referred to newspapers that the poor used for warmth, while "Hoover wagons’ were old
cars pulled by horses because the owners couldn't afford gas. Empty pockets pulled inside
out were called Hoover flags.

177
~ | AHooverville in Central Park, New York City,
~~ during the Great Depression

a

Jimmy and Ella's new "home" was a shack that barely kept out the cold. The walls were thin,
and the floor was dirt. The few belongings they had were crammed into one small area, and
the air smelled of mildew and wet wood. But at least it was a roof over their heads.

Life in the Hooverville was tough. The makeshift community relied on soup kitchens and
charities, and children like Ruby played barely clothed and barefoot among the rickety
structures.

Despite the harsh conditions, Hoovervilles had a sense of community. People shared what
little they had and looked out for one anothen Many Hooverville residents relied on soup
kitchens and bread lines for their meals, and some even grew vegetables in small gardens.
The residents, including men, women, and children, often had to resort to begging or
scavenging to survive.

People living there showed incredible strength and support for each othen Even though they
faced tough challenges, they kept helping one another through the hard times.

Even families who weren't struck completely down like Jimmy and Ella had to be resourceful
during this time. They cut back on spending, reused everything, and tried to be as self-
sufficient as possible.

Clothing was mended and patched, and families often traded outgrown items with neighbors.
With the cold weathen homes were often left unheated, and buying new furniture or
appliances was put off until better times. Many women worked outside the home, took in
boarders, did laundry for trade or cash, or sewed for neighbors in exchange for whatever
they could offer in return. Extended families and long-lost cousins often came together to

178
help each othen sharing extra food, offering spare rooms, lending money, or providing repair

Bac

Families used to gather round to listen to the radio
for entertainment.

fie
o a a ae AN
tdi, a
. manag a

| COAST TO COAST

Thrilli &
lat fee Mi, ly p ru

_ the Avenging
Gang Smasher

Twice-a-Week

CONSULT YOUR LOCAL NEWSPAPER, OR BETTER

CALL YOUR FAVORITE LOCAL STATION, FOR
THE SCHEDULE OF THIS SUPER-THRILLER. IF IT
1S NOT SCHEDULED IN YOUR LOCALITY, ASK
YOUR FAVORITE LOCAL STATION TO HAVE THE
BLUE BEETLE ON THE AIR.

| i i No bathtub, no problem!

work when needed.

Families found creative and
inexpensive ways to entertain
themselves like playing charades
or cards and telling stories. It
was also the golden age of the
radio. Everyone came together
to listen to the news and find a
brief escape in sports and
entertainment programs,
including popular radio dramas.

When it came to making meals,
people got really creative. They
relied on inexpensive foods like

soups, beans, and noodles to stretch their meals. They
bought the cheapest cuts of meat, sometimes even
horse meat, and turned leftover Sunday roasts into
sandwiches or soups for the week. Meat was cut into
smaller portions and stale breadcrumbs added to
make it seem like a little more. Dead animals on the
side of the road ended up in the stewpot. Children
gathered wild dandelion greens for salads and soups
were made from whatever you had on hand.

People in the Depression figured out all sorts of ways
to make nourishing, cheap food for their families. You
can make some, too!