A GREAT DEPRESSION MENU WEEK 8 DAY 4
The main dish:

Hoover Stew

Ingredients:

¢ 12 0z package of macaroni or a similar pasta

¢ 1-2 packages of kielbasa (or similar) sausage or a pack of hot dogs
¢ 1 onion

¢ 2-cans of stewed or crushed tomatoes (around 15 oz)

¢ can of pinto beans (or any other kind of bean)
Optional: Add any other items you want to throw in, like: _h |
¢ Additional vegetables and/or greens ez,
¢ Canned corn

¢ Garlic

¢ Spices or Italian herbs
¢ Salt and pepper

¢ Maybe a bit of Parmesan fo sprinkle on top

Note: The point of this stew is to use whatever you have a vend combining a meat, pasta,
and vegetable(s). You can get totally creative as long as the flavors work togethen

Instructions:

Cook the macaroni or pasta according to package directions. Rinse and drain it. Then return
it to the pot. Cut up the sausage or hot dogs. Add them to the pot. Add the rest of the
ingredients. You don't need to drain the canned ingredients. Add any seasonings and additional
ingredients you d like to use.

Stir until everything is hot, then serve!

180
The side dish:

Dandelion Salad

Ingredients:

¢ Young dandelion greens harvested from a place that is not sprayed with chemicals,
washed and chopped or torn into pieces

¢ Fresh lemon juice (about 1/3 of a cup)

© Olive oil
¢ Salt
¢ Pepper

Directions: Collect dandelion greens. Make sure you collect them from an area free of
pesticides or other chemicals. Pick out any dead or damaged leaves and cut the bitter white
stems off: Soak them briefly in a bowl of water and rinse several times until they are clean.
Empty all the water out of the bowl. Dry the dandelion greens and put them back in the
bowl. Drizzle the lemon juice over the top. Drizzle some olive oil over the top as well - just
enough to wet the greens nicely, but not to make them too soggy. Sprinkle a bit of salt and
pepper over the salad fo your liking. A few shakes or so of each should do it. Mix well and
enjoy!

Options: You can add additional ingredients to this salad to make it a bit heartier

Some ideas are:

¢ Eggs
e Nuts
¢ Scallions

¢ Bacon

The dessert:

Mock Apple Pie

Ingredients:

Filling:

¢ 2cups of water

¢ 2/3 cup of sugar

¢ 2 tsp. cream of tartar

e 1 sleeve of Ritz crackers (about 30 crackers)

¢ refrigerated pie crust

¢ 11/2 Tbsp. lemon juice

¢ Several sprinkles of cinnamon (about 2 tsp.)
Topping:

¢ cup crushed Ritz crackers

¢ 2/3 cup brown sugar

¢ 1/2 tsp. cinnamon

¢ 1/3 cup softened unsalted butter

Optional: whipped cream or Cool Whip
as garnish

Instructions:

Before you start this recipe, make sure your butter has been warmed up to room
temperature and is somewhat soft. It should be softened enough so that you can easily
spread it across bread. If your house is cold, you may want to soften the butter in the
microwave. Just be careful not to melt it! Put it in a microwave safe bowl and heat it with a
cover for around 15-20 seconds. Another option for softening butter is to fill a heat-safe
glass jar with hot water then drain the water and place the glass upside down on the butter

for 5-10 minutes. Check it. If it's not soft yet, continue microwaving for an additional 15-
20 seconds or so. Do this until the butter is soft but not melting. If a little bit melts, it’s not

182
the end of the world. Just use it anyway.
Heat your oven to 400 F

Filling: Mix water sugan and cream of tartar in a saucepan. Bring these ingredients to a boil
and then add the crackers. The crackers in the filling are the “mock” apples. Simmer for
about 5 minutes. The crackers will get mushy and break down a bit. They will look like the
texture of chunky applesauce. Stir as necessary to keep it from sticking to the bottom.

Put the pie crust into a pie pan greased with butter or lined with parchment paper and add
the filling on top. Pour the lemon juice evenly across the top and sprinkle with cinnamon. You
don't want too much cinnamon - just enough to add a bit of flavor You can add more or less,
depending on what you like.

Topping: Mix all the topping ingredients together in a bowl. Place the topping evenly over the
pie. Bake for 10 minutes at 400 degrees. Then, cover the edges of the pie with foil (so the
crust doesn't get too dark). Bake an additional 20 minutes or until the filling is set. You'll
know it’s done when it doesn't jiggle too much.

Let the pie cool down and then enjoy a slice with whipped cream or Cool Whip on top.

183