Helen and John Johnston in a Black Blizzard WEEK 9 DAY 2

The wind had picked up early that morning, howling across the land whipping up dust devils
and sweeping dirt from the fields. Helen stood at the window, looking out over the barren
stretch of land that had once been her husband's pride-their farm in the heart of
Oklahoma. Now, it was just dust. Dust in the fields, dust in the ain and dust creeping into
every comer of their home. She wiped the window clean for a moment, but it wasn't enough
to see past the thick cloud forming on the horizon. Lunch was ready on the table -
sandwiches and glasses of milk. Helen expected that John would be in soon to eat a hasty
lunch before he went back to work trying to eke a living out of the parched land.

“Momma, what's that?” Georgie asked, his small voice edged with worry as he stood by her
side, squinting out into the distance. “Is it a storm coming?"

Helen didnt answer right away. She knew what it was, but she couldn't bring herself to say it
aloud. The door suddenly slammed open, and John stood, limned by the light of the sun at his
back. “Got a duster blowing in. I'm going to put the tractor away. He grabbed one of the
kitchen towels and quickly wetted it in the sink. Then he tied it over his nose and mouth.

192
Greek and Latin roots: Limn comes from the Latin word /uminare meaning to illuminate.
Luminare comes from a simpler Latin word lumen which means light. In the sentence above,
the light from the sun was illuminating John from behind.

Other words that use this root are:

Luminous - Giving off light; glowing

Luminary - A person who is inspiring or well-known in a field (as in “a shining light” in their
profession)

Lumen - A unit of light measurement

Luminescent - Emitting light, especially without heat

Georgie pointed and laughed, “Daddy looks like a bank robber!"
John winked at the boy and lifted his hand in the shape of a gun. ‘Pow! Gottcha!” With that

he turned and hurried out of the house after securing the door behind him.
"Georgie, you keep Edward entertained. I'll close up the house. °

Georgie nodded, cheerful as even as he bounced off to check on his baby brother Helen
quickly grabbed the wet cloths she always kept handy, draping them over the windows, trying
to seal the dust out as best as she could. But she knew it wasn't enough. It always had a
way of creeping in, no matter what they did.

John hadnt even reached the tractor when he saw it: a monstrous, dark cloud rolling in. He'd
seen plenty of dust storms before, but this was like something from a nightmare. The whole
horizon from end to end was filled with a black and boiling cloud that was swallowing the
entire sky. It hit within seconds and a sudden darkness descended over everything. John
could barely see a few feet in front of him. The nearby fence wires started to glow a dim
blue with static electricity, and the chickens, scared and confused, rushed into the
henhouse, thinking it was night.

John didn't have time to get back to the house or to deal with the tracton He ducked into
the henhouse with the chickens and latched the door shut. Then he waited it out in the dark,
trying to breathe.

This wasnt just a storm; it was a black blizzard. The name seemed to capture the swirling
darkness perfectly. This was a storm that could blind you in seconds and disorient you so
completely that you might wander off and never find your way back before suffocating.

Inside the house, Helen held a damp flour sack over the baby’s face while Georgie held a wet
tea towel over his face the way they had practiced several times before. He was wiggling
around and impatient. It was hard for such an active little boy to sit and wait with his face
covered. Edward was fussing and fighting the flour sack.

193
The black cloud, thick and swirling, loomed closen swallowing up the sky. This wasn't just a
dust storm-it was like a tidal wave of dirt, pushing its way through the world, sweeping
everything in its path. The wind screamed louder and louden drowning out everything else.

‘T cant see anything!’ Georgie whined; his voice muffled behind the towel. “It's so wet and
dark! I don't want to keep this over my face.”

Helen pulled him closen wrapping her arms tightly around both boys, hating that she had to
cover them up. Despite her efforts, she knew there was no escaping the fine powder that
filled the ain as if gray flour particles had been suspended throughout every room. “Hush,
Georgie. She didn't have the patience to deal with this right now. Her voice was a bit
sharper than she would have liked it to be under normal circumstances. Georgie kicked and
squirmed and peeked out from under his towel.

“Georgie, you put that back over your face right this instant.” Helen admonished.

Georgie scowled and kicked his feet some more. Edward had finally stopped fighting the flour
sack. Helen sighed in relief She felt so mean, holding it over him, as he was too little to
understand why.

Her thoughts strayed to John, hoping, praying, that he was safe in the barn. She knew that
people had been caught outside during storms like this, their lungs filled with dust, choking as

194
the storm robbed them of ain It was the kind of storm that could turn deadly if you weren't
careful.

Helen held Georgie’s hand tightly despite his protests and looked down at the little covered
lump that was Edward. He had fallen asleep in her lap, his breathing raspy and laboring.

By the time the storm passed, the air inside the house was choked with dust. It had
infiltrated every crack, no matter how tightly Helen had tried to seal things up. Outside, the
world had been completely transformed. Dust piled into massive dunes, half-burying the
tractor and settling around the buildings like dirty snowdrifts. Helen had to shovel dust away
from the doorstep just to get it open. She burst into tears when she saw that Clarence,
their beloved horse, lay dead across the driveway having suffocated. The red paint on the
tractor parked nearby was nearly scoured away.

John stumbled into the house coughing and hacking. He looked at the lunch set out on the
table an hour ago. Glasses of now warm milk had gray scum on the top and the sandwiches
were gritty with dirt. In all the commotion, Helen had forgotten to cover everything. She'd
have to see if any of it could be salvaged as food was too precious to waste. It was going to
take the rest of the day to get everything cleaned up. Every surface was going to have to
be washed. Perhaps the bed coverings could wait for another day, even if it meant climbing in
under dirty blankets.

That night John sat sprawled in his favorite chain with Helen, exhausted, sitting nearby. The

FeSO eas ae 5 Ali BEY A> = Se Se TMNT iS!

195
boys were in bed. Helen was worried about Edward. His lungs were delicate, and his sleep
was punctuated by weak coughs. Helen worried it could be the black lung.

John’s fist pounded the arm of his chair: ‘I've had enough of this. We're going to pack
everything up in the truck and move to California. I heard from the Cavalieris in Sonora that
there may be an opening at the railyard there. Joseph is the foreman now, so I'm sure he
can hold it for me, and if not, there's always picking to be done in the fields. At least it's
something so that we dont starve. This storm has ruined the wheat seedlings. We don't
have enough to try again, even if there were rain to water it.”

Helen interrupted, "We could always go back to New York and stay with Lucy and Josef for
a while. They are quite comfortable, and I'm sure...”

John shook his head. “Absolutely not. I will not take charity from them. Not for a second!
You know how Uosef’s family is tied up with Paulo. Where do you think they got all the money
to live in that fancy house?"

Helen looked at the floor She knew it was true. Lucy lived a fairly glamorous life, and her
children were completely spoiled. Her 11-year-old son Alexander was given everything he
asked for and probably more. No one asked how they got where they were, but everyone
knew Paulo was behind it. And everyone knew Paulo was associated with the mob.

In the 1930s, the Mob in New York was made up of powerful crime groups, mainly the Italian
Mafia. These gangs were involved in many illegal activities like smuggling alcohol (during
Prohibition), extorting money from businesses for “protection,” running illegal gambling, and
lending money at high-interest rates. They used violence and threats to get what they
wanted and controlled many areas of life in the city, including labor unions and businesses.

Helen didnt remind John that Lucy had sent them a tidy sum of money last month that was
used to buy groceries and new clothes for the boys. It didnt seem like a good time to bring
that up now.

“We could ask Uncle Robert...” Helen began, but John interrupted instantly.

“No. He's lost everything in the stock market. He already gave us this farm and wasted all
that money on us, for what? This?” His arms gestured to their home that was still filthy with
dust despite working all through the evening to try and clean it up. ‘No, it's up fo us and us
alone to fix this.”

So, it was decided. They'd be starting all over again, but this time it would be even further
west.

The following month John and Helen packed everything they could in their truck and headed
toward California. Helen felt a mixture of despair and hope.

196
Oklahoma Dust Bowl refugees =