WHEN DOLLARS LOST THEIR SHINE: THE DAY

AMERICA LEFT GOLD BEHIND WEEK 9 DAY 4

FDR wasn't finished, though. Back in those days every dollar was backed by a specific
amount of gold. That meant you could walk into a bank and exchange your paper money for
gold if you so desired. It made a paper dollar worth something since its value was based on
something real. This made people feel secure about their money.

During the
Depression,
people didn't
just hoard
their paper
money-they
also exchanged
their dollars for
gold, keeping or

hiding it out of fear that the economy might collapse. This hoarding made the economic
situation even worse, as it limited the amount of money circulating.

FDR was frustrated. People were returning their paper dollars to the banks, but they were
still hanging on to their gold. FDR needed a lot of money to start up programs he had in mind
to help Americans across the country. With people hanging onto gold, there wasn't enough
money in circulation to use for government projects. The government could only print enough
money to match the amount of gold in its vaults. There was no way to get ‘more’ money.

FDR took a bold step. He took the country off the gold standard. In 1933, he issued an
executive (presidential) order that required Americans to turn in their gold coins, gold bullion,
and gold certificates to the Federal Reserve in exchange for paper money. This move was
meant to stop people from hoarding gold and to give the government more control over the
money supply. Now the government would be able to print more money without it being limited
by the amount of gold it had in its vaults.

It was now a crime fo have any monetary gold! If you had gold coins and someone found out
about it, you could go to prison for 10 years or have to pay a $10,000 fine, or both!
People were only allowed to own small amounts of gold like jewelry.

President Gerald Ford signed a law in 1974 that allowed Americans to own gold again.
The money system FDR moved the country to is called a fiat currency.

Greek and Latin roots: Fiatis a Latin word that means ‘let it be done. "A fiat is an order or
command issued by an authority.

In a fiat currency, money gets its value because the government says it has value, not
because it's actually backed by a physical item like gold or silver The government decides how
much money to print, where it goes, and how to keep its value steady. It makes sure there's
enough money for people to use, but (hopefully) not so much that it loses its worth. The
system only works because people trust the government to manage the money responsibly.

The potential problem with a fiat currency is that if people lose faith in the government or
economy, the money's value can drop and even become worthless.

Another potential problem is that a fiat currency allows the government to print as much
money as it wants. While this can possibly help in emergencies, like during a depression such
as the one in the 1930s, printing too much money can lead to inflation. Inflation happens
when there is too much money in circulation or the demand for items is higher than the
supply (what is available to buy). These two things can make the value of money go down, so
that it takes more money to buy the same things, which causes prices to go up.

In extreme cases, if a government prints way too much money, it can cause hyperinflation.
This happened in Germany in the 1920s. Papiermarks (German dollars) were so worthless

205
that it was cheaper to burn money than to buy firewood.

Even though the U.S. stopped using the gold standard for people at home, it still used gold to
back the dollar for international trade. This meant that other countries could trade their
U.S. dollars for gold if they wanted to do so. It was only people at home who could not.

President Nixon took the final step in 1971 of converting the U.S. dollar into a fiat currency.
He made it so that foreign governments could no longer exchange U.S. dollars for gold,
severing (cutting) the last tie between the dollar and gold.

Now that the government seized all the gold and controlled the nation’s supply, it could say
gold was worth whatever it wanted! FDR's administration began setting the price of gold
daily as part of its effort to manage the economy. Henry Morgenthau Jr, the Secretary of
the Treasury at the time, wrote this in his diary of how FDR made the decision on one of the
days to raise it 2] cents:

"T believe it was on Friday that we raised the price 21¢, and the President said, “It is a lucky
number because it is three times seven.” If anybody ever knew how we really set the gold
price through a combination of lucky numbers, etc., I think that they really would be
frightened.”

w) *s That's crazy!! They were raising the gold price based on lucky numbers and

y
¢

a) ( things like that?? Wow! I don’t think that's a very good way to do things.

\ >)
C
Vv, wa"

, In 1934, the daily raising of the gold price stopped. With the passage of the Gold
Reserve Act, the government officially set the price of gold at $35 per ounce,
$14.33 more than what it was worth when the country was on the gold standard.

206
Once they did this, the value of the U.S. dollar immediately went down. The dollar was now
worth about 40% less in terms of gold. For example, what used to cost $1.00 now was
$1.40. Devaluing the dollar made it easier for the government to pay off debts because
debts were in “cheaper” dollars. Let's say the government borrowed $10,000 dollars from
a bank. Now with the dollar worth less, it was like they only had to pay back $6,000!

Lowering the value of the dollar also made things from America cheaper for other countries
to buy. FDR also thought that lowering the value of the dollar would make it so other
countries might buy more American stuff now that if cost less.

People who had been forced to turn in their gold to the government at $20.67 per ounce
felt cheated when the government later revalued it at $35.

People who had money saved in the banks were also angry, because now their savings were
worth less. It might be nice for the government to pay back a $10,000 dollar loan for what
was now really like $6,000, but it was not nice for someone who had saved up $10,000
for their retirement to have their money now be worth only $6,000.