Agricultural
Adjustment Act (AAA) will pay farmers to reduce crop production, which should help raise
crop prices. I see it’s also your goal to address the plight of the elderly and the poor So
many have no savings to fall back on. Can you imagine the dear old grandparents who are
starving and scraping by right now? The Social Security Act will provide pensions for the
elderly and unemployment insurance for those out of work.”

FDR stood and then his eyes were drawn to the crumbs on the floor “You rascal," he joked
while batting Henry on the shoulder “Why don't you start with cleaning up the floon and then
we ll get to work cleaning up this mess Hoover left us. °

During FDR’s presidency, a lot of legislation was passed with the goal of helping families
across the nation in what was called the New Deal. While many people across the nation
were helped by the programs that were created, some people say that these programs
gave too much power to the federal government.

209
Let's take a look at a few of them:

AGRICULTURAL ADJUSTMENT ACT (AAA)
Puppy Wuppy explains:

Once upon a time, Old McDonald owned a big farm where he grew lots of corn, wheat, and
other crops. There was a problem, though! Old McDonald wasn't the only one growing crops.
There were lots of other farmers, and they were growing the same things as Old McDonald!
This is called overproduction.

The market was flooded with all these crops which made the prices drop. The stores had so
much corn (and other crops) that some of it was going to waste. There was just too much
to sell. To get rid of it, they sold it for hardly any money. Food became so cheap that Old
McDonald and the other farmers didn't make much profit, if any. It was hard for them to

make a living!

To help, the government created a program called the Agricultural Adjustment Act, or AAA
for short. The government paid many farmers to not plant crops on part of their land. This
made it so there were fewer crops to sell. The prices for food went up, and the farmers
were paid a lot more for their produce.

The end.
Beowulf adds:
Well, that's not all there is to that story!

The government also ruined food so that it couldn't
be consumed. They soaked oranges in kerosene (a
type of fuel) to make them inedible. They ordered
farmers to plow fully grown crops back into the
dirt and burned piles of corn. They bought livestock
from the farmers like pigs and cows, shot them,
and then buried them in big pits. In Nebraska alone,

470,000 cows and 438,000 pigs were
purchased by the government to be slaughtered.

Some farmers were extremely upset at the new
act. They had worked hard to raise their animals
and grow their crops, and didn’t like to see them go
to waste, especially during a time when many in the country were going hungry! Many
farmers didn’t really have any choice, though. The AAA payments became the main source
of income for many working in agriculture and saved them from bankruptcy and losing all
they owned.

210
Definition: Bankruptcy is a legal process that happens when a person, business, or
organization cant pay back the money they owe. It's like saying, “I don't have enough money to
pay my bills or debts.” When someone declares bankruptcy, the court helps figure out how to
deal with the debts. Sometimes this means selling the things they own to pay back part of what
they owe. Many people have lost things like their houses and farms from going bankrupt.

Although the original AAA had to be changed due to some issues where it was found to be
unconstitutional, parts of it became permanent law. The government still pays farmers to not
plant certain things to keep food prices stable. These payments are called subsidies, and in
2024 farmers received more than $2.14 billion dollars in payments. It’s a topic that is still
controversial.