1933 THE EMERGENCY
BANKING ACT

One of the first things FDR had to deal
with when he became president was a
series of bank runs that was scaring
families across the country.

Definition: A bank run happens when a large number of people rush to take their money out
of the bank all at once because they're afraid the bank is going to fail or lose their money.

Back in the 1930s during the Great Depression, banks weren't as well protected as they
are today. If too many people pulled out their money at the same time, the bank could
actually run out of cash and go out of business.

So, when people got scared, they’d line up outside the bank, trying to get their money out
before it was too late.

Many people withdrew all their money and started hoarding it, believing it was safer hidden in
a tin, in a drawen or buried in the backyard than in a bank where it could vanish completely,
leaving them penniless. Though their fear was understandable, this behavior was not good
for the economy, and something had to be done - fast!

In his inauguration speech (when he officially became president), FDR famously said, "We
have nothing to fear but fear itself...”

At the time, most newspapers were biased toward Republicans and critical of FDR, so he
didn't want to rely on them to communicate with the public. Instead, he turned to the radio
and started his famous Fireside Chats. People across the country gathered around their

203
radios to hear his calm, reassuring voice. In the first of these chats, he explained that there
would be a four-day national bank holiday, meaning all the banks would temporarily close.
During this time, the government would examine each bank and decide which ones could be
saved and which ones needed to be shut down. FDR promised that once the banks reopened,
the government would provide an unlimited supply of money to make sure that deposits were
100% insured. This meant that if a bank failed, the government would step in and pay you
back, making it so you didn’t lose a single cent of your money.

Later in June of that yean the 1933 Banking Act was enacted that insured deposits up to
$2,500. That was eventually increased, and today the government (through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation known as the FDIC) insures deposits up to $250,000.

FDR said in his chat, “I can assure you that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened
bank than under the mattress. °

People trusted FDR and suddenly they felt safe again. Within two weeks people returned
more than half of the cash they had been hoarding and now the long lines at the bank were
to deposit money, not take it out!

The stock market was happy, too. Because people were feeling more confident, some began
investing in stocks again. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (a way to measure how the
stock market is doing) went up by 8.26 points, which was a 15.34% increase. This was the
biggest one-day percentage increase even and even as of 2024, it still holds that record!

It’s normal for the stock market to move up or down by 1% a day.