THE WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION (WPA)

The WPA also put unemployed people to work on a variety of projects during the Depression
like the construction of roads and bridges. Besides building jobs, the WPA employed out-of -
work artists, musicians, and young people between the ages of 16 and 25 in a separate
youth division. Even though workers were paid much less than the normal wages of the time,
the program provided some relief for many out of a job.

Artists painted public murals, sculptors created statues, and writers documented local
histories, folklore, and slave narratives. Musicians and actors performed plays and concerts,
making the arts accessible to communities that had never experienced them before. Roads,
bridges, schools, parks, zoos, and playgrounds were built across the country. The program
even had workers build things like ice-skating rinks and ski jumps!

Another division of the WPA had a mission as daring as it was inspiring: delivering library
books to children and families in rural and remote areas, like the rugged Appalachian
Mountains. Known as ‘book ladies” or “packsaddle librarians,’ these women would saddle up
horses and navigate rough and dangerous terrain, their bags overflowing with books.

Grace Caudill Lucas was one of those brave riders. For three days each week, she rented a
handsome but sturdy black horse named Bill for 50 cents a day. As she prepared for
another journey into the mountains during a crisp fall morning, one of the townsfolk called
out with encouragement.

“OFF again, Grace?" old Donald asked from his rocking chair on the porch of his home
alongside the stables.

“OFF again,” Grace replied with a determined smile. “There are little ones waiting for their
books and stories, and I won't let them down.” She tightened Bill's reins and patted his shiny
main fondly.

“Whelp, be careful now!” Donald called while tapping his pipe on the arm of the chain

“You bet!” Grace called out. Donald almost seemed older than the hills, but he was a friendly
fellow. If she didnt get going, he'd keep her chatting for another hour Grace clicked to Billy,
and he took of f at a nice clip.

212