Okies in a Mass Migration

During the Dust Bowl, crop after crop failed. Failed crops sent food prices soaring, leaving
many families struggling to afford to eat. The nation's economy, already reeling from the
stock market crash, spiraled down even further With little or no rain, many farmers like
John were out of work, adding to the millions of people across the country without a job.

California had many large farms that provided fruits and vegetables for the entire nation, so
in the worst-hit areas of the Dust Bowl, families packed up what little they could carry and
headed west, hoping to find a job. Entire towns were abandoned as people fled with vehicles
packed to the brim with all the belongings they could carry. Mattresses were strapped to the
roof, while boxes, bags, and furniture hung from every window. Inside, children and beloved
pets were squeezed between the remaining spaces, making the journey with their families.
Sometimes scraggly chickens made the journey as well, tied in cages, and hanging from the
sides.

Californians gave these migrants the name Okies, since many of them first arrived from
Oklahoma- one of the states hit hardest by the drought and dust. Pretty soon the name
was given to anyone fleeing the Dust Bowl even if they were from a different state.

Jobs were already hard to come by, and many Californians were struggling to find work.

197

When thousands of Okies from the Great Plains arrived, eager to find employment and
willing to take low-paying jobs, they increased the already fierce competition for work. This
did not make Californians happy. They sat around dinner tables muttering, “Those Okies are
taking our jobs.”

Many “Okies” ended up living in makeshift shelters on the outskirts of the farms where they
worked. These shantytowns, located near irrigation ditches, lacked basic amenities like indoor
plumbing, just like Hoovervilles across the country. Outhouses, often placed near water
sources, created serious health risks. The harsh conditions in these camps, along with poor
sanitation and limited access to medical care, led to widespread disease among the migrant
workers and their families.

The ragtag migrant families faced all sorts of discrimination as they were seen as poon dirty,
and uneducated. People would give them ugly looks and talk badly about them. Parents
admonished their children, “Wash your face! You look like an Okie!” Many Californians blamed
the Okies for problems like overcrowding and the strain on California's healthcare, schools,
and housing. Ironically, many of these families had once owned their own farms and lived
comfortably. The Dust Bowl had stripped them of their livelihoods and forced them into a life
that was a stark contrast to what they had before. It didn't help that they were looked
down on and mistreated by their new neighbors.

In the fall of 1932, the country was in crisis. The Great Depression had worsened, leaving
millions of Americans struggling. Unemployment was skyrocketing, businesses were collapsing,
and banks were shutting down. Many people were hungry, homeless, or just finding life a lot
harder than it used to be in the past. People were desperate for change. In this time of
fear and uncertainty, the nation looked toward the upcoming presidential election for hope,
and a future that didn't include Herbert Hoover

Hoover's presidency was drowning in the country’s problems. It wasn't long before many
blamed him for everything that was going wrong, and if not that, then they blamed him for

198
< - 4
ae
<a a .

not fixing the economy.

ae

Hoover believed the government should not provide direct aid to people, or the “dole” as
welfare was called back then, because he thought it would weaken the nation and cause
lasting harm. “If people get on the dole, they will lose the will to work. When people lose the
will fo work, the whole country will suffen” Hoover said one evening to one of his associates
while pacing around the room.

Hoover was also afraid to talk about the problems with the economy, thinking it would cause
people to panic more. When he did give speeches, he didnt have a knack for public speaking
and came across as cold and uncaring. The Democrats attacked Hoover as the cause of the
Great Depression and blamed him for not caring enough about the suffering of millions.

199
Into this disillusionment stepped Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR), a very distant cousin to
Theodore Roosevelt. He was a Democrat who came from a wealthy family, and he had a
clear message: 'T pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people. °

Greek and Latin roots: Disillusionment comes from several Latin words. Let's break it down:
dis - illusion - ment

Dis means lack of or not - Example: the word dishonest means “not honest’.

The French word illusion means deception.

Ment is a suffix (word ending) that turns something into a noun.

The definition of disillusionment is when you feel disappointed after discovering something is
not as good as you thought it was. You are no longer deceived about the truth of something.
People felt this way about Hoover They thought he was going to be a great president, but
many later believed he was a flop (a total failure).

FDR promised to create jobs, provide relief to the unemployed, and fix the banking system.
His optimism and energy were contagious, and he projected a sense of hope for which many
Americans were yearning. Here was a man who promised to DO something and get the
country out of its current mess. That seemed preferable to Hoover sitting by and trusting
things would work out somehow.

The Election of 1932 was on everyone's
mind as families across the nation
debated the choice for president while at
work and around the kitchen table with

loved ones: Hoover or FDR?

Christina Cavalieri walked along the bank
of Sullivan's Creek, taking the shortcut
to her son Frank's house. He and his new
wife Sally had invited her over this
Saturday evening for a dinner of
spaghetti. She smiled thinking of the
upcoming meal. Frank grew up learning
how to cook while helping at her
boardinghouse, which was just down the
road from his own little redwood-framed
cottage. She was thankful he decided to
settle so close. Besides getting to share
in some of Frank's good cooking,
Christina was hoping for some additional
fat grandbabies to dandle on her knee.

Sally waved from the little porch of the

200
house with a smile. That girl was good for her boy, Christina thought. The two had met at a
dance and been inseparable ever since. Christina liked Sally's friendly nature, and it didnt
hurt that she was pretty as a peach - with her golden curls framing lovely blue eyes. Kind of
like the painting of an angel you'd see in church.

Thinking of church, that was something she'd have to bring up today. Christina was a good
Catholic woman, but her boy hadn't been to church in a while and Sally had grown up a
Protestant. Well, there was nothing wrong with a bit of an interfering mother-in-law. She
chuckled to herself while pulling Sally into a hug.

Christina settled her ample form into a chair indoors while Sally went to the cupboard to get
napkins and finish setting the table. Sally wouldn't allow her mother-in-law to help for even a
moment. “Sit! Sit - ['ve got it all taken care of” She was beaming to have company over and
prove herself a competent housewife.

Christina smiled in approval. Yes, yes...this was a good one.

Once the three were in the kitchen, the talk immediately drifted to politics. Like everyone
else around town, the main thing on their minds was the election. The smell of simmering
spaghetti sauce drifted over from the stove as the three of them got right down to the
business of discussing Hoover vs. FDR.

Frank opened the window and drew the curtains back. Hopefully the weather was going to
cool down soon, but California was sometimes known for hanging onto the heat during the
fall. With the stove going, it was getting a bit hot. It wasn't long before the conversation
went that way as well.

"T just dont understand why you want that Roosevelt,’ Christina said, shaking her head and
giving her son a bit of a scowl. ‘I'm a good Republican. People have fo give things a chance to
iron themselves out. The last thing we need is the government poking its nose where it
doesn't belong. Look what's happened in Italy with all the socialists! You mark my words -
nothing but trouble is coming from that!”

Sally smiled at her mother-in-law’s thick Italian accent. It was a bit amusing to see her spar
with Frank. The two could get quite animated.

Frank gestured a bit wildly while plopping down into the nearest chain His voice was loud and
confident. ‘Hoover has had plenty of time fo fix things, but all he’s done is let the country
sink further into this mess. He's not doing a thing to help the working people. We're
fortunate enough, but look at John's family!” John was an old family friend from Colorado
now living in Oklahoma with his wife Helen.

Frank's hand hit the table in disgust. “It's disgraceful. The government isn't doing a thing for
them. If something doesn't change, he’s going fo lose his farm.’

20]
He ran his fingers through the dark hair curling over his ears. He'd been born and raised in
this country, but his family's early struggles still felt fresh in his mind. He had a soft heart
for people.

“And FDR isnt a socialist Ma." He said, leaning forward.

Christina was quick fo answen “Cosa ho cresciuto? (What did I raise?) He may as well be!
New Deal! Pfah! Roosevelt wants the government to take care of the people like children.
There wasn't anyone taking care of me when I came fo this country! It was hard work that
got us to where we are, not handouts. *

Christina was a proud woman. She would rather die than accept charity. She gave birth in a
railroad car without a doctor in sight and washed her baby’s diapers in a kettle over a fire.
She put up with a young husband who sometimes drank away his paycheck until he finally
grew into the decent man he was now. There was no government helping them and look
where they were now! Joe was the foremen of the railroad, and she ran a boardinghouse.
Despite the Depression, they were doing well, even if things were a little tight.

“T don't understand it, Ma,” Frank said, taking a sip of coffee. “You of all people know what
it's like to go hungry. All I see in Hoover is a man who refuses to act. Families are losing their
homes, jobs are disappearing, and what does Hoover do? He just sits in that big of fice,
making speeches that don't mean a thing.” He was pointing his finger as if Hoover was sitting
across the table from them and on the receiving end of his ire.

“T'm voting for Roosevelt,” Frank said suddenly, his voice firm. At least he's promising change.
Change is what we need, not more Hooverviles. °

Sally nodded and rested her fingers gently on Frank's arm. She agreed with him but wasn't
as into politics as these two. Right now, her mind was more on the fact that she may be
expecting. She didn't really care which president got into office, so long as the world was a
good and safe place for her future children.

The conversation eventually turned to lighter topics, but the weight of the election stil
lingered in the ain

On November 8, 1932, Election Day arrived, and people across the country went to the
polls. The lines were long, the mood tense, and the stakes higher than ever Frank was in a
good mood, especially after Sally shared her secret news. The whole town was hopping with
enthusiasm about the election.

Later that evening, the results started to come in as the radio crackled with news updates.
Roosevelt was leading in almost every state.

“Looks like Hoover's out!" Frank cried out jubilantly as he grabbed Sally and pulled her in for
akiss on the porch.

202
By the end of the night, Roosevelt had won
in a landslide. He had carried 42 states,
while Hoover only won 6.

A real picture of Frank and Sally

The next day, newspapers across the
country featured bold headlines:

"ROOSEVELT WINS: A NEW DEAL FOR
AMERICA!"

Many hearts swelled with hope at those
headlines. Franklin D. Roosevelt's victory
represented more than just a political
shift—it was a sign that change was
coming!

'
Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR) was president: March 1933 - April 12, 1945