DEFLATION KEEPS THE DEPRESSION GOING

The bank runs were finally oven and the stock market was toddling back into recovery. The
Great Depression didn't end, though. A lot of people were still out of work, with
unemployment at 25% in 1933, meaning | in 4 people didn't have a job. Many businesses
were still struggling because people didn't have enough money to buy things, and farmers
were hit hard by the Dust Bowl and losing their farms.

Prices for things were also falling because of something called deflation. Prices spiraled

down and down and down. a,

Sd: PN a Oh! Like a balloon losing all its air? | Py ny; 6. oe

( Yeah, sort of.
&

‘
Nal a, re
— \ ae that's good, though, right? I love it - a) o

prices go down! Then I can buy more stuff!

It might be good for you when prices go down because there is sale or something similan but
some economists (people who study money and how it works) say deflation itself is not good
for a country’s economy. Other economists disagree, but that's kind of complicated and
more than I want to get into right now, so let's just look at why deflation occurred during
the Depression instead of whether it was OK for it to happen or not.

Decreased Spending

People were out of jobs, so they didn't have much money to spend. People who had a job
were afraid to spend their money since the country was in a depression.

207
Businesses lowered their prices to encourage people to buy things.
Falling Wages

Because prices were lowen businesses made less money. They had to cut wages or lay of f
workers. Now even more people were out of jobs.

More Decreased Spending

People saw that prices were dropping. They started waiting to buy things hoping they would
get even cheaper This meant even less spending.

Money Was Worth More...

Now each dollar could buy more than it could before. It was like getting more value out of
their money because things cost less. I'm going to give you an example. Just understand in
this example that I'm not using what the real price of bread used to be in the past. I'm just
picking numbers that are easy to think about.

OK - Let's say at the beginning of the Depression, bread cost $2. After businesses cut
prices, bread cost $1. Now people could buy two loaves instead of just one. The purchasing
power of money increased. It was like money was worth more now!

Which Led to a Rising Debt Burden

When prices fall, the value of money increases, which is great for someone who is holding
onto money, but for people who owe money, this can be a problem.

Let's say someone owed $100. Because things were cheapen that $100 was a lot more
powerful than it used to be. Using our example of the cost of bread, before prices dropped,
a person could buy 50 loaves of bread with $100. Now they could buy 100 loaves of bread
with $100.

When people owed money, it's like they were being asked to pay back a loan that felt like a
bigger burden than the original amount. It made people feel like a $100 loan was really more
like a $200 loan, especially because their income didn't go up with the value of the dollan

Imagine you have a loan you need to repay, and your salary gets cut because your employer
isnt making as much money. Now, not only do you have less money to spend, but your loan
payments take a bigger chunk of your smaller paycheck. That's how deflation can create a
tough cycle for both individuals and the economy as a whole.

Og Py ~ I totally don't get what you were saying in that
™ Val 4) last section about “a rising debt burden’.

ee

208
That's OK. Don't worry about it. The most important thing I want you ~ ff C * |

to get from it is that people who owed money felt like it was an even C * \
bigger burden than before deflation. That's the main point. a \

| =
a Phew - OK. I was feeling kind of stupid there for a minute. ) Ne?

a Ae
\"e
V3 \" / You're just a puppy! You are definitely not stupid. Never feel bad
‘OE | for not understanding something. It may just mean you aren't ready
for it yet, haven't explored it more deeply, or it's not the kind of
thing your brain is wired for understanding. That's nothing to be

ashamed about!