Pediatric Imaging

                                        The Fundamentals
This page intentionally left blank
Pediatric Imaging

                                        The Fundamentals

                               Lane F. Donnelly, MD

                                                  Radiologist-in-Chief, Department of Radiology
                                                   Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center

                                                                Professor of Radiology and Pediatrics
                                                     University of Cincinnati College of Medicine

                                                                                                 Cincinnati, Ohio
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Suite 1800
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103-2899

PEDIATRIC IMAGING                                                            ISBN: 978-1-4160-5907-3
Copyright ! 2009, by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Permissions may be sought directly
from Elsevier's Rights Department: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44)
1865 853333; e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via
the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.

                                                             Notice

Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment, and drug therapy may become necessary or
appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures
featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered to verify the recommended
dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on his or her own experience and knowledge of the patient,
to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to
take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the publisher nor the
author assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or
related to any use of the material contained in this book.

                                                                                                                 The Publisher

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data (in PHL)           D685p  2009]
Donnelly, Lane F.
                                                                                    2008038937
   Pediatric imaging: the fundamentals/Lane F. Donnelly. - 1st ed.
      p. ; cm.

   Includes bibliographical references.
   ISBN 978-1-4160-5907-3
1. Pediatric diagnostic imaging. I. Title.
   [DNLM: 1. Diagnostic Imaging-methods. 2. Child. 3. Infant. WN 240
   RJ51. D5D66 2009
   618.92'00754-dc22

Senior Acquisitions Editor: Rebecca S. Gaertner
Developmental Editor: Elizabeth Hart
Publishing Services Manager: Tina K. Rebane
Designer: Steve Stave
Marketing Manager: Catalina Nolte

Printed in China.

Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
For my wife, Carolina V. Guimaraes, MD. You are everything to me.
This page intentionally left blank
Preface

     I know that as a resident, I retained more     about, and commonly made mistakes. The
useful information when I read short and basic      book is intended to serve as an excellent intro-
books over and over than when I read longer,        duction or review for a resident or medical stu-
more detailed texts once. The intention of this     dent who is about to begin a rotation in pediatric
book is to serve as a basic introductory text on    radiology or prepare for radiology oral boards.
pediatric imaging. The book is written in prose,    This book may also serve as a review for a
rather than as an outline, and is intended to       general radiologist who wishes to brush up on
be readable. The emphasis is on commonly            pediatric radiology. Pediatric residents or pedia-
encountered imaging scenarios and pediatric         tricians who want to learn more about pediatric
diseases. The topics included reflect questions     radiology may also benefit from reading this
that I am commonly asked by residents on the        book.
pediatric radiology service, important issues that
the rotating residents often seem not to know                                        Lane F. Donnelly, MD

                                                    vii
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments

     I would like to thank Marlena Tyre for help  and efforts. The case material in this book is
with proofreading; Judy Racadio, MD, for her      the result of the hard work of the faculty, tech-
help with medical editing and proofreading;       nologists, and trainees in the Department of
James Leach, MD, for his help with the advanced   Radiology at Cincinnati Children's Hospital
neuroimaging section; and Glenn Minnano for       Medical Center and the referring physicians
his help with the diagrams. The information       who care for these patients. I would like to
in this book is a summation of the material that  acknowledge their efforts, without which this
was taught to me by numerous radiologists,        book would not be possible.
and I would like to thank them for their time

                                                  ix
This page intentionally left blank
Contents                   Chapter 6

Chapter 1                  Genitourinary 125

Special Considerations in  Chapter 7
Pediatric Imaging 1
                           Musculoskeletal 156
Chapter 2
                           Chapter 8
Airway 8
                           Neuro 212
Chapter 3
                           Index 259
Chest 26

Chapter 4

Cardiac 62

Chapter 5

Gastrointestinal 86

                                                xi
This page intentionally left blank
