hilar lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion.                                                                          Chest · 49
Therefore, when lung consolidation is seen
with associated lymphadenopathy or effusion                         COMMON CHRONIC OR
in a child who is not acutely ill, there should                     RECURRENT PULMONARY
be a high suspicion for tuberculosis. Most of                       PROBLEMS IN SPECIAL
the cases of pulmonary tuberculosis that I have                     POPULATIONS
seen have demonstrated unilateral hilar lym-
phadenopathy (Fig. 3-31A, B). Such cases                            In children with certain underlying conditions,
should be considered tuberculosis until proven                      the clinical scenarios and differential diagnoses
otherwise.                                                          differ greatly from those seen in the general
                                                                    population. Commonly encountered scenarios
                                                                    include the evaluation of pneumonia in immu-
                                                                    nocompromised children, acute chest syndrome
                                                                    in children with sickle cell anemia, and pulmo-
                                                                    nary complications in children with cystic
                                                                    fibrosis.

 A                                                                  Pneumonia in Immunodeficient
                                                                    Children
 B
                                                                    Children can be immunocompromised for a
FIGURE 3-31. Tuberculosis in a 7-year-old boy. A and B, Frontal     variety of reasons, including cancer therapy,
and lateral radiographs of the chest demonstrate a left hilar mass  bone marrow transplantation, solid organ trans-
(arrows) consistent with unilateral lymphadenopathy. There is       plantation, primary immunodeficiency, and
also left upper lobe collapse. Note displaced major fissure on      AIDS. This is a population that continues to
lateral view (arrowheads).                                          increase. Acute pulmonary processes are a
                                                                    common cause of morbidity and mortality in
                                                                    these patients. As with immunocompetent chil-
                                                                    dren, radiography is the primary modality used
                                                                    to confirm or exclude pneumonia. However,
                                                                    because many of the chest radiographs obtained
                                                                    in these children are portable and because of the
                                                                    consequences of missing an infection, CT plays
                                                                    a greater role in evaluating for an acute pulmo-
                                                                    nary process when chest radiographs are non-
                                                                    contributory. I would guess that in many tertiary
                                                                    institutions the number of chest CTs obtained
                                                                    in immunocompromised children is greater
                                                                    than the number of those obtained in immuno-
                                                                    competent children.

                                                                         In immunocompetent children, the main
                                                                    question is whether a pulmonary process
                                                                    is viral or bacterial; in immunocompromised
                                                                    children, there are many more possible causes
                                                                    of acute pulmonary processes They include
                                                                    alveolar hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, drug
                                                                    reaction, idiopathic pneumonia, lymphoid inter-
                                                                    stitial pneumonitis, bronchiolitis obliterans,
                                                                    bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneu-
                                                                    monia, and chronic graft-versus-host disease.
                                                                    The CT findings for many of these entities are
                                                                    overlapping and nonspecific. A clinical question
                                                                    often posed is this: Is there evidence of fungal
                                                                    infection? The hallmark CT finding indicating
                                                                    fungal infection is the presence of nodules
50 · Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentals                              Acute Chest Syndrome in Sickle
 A                                                                    Cell Anemia

                                                                      Children with sickle cell anemia can develop
                                                                      acute chest syndrome, which is manifested
                                                                      by fever, chest pain, hypoxia, and pulmonary
                                                                      opacities on chest radiographs (Fig. 3-34).
                                                                      Acute chest syndrome is much more common
                                                                      in children than adults with sickle cell anemia.
                                                                      It occurs most commonly between 2 and 4
                                                                      years of age and is the leading cause of death
                                                                      (25% of deaths) and the second most common
                                                                      cause of hospitalization in those affected with
                                                                      sickle cell anemia. Although it is debated
                                                                      whether the cause of such episodes is more
                                                                      often related to infection or infarction, many
                                                                      believe the lung opacities are related to rib
                                                                      infarction, splinting, and subsequent areas

B

FIGURE 3-32. Fungal pneumonia in child after bone marrow

transplantation for aplastic anemia. A, CT shows poorly defined

nodules and associated ground-glass opacity. B, A CT taken

earlier shows clear lungs. Note the striking change since this

baseline study.                                                       A

(Figs. 3-32A, B, 3-33). They are commonly clus-

tered and may exhibit poorly defined margins,

cavitation, or a surrounding halo that has the

opacity of ground glass. However, many of

these findings are also nonspecific. In these

cases CT does aid in directing potential interven-

tions, such as bronchoscopy or percutaneous

lung biopsy, to high yield areas.                                     B

FIGURE 3-33. Histoplasmosis infection. CT shows multiple                        C
nodules bilaterally. There is a biopsy site on the left, anteriorly.
                                                                      FIGURE 3-34. Acute chest syndrome in a 6-year-old boy with
                                                                      sickle cell anemia. A, Chest radiograph obtained at admission
                                                                      shows low lung volumes and minimal focal opacity within the
                                                                      left lower lobe. B, Chest radiograph obtained 1 day later shows
                                                                      consolidation of a large portion of the left lung. C, Chest radio-
                                                                      graph obtained 2 days after A shows complete left lung
                                                                      opacification.
