                                                                                                        Genitourinary · 151

                                                                      Trauma may result in a testicular hematoma.
                                                                 On ultrasound, hematomas appear as avascular
                                                                 masses of abnormal echogenicity. Associated
                                                                 hematoceles are common.

FIGURE 6-41. Testicular germ cell neoplasm. Transverse ultra-    ACUTE PELVIC PAIN IN OLDER
sound shows focal, heterogeneous, hypoechogenic mass             GIRLS AND ADOLESCENTS
(arrows) in left testicle. Increased blood flow is shown on
color Doppler.                                                   Acute pelvic pain in older girls and adolescents
                                                                 is a commonly encountered problem that has
echogenicity may be seen between the superior                    many possible causes. Pain can be related to
pole of the testis and the epididymis. Enlargement               menstruation, multiple ovarian pathologies, or
of the testicular appendage to greater than 5 mm                 appendicitis. Ovarian causes of pain include
has been touted as the best indicator of torsion.                ovarian cysts, hemorrhagic cysts, ectopic preg-
Periappendiceal hyperemia and normal testicular                  nancy, ovarian torsion, endometriosis, pelvic
flow are supportive findings (Fig. 6-45A, B).                    inflammatory disease, or other masses such as
Torsion of the testicular appendage is a self-limit-             teratoma (Fig. 6-46A, B) or other neoplasms
ed entity and does not require surgical manage-                  (Fig. 6-47A, B). Ovarian dermoids (mature ter-
ment. The importance of making the diagnosis is                  atoma) can show fluid/fluid levels, fat, and cal-
to avoid unnecessary surgical exploration.                       cifications on imaging (see Fig. 6-46). Other
                                                                 ovarian neoplasms are usually large at the
FIGURE 6-42. Testicular microlithiasis. Longitudinal ultrasound  time of presentation (see Fig. 6-47), can have
of the left testicle shows multiple punctate areas of increased  a cystic or solid appearance, and typically do
echogenicity without posterior shadowing.                        not have differentiating features at imaging. In
                                                                 girls with right lower quadrant pain, appendici-
                                                                 tis is also a possibility. The high incidence
                                                                 and variety of pathologic processes that may
                                                                 involve the ovaries make ultrasound the pri-
                                                                 mary imaging modality for right lower quadrant
                                                                 pain in girls.

                                                                      Hemorrhagic cysts are a common cause of
                                                                 pelvic pain in adolescent girls. On ultrasound, the
                                                                 lesions appear as echogenic masses that often
                                                                 have enhanced through-transmission. Sometimes
                                                                 the masses can be quite large. Ovarian cysts can be
                                                                 discovered when CT is performed to evaluate for
                                                                 appendicitis (Fig. 6-48).

                                                                      Ovarian torsion, which is less common than
                                                                 hemorrhagic cysts, can appear as an enlarged
                                                                 and echogenic ovary secondary to edema.
                                                                 There can be prominent peripheral follicular
                                                                 cysts, which are highly suggestive of the diagno-
                                                                 sis (Figs. 6-49A, B, 6-50). However, the most
                                                                 commonly encountered positive finding is asym-
                                                                 metric ovarian volumes, with the larger ovary
                                                                 located on the side of pain. Doppler ultrasound
                                                                 demonstration of decreased or absent blood
                                                                 flow has not been shown to be accurate in diag-
                                                                 nosing or excluding ovarian torsion. Note that
                                                                 a hemorrhagic cyst compressing the ovarian
                                                                 parenchyma peripherally can have a similar
                                                                 appearance and at times cannot be differen-
                                                                 tiated from ovarian torsion.
A  RT  LT

B          FIGURE 6-43. Testicular torsion, two exam-
           ples. A, Transverse Doppler ultrasound show-
           ing both testes in a boy with left scrotal pain
           demonstrates absent flow and heterogeneous
           echo-texture of left testicle (arrows). Note
           normal echo-texture and present flow on
           right. B, Later findings of torsion in different
           patient. Transverse Doppler ultrasound show-
           ing both testes in boy with left scrotal pain
           demonstrates absent flow and heterogeneous
           echo-texture of left testicle. Note the flow
           detected (arrows) in the right testicle. There
           is a large amount of flow surrounding the left
           testicle, related to inflammatory reaction
           secondary to the necrosis.

A

                                                                                              FIGURE 6-44. Epidydimoorchitis in a boy
                                                                                                          with acute onset of right scrotal pain.
                                                                                                          A, Transverse color Doppler ultrasound
                                                                                                          shows asymmetric increased flow to the
                                                                                                          symptomatic right testis (arrows). There is a
                                                                                                          reactive hydrocele. B, Longitudinal color
                                                                                                          Doppler ultrasound shows enlarged epidydi-
B mis (arrows). There is increased flow to both
                                                                                                          the epidydimis and the testicle.
                                                                       Genitourinary · 153

                                         T
           E

A
                                                                    A

 B

FIGURE 6-45. Torsion of the testicular appendage. A, Longitudinal
view of the symptomatic side shows testicular appendage (arrows)
to be enlarged (>5 mm). The appendage sits between the testicle
(T) and the epididymis (E). B, Color Doppler ultrasound image
shows absence of flow to the testicular appendage (arrows).

                                                                    B

                                                                   FIGURE 6-46. Ovarian dermoid (mature teratoma). A, Radiograph
                                                                   shows cluster of well-developed teeth in the pelvis (arrows).
                                                                   B, Ultrasound demonstrates mass in left ovary (arrows) with
                                                                   fluid-fluid levels of various echogenicities. Note echogenic teeth
                                                                   (arrowheads).
                      M

A
                                                                    A

 B

FIGURE 6-47. Sertoli cell neoplasm of the ovary. A, CT shows
heterogeneous mass arising from right superior pelvis (M).
B, Surgical photograph shows large mass arising from right
ovary.

                                                                   B

                                                                  FIGURE 6-49. Ovarian torsion. A, Ultrasound shows asymmetri-
                                                                  cally enlarged ovary with increased echogenicity and some
                                                                  peripheral cysts. Doppler evaluation (not shown) showed no
                                                                  vascular flow. B, Surgical photograph showing infarcted ovary.

C

FIGURE 6-48. Hemorrhagic cyst identified on CT in a 14-year-old   FIGURE 6-50. Ovarian torsion. Ultrasound shows asymmetrically
obese girl with right lower quadrant pain and suspected           enlarged ovary (arrows) with increased echogenicity and periph-
appendicitis. CT shows 5-cm cyst (C) in region of right adenexa.  eral cysts. Doppler evaluation shows no vascular flow to ovary.
Suggested Readings                                                                                  Genitourinary · 155

Daneman A, Alton DJ: Radiographic manifestations of renal    Kraus SJ: Genitourinary imaging in children. Pediatr Clin
   anomalies, Radiol Clin North Am 29:351-363, 1991.            North Am 48:1381-1424, 2001.

Frush DP, Sheldon CA: Diagnostic imaging of pediatric        Lebowitz RL, Olbing H, Parkkulainen KV, et al: International
   scrotal disorders, Radiographics 18:969-985, 1998.           system of radiographic grading of vesicoureteral reflux:
                                                                International reflux study in children, Pediatr Radiol
Han BK, Babcock DS: Sonographic measurements and                15:105-109, 1985.
   appearance of normal kidneys in children, AJR 145:
   611-618, 1985.                                            Ng YY, Kingston JE: The role of radiology in the staging
                                                                of neuroblastoma, Clin Radiol 47:226-235, 1993.
Hartman DS: Renal cystic disease in multisystem conditions,
   Urol Radiol 14:13-17, 1992.                               Sty JR, Wells RY, Schroeder BA, Starshak RJ: Diagnostic
                                                                imaging in pediatric renal inflammatory disease, JAMA
Kirks DR, Kaufman RA, Babcock DS: Renal neoplasms in            256:895-899, 1986.
   infants and children, Semin Roentgenol 22:292-302, 1987.
