                                                                Neuro · 227

A                                                            B

FIGURE 8-22. Heterotopic gray matter in two different patients. A, CT shows nodular areas (arrows) adjacent to the lateral ventricles.
The nodules have the same attenuation as gray matter. B, Axial T2-weighted MRI shows nodular areas (arrows) lining the occipital horns
of the lateral ventricles. Nodules have the same signal as gray matter, consistent with heterotopic gray matter. There is associated
colpocephaly (enlargement of the occipital horns of the lateral ventricles).

                                                             Imaging studies demonstrate a large mass in the
                                                             region of the posterior third ventricle. Doppler
                                                             imaging, MR arteriography, or contrast
                                                             enhanced CT documents the vascular nature of
                                                             the lesion (Fig. 8-27A-C). On MRI, the prominent
                                                             arterial structures may be seen feeding the dila-
                                                             tated vein. There is often associated hydroceph-
                                                             alus. Most vein of Galen malformations are
                                                             treated by arterial embolization. Untreated
                                                             cases usually result in death.

FIGURE 8-23. Band heterotopia. Axial, T2-weighted MR image   SEQUELAE OF IN UTERO
shows heterotopias as linear structures (arrows) within the  INSULTS
frontal white matter that are isointense to gray matter.
                                                             In contrast to developmental abnormalities that
                                                             result from abnormal formation, other congenital
                                                             abnormalities may arise from destruction of
                                                             already developed structures. Most commonly,
                                                             they are related to vascular ischemia and infarc-
                                                             tion that can be caused by a number of under-
                                                             lying causes. The most commonly encountered
                                                             lesions are porencephaly, encephalomalacia,
                                                             and hydranencephaly.
228 · Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentals

A                                                                  B

FIGURE 8-24. Schizencephaly. A, Coronal T1-weighted image shows large fluid-filled space that is in communication with the right lateral
ventricle. The communication is lined by gray matter (arrows), consistent with schizencephaly. B, Axial T2-weighted image again shows
large fluid-filled space that is in communication with the right lateral ventricle. The communication is lined with gray matter (arrows).

Porencephaly and                                                   During this early time period, focal injury results in
Encephalomalacia                                                   the development of a fluid-filled space. When
                                                                   such a cyst communicates with the ventricles, it
Prior to the end of the second trimester, parenchy-                is called a porencephalic cyst. On imaging, this
mal injury does not result in glial scar formation.                cyst appears as thin-walled CSF-containing cysts,
                                                                   communicating directly with the ventricles (Fig.
                                                                   8-28). There are no septations. During the third
                                                                   trimester, parenchymal injury incites glial scar for-
                                                                   mation. During this period, brain injury results in
                                                                   encephalomalacia. Encephalomalacia appears as
                                                                   areas of high T2-weighted signal with multiple
                                                                   septations in the region of injury.

FIGURE 8-25. Agyria (lissencephaly) in a 10-year-old girl with     Hydranencephaly
seizures and developmental delay. Coronal T2-weighted image
shows the smooth surface of the bilateral frontal lobes (arrows),  Hydranencephaly is the destruction of the major-
without formation of sulci and gyri.                               ity of the cerebral hemispheres secondary to a
                                                                   massive ischemic event thought to be related to
                                                                   bilateral internal carotid artery occlusion. Large
                                                                   thin-walled cystic structures are seen in place of
                                                                   the cerebral parenchyma (Fig. 8-29). The occipital
                                                                   lobes, inferior temporal lobes, thalami, brainstem,
                                                                   and cerebellum are typically intact. These struc-
                                                                   tures remain because they are supplied by the
                                                                   vertebrobasilar arterial system. The presence of
                                                                   the falx cerebri and the separation of the thalami
                                                                   seen in hydranencephaly help to differentiate this
