Cervical lymph nodes 
structures deÿning the boundaries cervical lymph node levels of cervical lymph node levels 
and their boundaries 
submandibular posterior margin of gland 
submandibular gland 
anterior digastric hyoid bone carotid artery thyroid cartilage  SCM  medial margin of ant. digastric IA inferior margin of hyoid bone  IIA III  IIB VA  posterior margin of internal jugular vein anterior margin of trapezius posterior margin of sternocleidomastoid  
cricoid cartilage  trapezius  
internal jugular vein  anterior scalene  inferior margin of cricoid cartilage  IV  VB  posterior margin of anterior scalene  
anterior margin  
clavicle  of carotid artery  clavicle  


cervical lymph node levels superimposed on boundary structures 
posterior margin of submandibular gland 
mandible 
medial margin of anterior digastric IIB

IB IIA 
posterior margin of IA internal jugular vein 
inferior margin of hyoid bone anterior margin of trapezius 
thyroid 
posterior margin of 
cartilage III 
sternocleidomastoid 
VA 
inferior margin of cricoid cartilage 
anterior margin 
VB
of carotid artery IV posterior margin of anterior scalene 
clavicle 
Neuro Head & Neck: 853 
Cervical lymph node levels 
Overview of cervical lymph nodes 
• 
The cervical lymph nodes are divided into 7 levels as recommended by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), with consistent agreement between surgeons, oncologists, and radiologists. The lymph node levels are not defined by fascial planes, but instead are defined by anatomic landmarks and organized by patterns of lymphatic spread. 

• 
In an adult, 90% of head and neck cancers are SCC: The role of the radiologist is not to provide a differential, but to stage the disease. The degree of lymph node involvement has a substantial prognostic value. For instance, a single metastatic lymph node decreases survival from SCC by 50% over an equivalent period. 

• 
Cystic lymph nodes can be seen in the setting of papillary thyroid cancer and SCC of the head and neck. 


Level I 
• 
Level I lymph nodes include submental and submandibular nodes, which are superior to the hyoid bone and inferior to the mandible and mylohyoid. 

• 
IA nodes are submental, lying between the medial margins of the anterior bellies of the digastrics. IB nodes are submandibular, lateral to the medial margin of the anterior belly of the digastric and extending to the posterior margin of the submandibular gland. 


Level II 
• 
Level II lymph nodes are upper internal jugular nodes, extending from the skull base to the inferior margin of the hyoid bone. 

• 
IIA nodes are anterior to the posterior margin of the internal jugular vein (IJV). IIB nodes are posterior to the IJV but anterior to the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. 


Level III 
• Level III lymph nodes are middle jugular nodes, extending craniocaudally from the inferior 
aspect of the hyoid to the inferior aspect of the cricoid cartilage. The posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid is the shared posterior margin for both level III and level IIB nodes. 
Level IV 
• Level IV nodes are inferior jugular nodes, extending from the inferior aspect of the cricoid cartilage to the clavicle. Superiorly, the posterior border is the posterior aspect of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (similar to level III and IIB nodes). Inferiorly, the posterior border is the posterior aspect of the anterior scalene muscle. 
Level V 
• 
Level V lymph nodes are posterior cervical nodes. 

• 
VA nodes are superior, extending from the skull base to the inferior cricoid cartilage. 

• 
VB nodes are inferior, extending from the inferior cricoid cartilage to the clavicle. 


Level VI 
• Level VI nodes are pretracheal nodes, which are often simply called “pretracheal”. They are located anteromedially in the lower neck and bounded laterally by the carotid sheaths. Level VI extends craniocaudally from the inferior aspect of the hyoid bone to the top of the manubrium. 
Level VII 
• Level VII nodes are superior mediastinal nodes, which are also commonly described by their location. They are inferior to level VI and medial to the carotid sheaths, extending craniocaudally from the superior aspect of the manubrium to the brachiocephalic vein. 
Neuro Head & Neck: 854 



