Radioisotope Safety Content (RISC) Study Guide  
Introduction 
Radioisotope Safety Content (RISC) is an integral part of the domain of diagnostic radiology 
and interventional radiology. Questions about RISC are included on the Qualifying (Core) 
Exam (25 questions) and in the essentials module on the Certifying Exam (10 questions). 
RISC questions count toward the overall exam score and are not scored separately. 
These questions assess the candidate’s understanding and knowledge related to the safe use 
of radioactive materials in the clinical practice of diagnostic or interventional radiology. The 
domain encompasses but is not limited to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) 
requirements found in Part 35 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR): Medical Use of 
Byproduct Material. The NRC defines byproduct material as radioactive material yielded in 
or made radioactive by exposure to the radiation incident to the process of producing or using 
special nuclear material. The RISC elements on the Certifying Exam are devoted to clinically 
oriented practice scenarios, which emphasize evaluation of practical knowledge of 
radioisotope safety and handling, as well as regulatory compliance. 
A short practice domain document on the ABR website lists the domain critical concepts and 
scope and provides an overview of the blueprint with estimated percentages of specific 
content. Much of the information necessary to prepare for the exams, however, is spread 
across multiple CFR reports and NRC documents. Reviewing this content can be a daunting 
task for candidates preparing for the ABR Qualifying and Certifying exams. Given the scope 
of expected knowledge and varied classroom/laboratory training and experience in radiology 
departments, an in-depth study guide for candidates that would supplement their 
NRC/authorized user (AU) training and experience during residency was identified as a 
needed document.  
All RISC questions on diagnostic radiology and interventional radiology exams will be based 
on information that is covered in this document. This document will be maintained on an 
ongoing basis to ensure the information continues to reflect current practice models and 
regulatory requirements. 
Please note: Some aspects of radiation safety and biology on the diagnostic radiology and 
interventional radiology exams are from the physics section and are not covered in this 
document. 
1. Radiation protection 
1.1   
ALARA program 
The annual average effective dose to the United States (U.S.) population from all sources of 
radiation including background is 500 to 600 mrem (5 to 6 mSv).  
The ALARA acronym stands for “as low as reasonably achievable,” referring to the judicious 
use of nuclear radiology imaging such that the level of radiation exposure to patients and 
personnel is as low as possible to yield a diagnosis. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
5 
(NRC) mandates annual review of the ALARA program by the Radiation Safety Officer 
(RSO).  
1.1.1  Radiation protection program  
Licensees must ensure that the highest dose to the public shall not exceed 100 mrem/year (1 
mSv/yr). This dose also applies to hospital staff working outside of a radiology/imaging 
department including but not limited to administration, support, nursing, engineering, or 
transport personnel. 
Time, shielding, and distance are the three main measures to decrease radiation exposure to 
personnel. 
Training and experience of authorized users, inventory of sealed sources and leak testing, and 
a record of administered activity for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures are required in a 
radiation protection program. 
All personnel dosimeters (except for direct and indirect reading pocket ionization chambers 
and those dosimeters used to measure the dose to the extremities) to determine the radiation 
dose and that are used by licensees must be processed and evaluated by a dosimetry 
processor. Personnel dosimetry records should be reviewed quarterly by the RSO. The 
Radiation Safety Committee (RSC) must review dosimetry records every 3 months.  
Individual dosimeters are required if personnel exposures are expected to exceed greater than 
10% of the annual occupational dose in a year.  
1.1.2  Audit program  
Periodic, planned audits must be carried out at least every 12 months to verify compliance 
with all aspects of the radiation protection program. These audits must be performed by 
trained personnel not having direct responsibilities in the department/facility being audited. 
Results from audits, including follow-up actions, must be documented and reviewed by 
hospital/facility administration. 
1.2 
Radiation areas  
In nuclear radiology and radiation oncology departments, there are restricted and unrestricted 
areas depending on the exposure rates and/or the presence of radioactive materials.  
1.2.1. Restricted areas  
Examples of activities in radiation restricted areas include radiopharmaceutical preparation, 
radiopharmaceutical administration, radiopharmaceutical storage, and imaging.  
Signage required for various areas depending on radiation levels is shown in Figure 1.  
6 
  
 
 
 
 
“Radiation area” is where the effective 
dose could result in an excess of 5 mrem 
(0.05 mSv) in 1 hour at 30 cm from a 
radiation source.  
 
 
“High radiation area” is where the 
effective dose is up to 100 mrem (1 mSv) in 
1 hour at 30 cm from the source. A visible 
or audible alarm is required to control 
access to a high radiation area.  
 
 
  
 
“Very high radiation area” is where the 
absorbed dose levels could exceed 500 rad 
(5 Gy) in 1 hour at 1 m from the source or 
from any surface. 
  
Areas where licensed radioactive material is 
used or stored must have a “caution 
radioactive materials” sign posted.  
 
Figure 1. Radiation area warning signs and their significance 
 
1.2.2. Public area  
 
Unrestricted areas include reception, waiting areas, office spaces, and reading rooms. These 
areas must have dose rates less than 2 mrem in any 1 hour (20 µSv/h) or less than 100 
mrem/yr (1 mSv/yr), excluding dose contributions from patients administered radioactive 
material and from patients being released.  
Rooms or other areas in hospitals/facilities that are occupied by patients with administered 
radioactive material are not required to be posted with caution signs provided that the patients 
meet criteria for release (see section 6.5.1.3). 
A room or area is not required to be posted with a caution sign in the presence of a sealed 
source if the radiation level at 30 cm from the source surface container or housing does not 
exceed 5 mrem (0.05 mSv) per hour.  
1.2.3. Caution signs 
The standard radiation symbol authorized by the NRC uses the colors magenta, purple, or 
black on a yellow background. Licensees are authorized to label sources, source holders, or 
other device components without a color requirement. Refer to 1.2.1 for examples of caution 
signage.  