2  
Radiation biology 
There are four different but interrelated ways to measure radiation: Radioactivity, Exposure, 
Absorbed dose, and Dose equivalent. These can be remembered by the mnemonic R-E-A-D.  
2.1.  Radioactivity  
Radioactivity is a process by which an unstable atomic nucleus transitions to a stable 
configuration by emitting radiation. The emitted radiation can be in the form of alpha or beta 
particles, gamma rays, x-rays, or neutrons. A quantity of radioactive material is expressed in 
terms of its radioactivity (or simply its activity), which represents how many atoms in the 
material decay in a given time period. The units of measure for radioactivity are the curie (Ci) 
or becquerel (Bq); note: 1 mCi = 37 MBq. 
• Alpha particles are positively charged particles consisting of two protons and two 
neutrons (a helium nucleus). They do not travel far in tissue (on average only 10-100 
µm) and have a high linear energy transfer (LET), causing substantial 
radiobiological effect to surrounding tissue if ingested, inhaled, or used for medical 
therapeutic purposes. 
• Beta particles are electrons (beta-minus) or positrons (beta-plus) emitted from a 
decaying nucleus. Beta particles have greater penetration ability than alpha particles 
(e.g., 131I beta-minus [negatron] travels 0.5-3.0 mm) but can be stopped by a few 
millimeters of plastic. Beta-minus particles (electrons) have a moderate LET and can 
be used for medical therapeutic purposes. Beta-plus particles (positrons) are highly 
reactive and only travel a very short distance before combining in an annihilation 
event with a beta-minus particle. The resulting annihilation event ejects two 511 keV 
gamma rays in opposite directions. Annihilation photons are the foundation for PET 
imaging. 
8 
• Gamma rays are electromagnetic waves (i.e., photons that do not have any mass) 
emitted from the nucleus. Gamma rays have low LET and high penetration ability 
and can pass through several centimeters of lead and are principally used for 
imaging in general nuclear radiology studies. 
• X-rays are electromagnetic waves (i.e., photons that do not have any mass) created 
by beta-minus particles that interact with atomic nuclei and undergo Bremsstrahlung 
radiation. As a beta-minus particle passes a high atomic mass nucleus (e.g., lead or 
tungsten), its path is deflected, resulting in low energy x-ray emission. 
• Neutron radiation is free neutrons emitted from the breaking apart of an atomic 
nucleus. Neutron radiation can penetrate most materials and can cause nuclear 
reactions in other materials (called chain reactions). 
2.1.1 Half-life 
In determining radiation risk, it is important to understand the concept of half-life. The 
different concepts of half-life that are important to remember are: - - - 
2.2  
The physical half-life (Tp) of a radionuclide is defined as the time it takes for 50% of 
the radionuclide nuclei to decay. 
The biological half-life (Tb) of a radionuclide or radiopharmaceutical is defined as 
the time it takes for the radionuclide or radiopharmaceutical concentration within the 
body to reduce to 50% of the original concentration. 
The effective half-life (Te) of a radionuclide or radiopharmaceutical takes into 
account the physical and biological half-life values and represents the combined 
effects of physical nuclear decay and biological excretion. 
Radiation dose 
Exposure describes the amount of radiation present in the air. The units for exposure are the 
Roentgen (R) or coulomb/kilogram (C/kg). Typical measuring instruments are Geiger
Mueller (GM) counters or ionization chambers and are measured in milliRoentgen (mR). The 
exposure equivalent to one chest radiograph is ~10 mR. 
2.2.1  Absorbed dose 
Absorbed dose describes the amount of radiation absorbed by tissue (that is, the amount of 
energy that is deposited while passing through the tissue). Absorbed dose is scaled by the 
mass of the tissue; thus, for the same amount of absorbed radiation, a smaller organ (e.g., 
kidneys) will have a greater absorbed dose value than a larger organ (e.g., liver). The units for 
radiation absorbed dose are Gray (Gy) or (rad). 100 rads is the equivalent of 1 Gy (SI unit).  
9 
2.2.2  Dose equivalent 
Linear Energy Transfer (LET) is a term that describes the rate of energy transferred by 
radiation to a medium per unit of length. Radiation with higher LET (alpha or neutron) 
releases a higher rate of energy to tissue than radiation with lower LET (beta, gamma, or x
ray). Historically, when calculating the dose equivalent, quality factors termed Q(L) were 
calculated, which corresponded with the differences in radiation LET in tissue. After 1990, 
the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) proposed a different 
framework for calculating dose equivalent that incorporated dose over an organ or tissue (T). 
For the radiation quality factor, they developed a radiation weighting factor (wR) that replaced 
Q(L) and that was based on the Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation (BEIR) VII report.  
Dose equivalent is a measure used to quantify the relative biological effectiveness (RBE) of 
the different types of emitted radiation on human tissue. Radiation with higher LET (i.e., 
alpha particles and neutrons) causes greater tissue damage than lower LET radiation (i.e., 
beta particles, x-rays, and gamma rays), and therefore correlates with higher RBE. When 
calculating the dose equivalent, the absorbed dose of an organ/tissue is multiplied by a 
quality factor (wR). The wR is a dimensionless factor that compares a radiation's RBE to a 
standard, such as the RBE of gamma rays. Quality factors are listed in Table 1. When 
weighted for the average dose to an organ or tissue, the resultant weighted dose is called the 
organ- or tissue-equivalent dose (HT). Units for dose equivalent are the Sievert (Sv) or 
Roentgen equivalent man (rem); dose equivalent values in diagnostic medicine are commonly 
low and are therefore given in units of millisieverts (mSv) or millirem (mrem). 
Table 1. Radiation weighting (quality) factors 
Type of Radiation 
X-rays 
Weighting Factor, wR 
Gamma (g) rays 
1 
1 
Beta (b) particles 
Slow neutrons 
1 
5 
Fast neutrons 
Alpha (a) particles 
10 
20 
2.2.3  Effective dose 
Effective Dose Equivalent 
The dose equivalent can further be scaled by a tissue weighting factor (wT) that considers the 
relative sensitivity of different organs/tissues to radiation risk of radiocarcinogenesis. 
Effective dose is the multiplication of organ- or tissue-equivalent dose (HT) with wT.  
Therefore, the effective dose is the sum of the products of the dose equivalent to the organ or 
tissue (HT) and the weighting factors (wT) applicable to each of the body organs or tissues that 
are irradiated (HE = ΣWTHT). Tissue weighting factors for different tissues are listed in 
Table 2.  
10 
Table 2. Tissue weighting factors 
Organ/Tissue Type 
Colon, lung, red bone marrow, stomach, breast 
wT 
Gonads 
0.12 
0.08 
Bladder, liver, esophagus, thyroid 
Bone surface, brain, salivary glands, skin 
0.04 
0.01 
Total Effective Dose Equivalent 
The Total Effective Dose Equivalent (TEDE) is a radiation dosimetry quantity defined by the 
NRC to monitor and control human exposure to ionizing radiation. It is defined differently in 
the NRC regulations and NRC glossary. According to NRC regulations, TEDE is the sum of 
effective dose equivalent from external exposure and from internal exposure (termed 
committed effective dose equivalent), thereby taking into account all known exposures. 
However, the NRC glossary defines it as the sum of the deep-dose equivalent and committed 
effective dose equivalent, which would appear to exclude the effective dose to the skin and 
eyes from nonpenetrating radiation such as beta. These surface doses are included in the 
NRC's shallow dose equivalent, along with contributions from penetrating (gamma) 
radiation. 
• Units for effective dose and TEDE are the Sv or rem (typically mSv or mrem). 
Note: A measure given in Ci or Bq indicates the radioactivity of a substance, while a measure 
in mSv indicates the amount of energy that a radioactive source deposits in living tissue and 
gives a relative scale of risk. Effective dose scales linearly, thus, a PET/CT examination has a 
higher relative risk than a mammogram. (Note, cancer risk is too small to observe below 100 
mSv.) 
On average, U.S. inhabitants receive a radiation dose of about 3.1 mSv each year. This dose 
comes from natural background radiation. Most of this background exposure comes from 
radon in the air, with smaller amounts from cosmic rays and the Earth itself. An additional 
2.2 mSv comes from man-made sources of radiation (mostly exposure from medical 
procedures, and some commercial and industrial sources). In general, a yearly dose of 5.3 
mSv from all radiation sources has not been shown to cause humans any harm. Figure 2 
breaks down sources of background radiation as discussed in NCRP report #184. Figure 3 
shows specific examples of common radiation exposures. 
11 
Figure 2. NCRP report #184: Medical Radiation Exposure of Patients in the United States, 
11/15/2019 
12 
Figure 3. Examples and levels of common radiation exposures 
2.3 
Radiobiology 
There are three general categories of effects resulting from exposure to radiation:  
(1) Genetic or hereditary effects are passed on to the progeny of the exposed individual(s). 
(2) Somatic radiation effects refer to the biological effects of radiation exposure on the cells 
and tissues of the exposed individual. These effects are further classified into two categories: 
tissue (deterministic) and stochastic.  
(3) Teratogenic effects refer to the developmental abnormalities or birth defects that occur in 
a fetus as a result of in utero radiation exposure during pregnancy. 
Radiation destroys cells and tissues through two general pathways, which has implications 
for when and where cells and tissues are most sensitive to radiation:  
(1) Direct pathway - radiation induces single-stranded or double-stranded DNA (ssDNA 
or dsDNA) breaks that lead to cell death. 
a. Higher LET radiation leads to more dsDNA breaks as well as higher 
frequency ssDNA breaks. 
13 
b. During the cell cycle, cells are most sensitive to radiation during G2/M when 
the DNA is clumped in tighter bundles and DNA repair mechanisms are not 
active and cannot access the DNA. Contrastingly, cells in late S phase are the 
most radioresistant because of active DNA repair mechanisms. 
c. Cells that are actively dividing are more radiosensitive, while those that are 
not actively dividing are more radioresistant. 
i. Radiosensitive cells include hematopoietic cells (particularly 
lymphocytes), spermatogonia cells, and gastrointestinal stem cells. 
ii. Radioresistant cells include nerve and muscle cells. 
(2) Indirect pathway - radiation induces the development of reactive oxygen species that 
can damage proteins, DNA, and lipids resulting in cell death.  
a. Water is an abundant source of oxygen for radiation injury due to indirect 
effects. 
b. Cells in an oxygen-rich environment are more at risk for the indirect effects of 
radiation. 
2.3.1  Tissue reactions (deterministic effects) 
Deterministic effects are those for which the severity increases with the dose and for which 
there is a threshold below which no effects are observed. These effects are typically observed 
soon after exposure when the dose exceeds a certain threshold (Table 3).  
Typical tissue effects during medical imaging/radiation therapy include: 
• Skin burns: High doses of radiation can cause erythema (redness), hair loss, blistering, 
and ulceration of the skin. 
• Opacifications and cataracts: Exposure to high doses of radiation can lead to clouding 
of the lens in the eye with delayed onset of years depending on dose and fractionation. 
Table 3. Summary of deterministic effects 
Effects 
Threshold dose levels 
(Gy) 
Transient erythema/epilation 
2 
Time of onset 
Dry desquamation 
~24 hours 
8 
Moist desquamation 
4 weeks 
15 
Opacification  
(single acute exposure) 
4 weeks 
0.5-2  
Opacification (fractionated) 
Cataract (single acute) 
5  
5  
Cataract (fractionated) 
8  
2.3.2.  Linear no-threshold effects (stochastic)/Risks of radiation-induced cancer 
Stochastic effects are those for which the probability of occurrence increases with the dose, 
but the severity of the effect does not depend on the dose. There is no threshold dose for 
14 
stochastic effects; this concept is called the linear no-threshold (LNT) model. The primary 
type of stochastic effect is carcinogenesis and genetic effects.  