3. Transport and management of radioactive materials  
Materials Transportation 
About 3 million packages of radioactive materials are shipped each year in the U.S., either by 
highway, rail, air, or water. Regulating the safety of these shipments is the joint responsibility 
of the NRC and the Department of Transportation (DOT). The NRC establishes requirements 
for the design and manufacture of packages for radioactive materials. The DOT, which has 
type A and B package requirements, regulates the shipments while they are in transit and sets 
standards for labeling and smaller quantity packages.  
The NRC oversees the safety of the transportation of nuclear materials through a combination 
of regulatory requirements, transportation package certification, inspections, and a system of 
monitoring to ensure that safety requirements are being met.  
Obtaining a Radioactive Material Package Certificate of Compliance 
The NRC must approve type A and B packages used for shipping nuclear material before 
shipment. If the package meets NRC requirements, the NRC issues a Radioactive Material 
Package Certificate of Compliance (CoC) to the organization requesting approval of a 
package. Organizations are authorized to ship radioactive material in a package approved for 
use under the general license provisions. 
For a transportation package to be certified by the NRC, it must be shown by actual test or 
computer analysis to withstand a series of accident conditions. The tests are performed in 
sequence to determine their cumulative effects on the package. The application must address 
the safety and operational characteristics of the package, including design analysis for 
structural and thermal integrity, radiation shielding, nuclear criticality, material content 
confinement, and the conditions listed. In addition, the application must contain operational 
guidance, such as any testing and maintenance requirements, operating procedures, and 
conditions for package use. 
Type A containers are designed to survive normal transportation handling and minor 
accidents. The Type A package is defined as the container and radioactive contents, and most 
radioactive materials in clinical use will be transported in Type A packages. Type B 
packaging is designed to survive severe accidents. 
3.1.  
Managing packages 
Colored labels are used to indicate the type and level of hazard contained in a radioactive 
package. Labels rely principally on symbols to indicate the hazard. 
15 
  
 
 
Although the package required for transporting radioactive material is based on the 
activity INSIDE the package, the label required on the package is based on the radiation 
hazard OUTSIDE the package. Radioactive material is the only hazardous material that has 
multiple possible labels, depending on the relative radiation levels external to the package, 
with White I, Yellow II, and Yellow III being the most common. Also, labels for radioactive 
material are the only ones that require the shipper to write information on the label. The 
information is a number called the transport index (TI), which is the highest radiation level at 
1 meter from the surface of the package expressed in mrem/hr. Only the White I label does 
not have a transport index.  
The three labels are commonly called White I, Yellow II, and Yellow III, referring to the 
color of the label and the Roman numeral prominently displayed. A specific label is required 
if the surface radiation limit and the limit at 1 meter satisfy the following requirements (Table 
4): 
Table 4. Transportation labels 
Label Surface Radiation Level  Radiation Level at 1 
Meter 
White I 
 
≤ 0.5 mrem/hr  ≤ 0.5 mrem/hr 
Yellow II 
 
> 0.5 mrem/hr but  
≤ 50 mrem/hr AND ≤ 1 mrem/hr 
Yellow III 
 
> 50 mrem/hr and  
≤ 200 mrem/h OR > 1 mrem/hr and  
≤ 10 mrem/hr 
Since the TI is the radiation level at 1 meter, a Yellow II must have a TI no greater than 1, 
and a Yellow III may have a TI greater than 1 but not more than 10.  
The maximum TI for nonexclusive use vehicles (common carriers) and for exclusive use 
(contract carriers) open vehicles is 10. The radiation level at 1 meter from the surface of a 
package can exceed 10 mrem/hr only if the package is transported in an exclusive use 
(contract carrier) closed vehicle. 
3.1.1.  Hazard levels and labeling 
The licensee shall ensure that each container of licensed material bears a durable, clearly 
visible label with the radiation symbol and the words "CAUTION, RADIOACTIVE 
MATERIAL" or "DANGER, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL." The label must also include:  
• Radionuclide(s) present. 
• Quantity of radioactivity. 
• Radioactivity date. 
• Radiation levels. 
• Kinds of materials. 
• Mass enrichment. 
Each licensee shall, prior to removal or disposal of empty uncontaminated containers to 
unrestricted areas, remove or deface the radioactive material label or otherwise clearly 
indicate that the container no longer contains radioactive material. 
3.1.2.  Receipt of radioactive material shipments 
The NRC requires the following procedures when radioactive packages are received and 
opened: 
1. Each licensee should be able to receive the package or receive notification of the 
arrival of the package at the carrier's terminal and to take possession of the package 
expeditiously. 
2. Each licensee must monitor the external surfaces of a labeled package for 
radioactive contamination, unless the package contains only radioactive material in 
the form of a gas or is designated as an excepted package.  
3. Each licensee must monitor all packages known to contain radioactive material for 
radioactive contamination and radiation levels with a Geiger-Mueller detector, and 
for evidence of degradation of package integrity, such as packages that are crushed, 
wet, or damaged. The licensee shall perform the monitoring as soon as practical 
after receipt of the package, but not later than: 3 hours after the package is received 
at the licensee's facility if it is received during the licensee's normal working hours, 
or not later than 3 hours from the beginning of the next working day if it is 
received after working hours. 
17 
4. The licensee shall immediately notify the final delivery carrier and the NRC 
Headquarters Operations Center by telephone if the removable radioactive surface 
contamination exceeds the limits or external radiation levels exceed the limits. 
6. Each licensee shall establish, maintain, and retain written procedures for safely 
opening packages in which radioactive material is received, and ensure that the 
procedures are followed and that due consideration is given to special instructions 
for the type of package being opened. 
7. Licensees transferring special form sources in licensee-owned or licensee-operated 
vehicles to and from a work site are exempt from the contamination monitoring 
requirements but are not exempt from the survey requirement for measuring 
radiation levels that is required to ensure that the source is still properly lodged in 
its shield. 
3.2.  
Sealed sources 
The NRC and the Agreement States (AS) perform engineering and radiation safety 
evaluations of the ability of sealed sources and devices to safely contain radioactivity under 
the conditions of their possession and use. Sealed sources are radioactive sources that are 
permanently or completely contained either by being bonded to a surface or encased in a 
metal capsule. Sealed sources reduce the risk of dispersion of radioactive material but must 
be monitored in case of damage. Both the NRC and AS issue registration certificates for 
distributors and manufacturers within their jurisdiction. However, only the NRC is 
responsible for devices distributed as exempt products (i.e., smoke detectors, gun sights, etc.) 
and issues those registration certificates. 
Each sealed source must be tested at intervals not to exceed 6 months. In the absence of a 
certificate from a transferor that a test has been made within the 6 months before the transfer, 
the sealed source may not be used until tested. If a sealed source has leaked, a licensee shall 
file a report within 5 days if a required leak test reveals the presence of 185 Bq (0.005 μCi) or 
more of removable contamination. The report must be filed with the appropriate NRC 
Regional Office with a copy to the Director, Office of Nuclear Material Safety and 
Safeguards. The written report must include the model number and serial number, if assigned, 
of the leaking source, the radionuclide and its estimated activity, the results of the test, the 
date of the test, and the corrective action taken. 
Training for use of sealed sources and medical devices for diagnosis requires the authorized 
user of a diagnostic sealed source or a device authorized to be a physician, dentist, or 
podiatrist who is certified by a specialty board whose certification process is recognized by 
the NRC or AS or is an AU. Alternatively, the AU must have completed 8 hours of classroom 
and laboratory training in basic radionuclide handling techniques specifically applicable to 
the use of the device. The training must include radiation physics and instrumentation, 
radiation protection, mathematics pertaining to the use and measurement of radioactivity, and 
radiation biology and has completed training in the use of the device for the uses requested. 
18 
3.3.  
Exempt quantities 
Examples of exempt quantities include the following: 
• Natural material and ores containing naturally occurring radionuclides in their natural 
state, which are not intended to be processed for the use of these radionuclides. 
• Byproduct material used in products such as electron tubes, self-luminous watches, or 
radiation measuring instruments for standardization or calibration purposes. 
• Small quantities of byproduct material such as in check sources and calibration 
standards for commercial distribution.  
• Use in self-luminous products such as gunsights and exit signs, which contain tiny 
glass vials filled with a radioactive gas such as tritium (hydrogen-3). 
• Use of byproduct material in gas and aerosol detector products such as smoke 
detectors and chemical agent detectors. These products contain tiny foils that provide 
a steady source of ions in analytical chambers. The foils are coated with byproduct 
material such as Am-241 or Ni-63. 
• Capsules containing 1 μCi carbon-14 urea each, for "in vivo" diagnostic use for 
humans. 
3.4.  Use records 
Each licensee shall maintain records showing the results of surveys, calibrations, and sealed 
source leak checks. The licensee shall retain these records for 3 years after the record is 
made.  
The following records are retained for the duration of the license: 
• Results of surveys to determine the dose from external sources and used, in the 
absence of or in combination with individual monitoring data, in the assessment of 
individual dose equivalents. 
• Results of measurements and calculations used to determine individual intakes of 
radioactive material and used in the assessment of internal dose. 
• Results of air sampling, surveys, and required bioassays. 
• Results of measurements and calculations used to evaluate the release of radioactive 
effluents to the environment. 
19 
3.5. Area surveys 
Each licensee shall make or cause to be made surveys of areas, including the subsurface, that 
may be necessary for the licensee to comply with the regulations to evaluate the magnitude 
and extent of radiation levels and the potential radiological hazards of the radiation levels and 
residual radioactivity detected. Records from surveys describing the location and amount of 
subsurface residual radioactivity identified at the site must be kept with records important for 
decommissioning, and such records must be retained. The licensee shall ensure that 
instruments and equipment used for quantitative radiation measurements (e.g., dose rate and 
effluent monitoring) are calibrated periodically for the radiation measured. 
The licensee shall survey with a radiation detection survey instrument (Geiger-Mueller 
meter) at the end of each day of use. A licensee must survey all areas where unsealed 
byproduct material requiring a written directive was prepared for use or administered. A 
licensee must retain a record of each survey required for 3 years. The record must include the 
survey date, the results, the instrument used to make it, and the name of the person who 
performed it. 
3.6. 
Waste management/disposal 
A licensee shall dispose of licensed material only by transfer to an authorized recipient, by 
decay in storage, or by release in effluents within the authorized limits. A person must be 
specifically licensed to receive waste containing licensed material from other persons for 
treatment prior to disposal, treatment or disposal by incineration, or decay in storage, or 
disposal at a land disposal facility.  
A licensee may discharge licensed material into sanitary sewerage if each of the following 
conditions is satisfied: The material is readily soluble (or is readily dispersible biological 
material) in water and the quantity of radioactive material released into the sewer in 1 month 
divided by the average monthly volume of water released into the sewer by the licensee does 
not exceed predefined concentration. The total quantity of licensed and other radioactive 
material that the licensee releases into the sanitary sewerage system in a year must not exceed 
5 curies (185 GBq) of hydrogen-3, 1 curie (37 GBq) of carbon-14, and 1 curie (37 GBq) of 
all other radioactive materials combined. 
Patient excreta from individuals undergoing medical diagnosis or therapy with radioactive 
material are not subject to the limitations. 
Any licensee shipping radioactive waste intended for ultimate disposal at a licensed land 
disposal facility must document the information required on NRC's Uniform Low-Level 
Radioactive Waste Manifest and transfer this recorded manifest information to the intended 
consignee. Each shipment manifest must include a certification by the waste generator.  
A licensee may hold byproduct material with a physical half-life of less than or equal to 
120 days for decay-in-storage before disposal without regard to its radioactivity if they 
monitor byproduct material with a Geiger-Mueller meter at the surface before disposal and 
20 
determine that its radioactivity cannot be distinguished from the background radiation level 
with an appropriate radiation detection survey meter set on its most sensitive scale and with 
no interposed shielding; and if they remove or obliterate all radiation labels, except for 
radiation labels on materials that are within containers and that will be managed as 
biomedical waste after they have been released from the licensee. A licensee shall maintain 
records of the disposal of licensed materials for 3 years. The record must include the date of 
the disposal, the survey instrument used, the background radiation level, the radiation level 
measured at the surface of each waste container, and the name of the individual who 
performed the survey.