4.  
4.1.  
Regulatory exposure limits to radioactive materials 
Occupational dose limits 
All individuals who, in the course of their employment, are likely to receive a dose of more 
than 100 mrem (1 mSv)/year must receive adequate training to protect themselves against 
radiation. Also, these individuals have the right to know the amount of radiation to which 
they have been exposed. In addition, radiation workers have the right to ask the NRC to 
conduct an inspection if they believe their working environment has safety problems. 
The maximum allowable radiation doses for radiation workers are shown in Table 5 and 
Figure 4. 
Table 5. Maximum allowable radiation doses for radiation workers 
Adults/year 
Minors (< 18 years**)/year 
Whole body 
5 rem (0.05 Sv)* 
Individual organ 
50 rem (0.5 Sv) 
0.5 rem (0.005 Sv) 
Skin or extremity (distal to knee or elbow) 
5 rem (0.05 Sv) 
50 rem (0.5 Sv) 
Eye lens 
5 rem (0.05 Sv) 
15 rem (0.15 Sv) 
*
 1.5 rem (0.015 Sv) 
If an adult radiation worker exceeds the dose of 5 rem in less than a year – employed at one or 
multiple places – the individual will not be allowed in the radiation zone until the next calendar year.  
**Minors – such as students working in a lab – have a dose limit that is 10% of the adult dose. 
21 
Figure 4. Maximum allowable radiation doses for radiation workers 
Doses received in excess of the annual limits, including doses received during accidents, 
emergencies, and planned special exposures, must be subtracted from the limits for planned 
special exposures that the individual may receive during the current year and during the 
individual's lifetime. 
The assigned deep-dose equivalent must be for the part of the body receiving the highest 
exposure. The assigned shallow-dose equivalent must be the dose averaged over the 
contiguous 10 square centimeters of skin receiving the highest exposure. The deep-dose 
equivalent, lens-dose equivalent, and shallow-dose equivalent may be assessed from surveys 
or other radiation measurements for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with the 
occupational dose limits. 
Licensees are required to provide the NRC with an annual report of their workers' individual 
exposures. The NRC, in turn, maintains such radiation exposure data in its Radiation 
Exposure Information and Reporting System (REIRS). Thus, the REIRS database represents 
a resource for use in responding to workers' requests for exposure information and dose 
histories. 
Organizations and individuals may request dose histories from REIRS and may submit 
requests for up to 10 individuals at a time. The requestor is required to enter their name, title, 
22 
and contact information, and the identification number, name, and birth date of the monitored 
individual(s).  
4.1.1. Occupational dose limits for minors 
The annual occupational dose limits for minors are 10 percent of the annual dose limits 
specified for adult workers (see 4.1.). 
4.2.  
Pregnant workers 
Other dose limits (additional notes): 
Table 6. Other maximum allowable doses 
Group 
Pregnant workers (embryo/fetus) 
Maximum Allowable Dose 
Members of the public* 
0.5 rem (5 mSv) for entire gestation 
Visitor/caregiver/family member 
0.1 rem (1 mSv)/year 
*A patient is not considered a “member of the public.” 
0.5 rem (5 mSv) for duration of contact 
If the dose equivalent to an embryo/fetus is found to have exceeded 0.5 rem (5 mSv) or is 
within 0.05 rem (0.5 mSv) of this dose by the time the worker declares the pregnancy to the 
licensee, the licensee shall be deemed to be in compliance. Additionally, if the additional 
dose equivalent to the embryo/fetus does not exceed 0.05 rem (0.5 mSv) during the remainder 
of the pregnancy, the licensee shall be deemed to be in compliance. 
A declared pregnant worker is one who has voluntarily informed their employer, in writing, 
of the pregnancy and the estimated date of conception. A separate written declaration should 
be submitted for each pregnancy. A pregnant worker can decide not to declare the 
pregnancy and can de-declare the pregnancy at any time (e.g., in case the fetal dose may 
exceed limits and the worker does not want to change the place of work or stop work).  
4.3.  
Public (including family and caregivers) 
The total effective dose equivalent to individual members of the public from the licensed 
operation must not exceed 100 mrem (1 mSv) in a year, exclusive of the dose contributions 
from background radiation, any administration the individual has received, exposure to 
individuals administered with radioactive material, and voluntary participation in medical 
research programs. 
If the licensee permits members of the public to have access to controlled areas, the limits for 
members of the public continue to apply to those individuals. A licensee may permit visitors 
to an individual who cannot be released to receive a radiation dose greater than 0.1 rem (1 
23 
mSv) if the radiation dose received does not exceed 0.5 rem (5 mSv) and the authorizer user 
has determined before the visit that it is appropriate. 
A licensee or license applicant may apply for prior NRC authorization to operate up to an 
annual dose limit for an individual member of the public of 50 mrem (5 mSv)/year.  
To protect the public, the dose in any unrestricted area from external sources does not exceed 
2 mrem (0.02 mSv)/hour and 50 mrem (0.5 mSv)/year.  
4.4.  
Embryo/fetus (radiation worker) 
See 4.2. 
4.5.  
Individual monitoring  
Each licensee shall monitor exposures to radiation and radioactive material at levels sufficient 
to demonstrate compliance with the occupational dose limits including:  
1) Adults likely to receive >10% dose limits in 1 year from external sources.  
2) Minors likely to receive > 100 mrem (1 mSv), a lens dose equivalent in excess of 
150 mrem (1.5 mSv), or a shallow dose equivalent to the skin or to the extremities in 
excess of 500 mrem (5 mSv) in 1 year from external radiation sources.  
3) A declared pregnant worker likely to receive > 100 mrem (1 mSv) during the entire 
pregnancy from external radiation sources.  
4) Individuals entering a high or very high radiation area.  
Each licensee shall maintain records of doses received by all individuals for whom 
monitoring was required. These records must include: the deep-dose equivalent to the whole 
body, lens dose equivalent, shallow-dose equivalent to the skin, shallow-dose equivalent to 
the extremities, the estimated intake of radionuclides, and the effective whole body and organ 
dose.  
The licensee shall make entries of the records at least annually and maintain clear and legible 
records containing all the information. The records required should be protected from public 
disclosure because of their personal privacy nature. The licensee shall maintain the records of 
dose to an embryo/fetus with the records of dose to the declared pregnant worker. The 
declaration of pregnancy shall also be kept on file but may be maintained separately from the 
dose records. 
An RSO monitors readings from radiation badges such that when a radiation worker exceeds 
10% of the occupational exposure in a quarter, an investigation is conducted to determine the 
cause of the higher exposure. This investigation would include evaluation of adherence to the 
principles of ALARA and proper badge placement. 