5.  
Radiopharmaceutical administration 
Radiopharmaceuticals emit radiation and are used in diagnostic or therapeutic medical 
procedures. Radioisotopes that have short half-lives are generally preferred to minimize the 
radiation dose to the patient and the risk of prolonged exposure. In most cases, these short
lived radioisotopes decay to stable elements within minutes, hours, or days, allowing patients 
to be released from the hospital in a relatively short time. The FDA oversees clinical 
administration of radiopharmaceuticals to humans either through an approved New Drug 
Application (NDA) or Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA). Investigational drugs 
must also be approved by the FDA for research purposes with an Investigational New Drug 
(IND) application.  
An application for a specific license to manufacture, prepare, or transfer for commercial 
distribution radioactive drugs containing byproduct material for use by persons authorized 
pursuant will be approved if: The manufacturer is registered with the FDA, registered or 
licensed with a state agency as a drug manufacturer, licensed as a pharmacy by a state board 
of pharmacy, or is a PET drug production facility registered with a state agency. 
5.1.  
Confirming dosage 
5.1.1.  Labeling 
Each syringe or vial containing unsealed radioactive byproduct material must be labeled to 
identify the radiopharmaceutical. Syringe/vial shields must also be labeled unless the label on 
the syringe/vial is visible when shielded. 
In addition to the above labeling requirements for radioactive materials, radiopharmaceutical 
dosage labels require:  
• The radiopharmaceutical radionuclide. 
• The radiopharmaceutical chemical form. 
• The amount of radiopharmaceutical and the date/time of measurement. 
• The radiopharmaceutical expiration date and time. 
• The quantity of the radiopharmaceutical, including the volume of liquids, the capsule 
number/weight of solids, or the ampules/vials/syringes of gases. 
• The name, address, and telephone number of the dispensing nuclear pharmacy. 
• The prescription or lot number. 
• The name of the radiopharmaceutical. 
When dispensing radiopharmaceuticals, the following must be present: 
• Labels for radiolabeled blood components and radiotherapies must contain the 
patient’s name. 
• A tamper-evident seal must be affixed to the delivery container. 
25 
When the patient's name is not available at the time of dispensing for diagnostic dosing, a 72
hour exemption is allowed to obtain the name of the patient. No later than 72 hours after 
dispensing the radiopharmaceutical, the patient's name must be associated with the 
prescription in a readily retrievable manner and retained for 3 years.  
The following items must also be included for administered radiopharmaceuticals:  
• Name and address of the nuclear pharmacy. 
• Name of the end authorized user, who is also a prescriber. 
• Lot number of the preparation. 
5.1.2.  Outside of prescribed range for diagnostic and therapeutic dosage  
Before medical use, radiopharmaceutical activities need to be determined and recorded. Unit 
dosages need to be determined by direct measurement of radioactivity or a decay correction 
from a predetermined activity or activity concentration. Other dosages need to be determined 
by direct measurement of radioactivity, measurement of radioactivity and mathematical 
calculations, or a combination of volumetric measurements and mathematical calculations 
from the manufacturers. 
Authorized users can prescribe a diagnostic or therapeutic dosage or dosage range for 
medical use. The administered dosage is permitted to vary from the prescribed dosage by 
±20%. If the licensee is aware that the administered dosage differs from the prescribed 
dosage by more than 20% and administers it anyway, then the licensee would be cited. 
However, the authorized user can direct the administered dosage to be more than 20% outside 
the prescribed dosage range for medical purposes. In such a situation, the authorized user 
must modify the prescription from one prescribed dosage/dosage range to a revised 
prescribed dosage/dosage range that encompasses the dosage to be administered. 
For a unit dosage, this determination must be made by direct measurement of radioactivity or 
decay correction based on the initial activity determined by a licensed manufacturer. For 
other than unit dosages, this determination must be made by direct measurement of 
radioactivity or a combination of measurement of radioactivity and mathematical calculations 
or volumetric measurements. A licensee shall retain a record of the dosage determination. 
5.2 Patient identity 
Before any radiopharmaceutical administration, the patient’s identity needs to be confirmed 
with two patient identifiers. Examples of approved patient identifiers include:  
• Individual’s name. 
• Assigned identification number. 
• Telephone number. 
• Date of birth. 
26 
• Person-specific identifier. 
• Electronic identification technology coding, such as bar coding or RFID, that includes 
two or more person-specific identifiers. 
In cases where a patient’s identity cannot be verified, a temporary means of identification 
must be used. Formal identification of the patient should occur as soon as possible. When 
obtained, the new identifying information should be used. No standards exist for the use of an 
alias to protect anonymity. Organizations should evaluate risks and utilize two identifiers 
regardless of the alias. 
5.3.  
Fetal dose (patient) 
Licensees shall notify the NRC Operations Center by telephone no later than the next 
calendar day after discovery of a dose to an embryo/fetus or nursing child in the following 
situations: 
• Licensees must report any dose to an embryo/fetus if it is greater than 5 rem (50 mSv) 
dose equivalent that results from byproduct administration to a pregnant individual, 
unless it was specifically approved, in advance, by the authorized user. 
• Licensees must report any dose to a nursing child that is a result of administration of 
byproduct material to a breast-feeding individual that is greater than 5 rem (50 mSv) 
total effective dose equivalent or has resulted in unintended permanent functional 
damage to an organ or a physiological system of the child, as determined by a 
physician. 
Licensees shall also submit a written report to the NRC Regional Office within 15 days of 
discovery of dose administration. The written report must include: 
• The licensee’s name. 
• The prescribing physician’s name. 
• A brief description of the event. 
• Why the event occurred. 
• The effect, if any, on the embryo/fetus or the nursing child. 
• What actions, if any, have been taken or are planned to prevent recurrence. 
• Certification that the licensee notified the pregnant individual or mother (or the 
mother’s or child’s responsible relative or guardian) and if not, why not. 
The report must not include the individual’s or child’s name or any other identifying 
information for the individual or child. 
The licensee shall provide notification of the event to the referring provider and also notify 
the pregnant individual or mother no later than 24 hours after discovery of an event that 
would require reporting, unless the referring provider personally informs the licensee either 
that they will inform the mother or that, based on medical judgment, telling the mother would 
be harmful. The licensee is not required to notify the mother without first consulting with the 
27 
referring provider. If the referring provider or mother cannot be reached within 24 hours, the 
licensee shall make the appropriate notifications as soon as possible thereafter.  
The licensee may not delay any appropriate medical care for the embryo/fetus or for the 
nursing child, including any necessary remedial care as a result of the event, because of any 
delay in notification. The notification may be made to the mother's or child's responsible 
relative or guardian instead of the mother. If a verbal notification is made, the licensee shall 
inform the mother, or the mother's or child's responsible relative or guardian, that a written 
description of the event can be obtained from the licensee upon request. The licensee shall 
provide such a written description if requested. 
5.4.  
Breastfeeding/lactation (patient) 
Breastfeeding mothers may need diagnostic or therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals, leading to 
concerns about radiation exposure to both the mother and child. Radiopharmaceuticals can 
appear in breast milk, causing internal exposure to the child and external exposure from the 
mother. 
Radiation Safety Guidelines 
The ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principle is emphasized to minimize radiation 
exposure. Breastfeeding interruption or cessation may be recommended based on the 
radiopharmaceutical and dosage. A nursing mother who has received unsealed byproduct can 
be released if the total effective dose equivalent to any other individual, including the nursing 
child, is projected to not exceed 500 mrem (5 mSv). If the nursing mother continues to 
breastfeed after receiving a radiopharmaceutical and the nursing child’s radiation exposure 
could exceed an effective dose equivalent of 100 mrem (1 mSv), written instructions must be 
given to the mother regarding the potential adverse consequences if breastfeeding is not 
interrupted or ceased as well as guidance on the discontinuation of breastfeeding. 
Before radioiodine therapy, oral and written radiation precaution instructions must be 
provided to the nursing mother and, as needed, to the appropriate family and/or caretakers. 
All concerns and questions should be addressed. The information should be given in a 
sufficient time frame for safety preparation, and at least six weeks prior to the radioiodine 
procedure to allow the necessary time for lactation cessation.  
Recommendations for Specific Radiopharmaceuticals/Radionuclides 
• 18F: 4-hour interruption 
• 67Ga: 28-day interruption 
• 68Ga: No interruption 
• 123I-NaI: 3-day interruption 
• 131I-NaI and 124I-NaI: Permanent cessation for current child. Breastfeeding should be 
stopped six weeks prior to therapy to minimize radiation dose to the breast. 
• 111In-labeled white blood cells: 6-day interruption 
28 
• 177Lu-dotatate: Permanent cessation for current child 
• 13N: No interruption  
• 82Rb: No interruption  
• 99mTc-labeled radiopharmaceuticals (all): 24-hour interruption 
• 201Tl-chloride: 4-day interruption 
Brachytherapy and Other Procedures 
Brachytherapy and radioactive seed localization procedures generally require suspension of 
breastfeeding while radioactive seeds are in place, but it can resume after their removal.  
Radioembolic therapy with 90Y-microspheres does not require breastfeeding interruption as 
90Y does not enter systemic circulation, breast tissue, or breast milk. 
5.5. 
Administration of prescribed dosage 
5.5.1.  Safe handling and administration 
Radiopharmaceutical administration for diagnosis or therapy requires a specific area or room 
that is separated from other operations. The area or room should be near the laboratory where 
the radiopharmaceuticals are stored. Transport of radiopharmaceuticals to a patient’s room 
necessitates good radiation safety practice, often necessitating radiation safety staff or nuclear 
technologist staff monitoring and assistance. Physicians, radiation safety, and other allied 
staff should observe principles of ALARA to reduce exposure. These principles include 
holding radioactive sources with tongs or tweezers, informing staff about patient excretion of 
radioactive materials to avoid contamination, avoiding contamination of surfaces, securing 
radioactive materials when staff are not present, not risking oral contamination through any 
worker activities or eating/drinking near radiopharmaceuticals, and conducting training for 
workers. Individuals involved in administering volatile 131I radiopharmaceuticals may be 
sampled for bioassay if > 10 mCi. 
Syringe shields should be used for radiopharmaceutical administration. For positron emitters, 
either lead or tungsten may be employed in a syringe shield. Tungsten is the preferred 
material as it provides better radiation attenuation at a smaller thickness, allowing for a 
lighter and more manageable shield. It is also less toxic than lead. Lead is still used in some 
applications as it can be a more cost-effective option. Disposable gloves, as well as finger and 
body dosimeters should be worn when administering radiopharmaceuticals. Finger (ring) 
dosimeters should be worn under a glove on the hand most likely to be exposed to radiation, 
on a finger exposed to radiation, with the detector (badge) facing the palm. 
Beta emitters can be stopped by lead shielding, but the bremsstrahlung (breaking radiation) 
that will result makes lead an ineffective shielding source as more energy would be created 
from lead interaction. Using lower atomic number material such as acrylic or aluminum 
shielding would be more effective choices for shielding beta emitters. 
29 
Criteria for the release of any patient or research subject who received unsealed byproduct 
material or implants with byproduct material is discussed in section 6.5.1.3 of this document. 
After treatment, all articles such as bedding, clothing, towels, food, and food trays should be 
surveyed for contamination before they are removed or held in storage for “Decay-in
Storage." The individual should be surveyed before release and instructed on ways to 
minimize contamination and exposure. 
5.5.2.  Shielding for ionizing radiation 
Shielding is an important principle of ALARA. Shielding requires an understanding of 
radionuclides/radiopharmaceuticals and their radiation. Radionuclide generators should be 
placed in a remote, well-shielded enclosure. Dose calibrators should be shielded to protect 
workers. Lead shielding should be used to shield employees and others from procedures with 
99mTc and other gamma-emitting radiopharmaceuticals. Fume hoods should be used for 
potential airborne radioactive materials.  
For 133Xe studies, additional lead shielding around the charcoal absorber canister, oxygen 
bag, and waste receptacle will prevent exposure. Leakage or contamination from the 
radioactive material should be prevented. Individualized 133Xe room evacuation time 
calculations are required in rooms where ventilation scans are performed.  
Shielded containers or waste cans should be used for syringes and other radioactive waste. 
These containers should be kept at as great a distance as possible from the workers.  