6.  
6.1.  
Administrative/practice regulations, responsibilities and training  
NRC authority/Agreement States  
Role of NRC and Other Agencies in Regulating the Medical Use of Nuclear Materials 
Radioactive byproduct material is used in calibration sources, radioactive drugs, bone mineral 
analyzers, brachytherapy sources and devices, gamma surgery devices, and teletherapy units 
used in medicine. With limited exceptions, all internal or external administrations of 
byproduct material to human patients or human research subjects must be done in accordance 
with a medical use license. Regulatory authority over the medical use of ionizing radiation is 
shared among several federal, state, and local government agencies.  
The NRC or the responsible Agreement State (AS) has regulatory authority over the 
possession and use of byproduct materials or other nuclear material in medicine. The NRC 
oversees medical uses of nuclear material through licensing, inspection, and enforcement 
programs. The NRC issues medical use licenses to medical facilities and authorized physician 
users, develops guidance and regulations for use by licensees, and maintains a committee of 
medical experts to obtain advice about the use of byproduct materials in medicine.  
The FDA oversees the good practices in the manufacturing of radiopharmaceuticals, medical 
devices, and radiation-producing x-ray machines and accelerators.  
30 
Agreement State Program 
The Atomic Energy Act of 1954 allows the NRC to relinquish to an AS portions of its 
regulatory authority to license and regulate byproduct materials. The mechanism for the 
transfer of NRC's authority to a state is an agreement signed by the governor and the chair of 
the commission. The NRC also coordinates with an AS the reporting of event information 
and responses to allegations reported to NRC involving the AS. To date, 39 states have 
entered into agreements with the NRC.  
The Integrated Materials Performance Evaluation Program (IMPEP) toolbox requires the 
NRC to periodically review Agreement States to ensure their radiation control programs are 
adequate to protect public health and safety and compatible with the NRC’s regulatory 
program.  
6.2.  
Personnel  
6.2.1.  Radiation safety officer 
A licensee is required to have a radiation safety officer (RSO) with "authority and 
responsibilities for the radiation protection program." The RSO agrees in writing to be 
responsible for implementing the radiation protection program. The licensee, through the 
RSO, verifies that radiation safety activities are being performed in accordance with licensee
approved procedures and regulatory requirements. An associate RSO (ARSO) may be 
appointed, in writing, to support the RSO. The RSO, with written agreement of the licensee's 
management, must assign the specific duties and tasks to each ARSO. The RSO shall not 
delegate the authority or responsibilities for implementing the radiation protection program. 
If an RSO or ARSO leaves or ceases to perform their duties, the licensee needs to notify the 
NRC or AS. The RSO or ARSO is certified by a specialty board that is recognized by the 
NRC or AS and each candidate must: hold at least a bachelor's degree from an accredited 
college or university in physical or biological science, have 5 or more years of professional 
experience in health physics, including at least 3 years in applied health physics, and pass an 
exam administered by diplomates of the specialty board.  
The full-time radiation safety experience must involve, among other items: shipping, 
receiving, and performing related radiation surveys; performing checks for proper operation 
of instruments used to determine the activity of dosages, survey meters, and instruments used 
to measure radionuclides; securing and controlling byproduct material; using proper 
decontamination procedures; and disposing of byproduct material. 
A licensee shall provide the RSO sufficient authority, organizational freedom, time, 
resources, and management prerogative, to:  
• Identify radiation safety problems. 
• Initiate, recommend, or provide corrective actions. 
31 
• Stop unsafe operations. 
• Verify implementation of corrective actions. 
An authorized user (AU) can be appointed as the RSO for a license if the AU is identified as 
an AU in the license; has experience with the radiation safety aspects of byproduct material 
for which the individual will have RSO responsibilities; has training in the radiation safety, 
regulatory issues, and emergency procedures for which a licensee seeks approval; and has 
obtained written attestation, signed by a preceptor RSO, that the AU has achieved a level of 
radiation safety knowledge sufficient to function independently as an RSO for a medical use 
licensee. Additionally, the AU must agree, in writing, to be responsible for implementing the 
radiation protection program.  
6.2.2.  Authorized user 
An AU is a physician, dentist, or podiatrist who meets criteria and who is specified on the 
license to authorize the medical use of byproduct material. AU applicants must submit 
training and experience information for the purpose(s) for which licensed material will be 
used. The NRC and AS evaluate this information on a case-by-case basis to determine 
whether the training and experience of the identified individuals is appropriate for the 
proposed use(s). A preceptor statement concerning the individuals' completion of appropriate 
training and experience and ability to function independently is a necessary component for 
evaluating the individual's qualifications. Individuals seeking AU recognition for new (not 
previously authorized) medical uses should submit a written attestation from person(s) 
knowledgeable about the radiation safety aspects of the new medical use and the associated 
equipment. A license amendment is not needed to permit the physician to begin work as an 
AU under the NRC license. However, for licensees other than those possessing a Type A 
specific license of broad scope for medical use, a copy of the AS license would have to be 
submitted to the NRC within 30 days.  
Delegation of Supervisory Responsibilities 
Only AUs and authorized nuclear pharmacists (ANPs) are allowed to use or prepare, 
respectively, byproduct material in the practice of medicine. However, an AU or ANP may 
delegate specific tasks associated with the use or preparation of byproduct material in the 
practice of medicine to other individuals who are properly supervised and instructed. The 
AUs and ANPs are best suited for determining tasks that supervised individuals can perform 
and the degree of supervision that each individual needs. 
Approval for Authorized Nuclear Pharmacist, Authorized Medical Physicist, or Authorized 
User 
6.2.3.  Authorized nuclear pharmacist  
An individual can begin duties as an authorized nuclear pharmacist (ANP) as long as one of 
the following three conditions applies: (1) they meet the board certification criteria and 
recentness of training requirements; (2) they are identified as an ANP on an NRC or AS 
32 
medical use license or nuclear pharmacy license; or (3) they are identified as an ANP by a 
commercial nuclear pharmacy authorized to identify ANPs. 
The ANP, like the AU, can be selected as an RSO or ARSO if they have experience with the 
radiation safety aspects of similar types of byproduct material for which the individual would 
have RSO responsibilities, similar to the requirements of an AU identified as an RSO. The 
ANP must agree, in writing, to be responsible for implementing the radiation protection 
program. Additionally, the licensee must apply to the NRC for an amendment and submit the 
ANP's training and experience qualifications to serve as RSO. 
6.2.4.  Authorized medical physicist 
An authorized medical physicist (AMP) must be named on licenses authorizing the medical 
uses of  90Sr ophthalmic applicators, teletherapy units, photon-emitting remote after-loader 
units, and gamma stereotactic radiosurgery units. Similar to an AU and ANP, an AMP may 
be identified as an RSO following a similar pattern of requirements as an ANP. 
6.2.5.  Radiation safety committee  
Licensees who are authorized for two or more different types of uses of byproduct material 
must have a radiation safety committee (RSC) to oversee all uses of byproduct material 
permitted by the license. The RSC must include an AU of each type of use permitted by the 
license, the RSO, a representative of the nursing service, and a representative of management 
who is neither an AU nor an RSO. The committee may include other members the licensee 
considers appropriate.  
The RSC has the authority and responsibilities for the radiation protection program including 
but not limited to evaluating requests for a license application, renewal, or amendment before 
submission to the NRC and allowing an individual to work as an AU, ANP, or AMP.  
6.3 Radioactive Materials (RAM) License   
The NRC issues specific licenses for possession and use of byproduct, source, and special 
nuclear material. After the initial license is granted, it may be modified during an amendment 
or renewal to reflect changes in circumstances affecting the operations after the license was 
issued. A company/facility that wishes to obtain a license to use nuclear materials must 
submit an application to the NRC. This application must demonstrate how the use of these 
materials will meet NRC safety requirements. Applicants must provide information on the 
type, form, and intended quantity of available facilities, qualifications of users, and radiation 
protection programs. The license may contain certain NRC conditions agreed to by the 
licensee.  
33 
6.3.1.  Broad scope license 
Type A: Type A licenses of broad scope are typically the largest licensed programs and 
encompass a broad range of uses. Type A broad scope licensees use an RSC, RSO, and 
criteria developed and submitted by the licensee. These licenses typically exist at a large 
academic center.  
Type B: Type B broad scope licensed programs are normally smaller and less diverse than 
Type A broad scope programs. Type B broad scope licensees use an RSO and criteria 
developed and submitted by the licensee 
Type C: Type C broad scope licensed programs are typically issued to institutions that do not 
require significant quantities of radioactive material but need the flexibility to possess a 
variety of different radioactive materials. Users of licensed material under these programs are 
approved by the licensee based on training and experience criteria. These licenses usually 
exist for nuclear cardiology clinics or small research labs requiring small quantities of 
radioactive material.  
6.3.2.  NRC Master Materials License 
A Master Materials License (MML) is a license issued by the NRC to federal organizations 
authorizing use of byproduct material at multiple sites that fall under the jurisdiction of the 
federal agency for industrial and medical purposes. The MML allows the federal agency to 
conduct some activities as a regulator, such as issuing permits for radioactive materials use at 
the sites that use byproduct materials, conducting inspections, handling allegations, following 
up on incidents and events, and taking enforcement actions. The NRC, in turn, provides 
oversight of MML licensees and inspects MMLs at least every two years to evaluate how 
well the licensee is implementing their program. 
6.4. 
Written directive  
“Written directive” refers to an AU's written order for the administration of byproduct 
material or radiation from byproduct material to a specific patient or human research subject. 
6.4.1.  Uptake, dilution, and excretion studies  
Use of unsealed byproduct material for uptake, dilution, and excretion studies do not require 
a written directive. A licensee may use any unsealed byproduct material prepared for medical 
use for uptake, dilution, or excretion studies that is obtained from a licensed manufacturer, a 
PET radioactive drug producer, or prepared by an ANP or AU with specific training 
approved by the NRC. Approved Radioactive Drug Research Committee (RDRC) or 
Investigational New Drug (IND) byproduct material also does not require a written directive 
when used for uptake, dilution, and excretion studies.  
34 
The licensee shall require an AU of unsealed byproduct material for uptake, dilution, and 
excretion studies to be a physician and have the following training: 60 hours of training and 
experience in basic radionuclide handling techniques and radiation safety applicable to the 
medical use of unsealed byproduct material for uptake, dilution, and excretion studies 
(including a minimum of 8 hours of classroom and laboratory training). Candidates must pass 
an exam, administered by diplomates of the specialty board, that assesses knowledge and 
competence in radiation safety, radionuclide handling, and quality control.  
Classroom and laboratory training must be inclusive of the following areas: radiation physics 
and instrumentation, radiation protection, mathematics pertaining to the use and measurement 
of radioactivity, chemistry of byproduct material for medical use, and radiation biology. AU 
candidates must also demonstrate work experience, under the supervision of an AU who 
meets the NRC or AS requirements, including ordering, receiving, and unpacking radioactive 
materials safely and performing the related radiation surveys; performing quality control 
procedures on instruments used to determine the activity of dosages and performing checks 
for proper operation of survey meters; calculating, measuring, and safely preparing patient or 
human research subject dosages; using administrative controls to prevent a medical event 
involving the use of unsealed byproduct material; using procedures to contain spilled 
byproduct material safely and using proper decontamination procedures; and administering 
dosages of radioactive drugs to patients or human research subjects. AU candidates must also 
have a written attestation that they have satisfactorily completed the training and work 
requirements from either a preceptor AU or a residency program director who affirms in 
writing that the attestation represents the consensus of the residency program faculty where at 
least one faculty member is an AU. 
6.4.2.  Imaging and localization studies  
Use of unsealed byproduct material for imaging and localization studies for which a written 
directive is not required  
Except for quantities that require a written directive, a licensee may use any unsealed 
byproduct material prepared for medical use for imaging and localization studies that is 
obtained from a licensed manufacturer, a PET radioactive drug producer, or prepared by an 
ANP or AU with specific training approved by the NRC. Alternatively, medical use for 
imaging and localization studies for use in research in accordance with a Radioactive Drug 
Research Committee (RDRC) approved protocol or an Investigational New Drug (IND) 
protocol accepted by the FDA do not require a written directive.  
Training for imaging and localization studies 
The licensee shall require an AU of unsealed byproduct material for imaging and localization 
studies to be a physician who (1) is certified by a medical specialty board whose certification 
process is recognized by the NRC or AS; (2) has completed 700 hours of training and 
experience in basic radionuclide handling techniques (including a minimum of 80 hours of 
classroom and laboratory training) and radiation safety applicable to the medical use of 
unsealed byproduct material for imaging and localization studies; and (3) passes an exam, 
administered by diplomates of the specialty board, that assesses knowledge and competence 
35 
in radiation safety, radionuclide handling, and quality control similar to the listed 
requirements for uptake, dilution, and excretion studies. Classroom and laboratory training is 
inclusive of the same areas for uptake, dilution, and excretion studies. 
6.4.3.  Unsealed byproduct material requiring written directive 
Use of unsealed byproduct material for which a written directive is required  
A licensee may use any unsealed byproduct material prepared for medical use and for which 
a written directive is required that is obtained from a licensed manufacturer following NRC 
or equivalent AS requirements, excluding production of PET radionuclides, prepared by an 
ANP or AU or an individual under supervision of an ANP or AU.  
Required training for use of unsealed byproduct material for which a written directive is 
required includes certification by a medical specialty board whose certification process has 
been recognized by the NRC or AS, and that person is a physician who successfully 
completed residency training in a radiation therapy or nuclear medicine training program or a 
program in a related medical specialty. These residency training programs must include 700 
hours (including 200 classroom hours) of training and experience, and graduates must pass an 
exam, administered by diplomates of the specialty board, that tests knowledge and 
competence in radiation safety, radionuclide handling, quality assurance, and clinical use of 
unsealed byproduct material for which a written directive is required.  
In addition to the areas discussed under imaging and localization studies, training for use of 
unsealed byproduct material for which a written directive is required includes safely 
preparing patient or human research subject dosages; administrative controls to prevent a 
medical event involving the use of unsealed byproduct material; procedures to contain spilled 
byproduct material safely and using proper decontamination procedures; and administering 
dosages of radioactive drugs to patients or human research subjects.  
Work experience must involve a minimum of three cases in each of the following categories 
for which the individual is requesting AU status:  
(1) Oral administration of less than or equal to 1.22 GBq (33 mCi) of sodium iodide 131I, for 
which a written directive is required;  
(2) Oral administration of greater than 1.22 GBq (33 mCi) of sodium iodide 131I;  
(3) Parenteral administration of any radioactive drug that contains a radionuclide that is 
primarily used for its electron emission, beta radiation characteristics, alpha radiation 
characteristics, or photon energy of less than 150 keV, for which a written directive is 
required.  
The AU candidate must have written attestation that the individual has satisfactorily 
completed the training and is able to independently fulfill the radiation safety-related duties 
as an AU for the medical uses for which the individual is requesting AU status from either a 
preceptor AU who meets the requirements from the NRC or equivalent AS requirements, or a 
residency program director who affirms in writing that the attestation represents the 
36 
consensus of the residency program faculty where at least one faculty member is an AU who 
meets the requirements.  
6.5. 
Radiopharmaceutical therapy 
A negative serum beta-hCG pregnancy test must be documented in the patient's chart for all 
potentially childbearing individuals who are under 50 years old when receiving therapeutic 
radiopharmaceuticals. The pregnancy test must be within one week of the sodium iodide 131I 
therapy. A pregnancy test is not necessary if the patient has had a remote bilateral tubal 
ligation or hysterectomy. 
6.5.1.  Oral 131I NaI 
Training for the oral administration of sodium iodide 131I requiring a written directive in 
quantities less than or equal to 1.22 GBq (33 mCi)  
The licensee shall require a written directive dated and signed by an AU for the oral 
administration of all 131I quantities greater than 1.11 MBq (30 µC). Additionally, 131I 
quantities less than or equal to 1.22 GBq (33 mCi) must have a written directive by a 
physician who is certified by a medical specialty board whose certification process has been 
recognized by the NRC or an AS, or has successfully completed 80 hours of classroom and 
laboratory training, applicable to the medical use of sodium iodide 131I for procedures 
requiring a written directive.  
Training for the oral administration of sodium iodide 131I requiring a written directive in 
quantities greater than 1.22 GBq (33 mCi)  
The licensee shall require an authorized user for the oral administration of sodium iodide 131I 
requiring a written directive in quantities greater than 1.22 GBq (33 mCi) to be a physician 
who fulfils the same requirements as that for less than 1.22 GBq (33 mCi).  
6.5.1.1  Inpatient 
A patient treated with therapeutic ionizing radiation as an inpatient should be treated in a 
room with appropriate shielding, such as lead or concrete. Where shielding is not available, a 
corner, private hospital room not next to a stairwell or open area is optimal. The head of the 
bed should be positioned against the outside wall. Additional protection can be achieved by 
placing a shield between the door and the patient. 
Before a patient is dosed, the room should be prepared. Signage indicating a radiation hazard 
and “no housekeeping services” should be placed on the door. Linen and trash hampers are 
placed inside the room. All surfaces the patient may frequently touch, such as the toilet, 
faucet handles, phone, and bedrails, should be wrapped in plastic. Materials used in the care 
of the patient are left in the room for the entire hospital stay. 
As much as possible, healthcare workers and visitors should minimize their contact with the 
patient’s body fluids. To minimize fluid exposure, managing nausea and preventing emesis, 
which are common side effects of sodium iodide 131I therapy, are important. Hospitals may 
ask patients receiving sodium iodide 131I to handle their own urine collection and 
37 
measurement, so that staff members need not have close contact with the fluid. Male patients 
should be instructed to sit while voiding, and all patients should be instructed to flush the 
toilet twice, with the lid closed, to reduce the risk of aerosolization. Vigorous hydration is 
highly encouraged because it hastens biologic elimination. Because sweat is a source of 
contamination, patients can be encouraged to take frequent showers as tolerated for the first 
two weeks after treatment. 
In the event of cardiac arrest or other medical emergencies, staff should follow the facility’s 
specific protocols. When a patient receiving sodium iodide 131I is at immediate risk of death 
or severe harm, many facilities relax their radiation restrictions and allow the patient to be 
moved away from the shielded room. When administering cardiopulmonary resuscitation to a 
radioactive patient, staff members should be cautious and use appropriate barriers. 
Visitor safety is promoted by prohibiting pregnant visitors and visitors younger than 18 years. 
State regulations and hospital policies vary, but visits typically are limited to 30 minutes and 
require that visitors maintain a distance of at least 6 feet from the patient. 
The patient and room should be surveyed with dosimeters at prescribed points at least daily. 
Surveys include points where care is provided, such as 1 meter from the patient’s chest, each 
side of the bed, the foot of the bed, and the doorway. In addition, the visitor chair, the inside 
and outside of the door, and the adjacent patient wall should be surveyed. When survey 
readings at 1 meter from the patient’s chest are 7 mrem per hour or less, the patient is 
considered generally safe for discharge. However, the discharge criteria may vary from state 
to state and from facility to facility. 
6.5.1.2. Outpatient 
NRC regulations allow sodium iodide 131I patients to be released following treatment when 
the radiation dose to third parties is not likely to exceed 500 mrem (5 mSv). (An average 
person receives about 300 mrem [3 mSv] each year from natural and background radiation.) 
The regulations assume the dose would apply principally to the patient’s family or other 
caregivers during the first few days the patient spends at home following treatment. 
Accordingly, treating physicians are required to consider the patient’s living conditions and 
provide instructions for avoiding unnecessary exposure to others. 
The NRC strongly discourages medical licensees who conduct outpatient treatment of thyroid 
patients with sodium iodide 131I from recommending patients stay at hotels immediately after 
treatment. 
The NRC also reminds treating physicians to inquire about the patient’s intended destination 
following treatment so that appropriate instructions may be given on how to manage 
exposure to others. If a patient is adamant about not being hospitalized or not going to a 
private residence and plans to go to an alternative location such as a hotel, treating physicians 
must still provide adequate instructions on how the patient can keep radiation doses to others 
as low as possible. 
38 
  
 
 
6.5.1.3. Release criteria 
 
Licensees are allowed to authorize the release from their control of any individual who has 
been administered radiopharmaceuticals or permanent implants containing radioactive 
material if the total effective dose equivalent to any other individual from exposure to the 
released individual is not likely to exceed 5 mSv (0.5 rem) or if the activity administered is 
no greater than the activity in column 1 of Table 7 below. The licensee must provide the 
released individual with instructions, including written instructions, on actions recommended 
to maintain doses to other individuals as low as reasonably achievable if the total effective 
dose equivalent to any other individual is likely to exceed 1 millisievert (0.1 rem).  
 
Table 7. Activities and dose rates for authorizing patient releasea (Adapted from: U.S. 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, April 1997 Revision 0, Regulatory Guide, Office of 
Nuclear Regulatory Research, Regulatory Guide 8.39 Release of Patients Administered 
Radioactive Materials)  
 
  Column 1  
Activity at or below which patients 
may be released 
Column 2   
Dose rate at 1 meter, at or below 
which patients may be releasedb 
Radionuclide  (GBq) (mCi) (mSv/hr) (mrem/hr) 
64Cu  8.4 230 0.27 27 
123I  6.0 160 0.26 26 
125I implant  0.33 9 0.01 1 
131I  1.2 33 0.07 7 
111In  2.4 64 0.2 20 
99mTc  28 760 0.58 58 
201Tl  16 430 0.19 19 
90Y  N/Ac N/A N/A N/A 
 
aThe activity values were computed based on 5 mSv (0.5 rem) total effective dose 
equivalent.  
bIf the release is based on the dose rate at 1 meter in column 2, the licensee must maintain a 
record as required by 10 CFR 35.75(c) because measurement includes shielding by tissue. 
See Regulatory Position 3.1, “Records of Release,” for information on records.  
cActivity and dose rate limits are not applicable in this case because of the minimal exposures 
to members of the public resulting from activities normally administered for diagnostic or 
therapeutic purposes.  
 
If the dose to a breastfeeding infant or child could exceed 1 mSv (0.1 rem), assuming there 
was no interruption of breastfeeding, the instructions shall also include: (1) guidance on the 
interruption or discontinuation of breastfeeding and (2) information on the potential 
consequences of failure to follow the guidance. The licensee must maintain a record of the 
basis for authorizing the release of an individual for 3 years after the date of release, if the 
total effective dose equivalent is calculated by: (1) using the retained activity rather than the 
activity administered, (2) using an occupancy factor less than 0.25 at 1 meter, (3) using the 
biological or effective half-life, or (4) considering the self-shielding by tissue.  
 
  
6.5.2.  Parenteral therapy (alpha, beta) 
Training for the parenteral administration of unsealed byproduct material requiring a written 
directive  
The licensee shall require an AU for the parenteral administration requiring a written 
directive to be a physician who is an AU or maintains equivalent AS requirements, or, 
alternatively, a physician certified by a medical specialty board whose certification process 
has been recognized by the NRC or AS and who has successfully completed training 
applicable to parenteral and work experience under the supervision of an AU who meets the 
requirements for parenteral administrations.  
The work experience must involve ordering, receiving, and unpacking radioactive materials 
safely and performing the related radiation surveys; performing quality control procedures on 
instruments used to determine the activity of dosages and performing checks for proper 
operation of survey meters; calculating, measuring, and safely preparing patient or human 
research subject dosages; using administrative controls to prevent a medical event involving 
the use of unsealed byproduct material; using procedures to contain spilled byproduct 
material safely and using proper decontamination procedures; and administering dosages to 
patients or human research subjects that include at least three cases of the parenteral 
administrations. 
Also required is written attestation that the individual is able to independently fulfill the 
radiation safety-related duties as an AU for the parenteral administration of unsealed 
byproduct material requiring a written directive. The attestation must be obtained from either 
a preceptor AU or a residency program director who affirms in writing that the attestation 
represents the consensus of the residency program faculty where at least one faculty member 
is an AU.  
6.6.  
Radiopharmacy ("hot lab") 
Licensed materials must be secured, either by storage in a locked room (such as the nuclear 
pharmacy or “hot lab”) or by constant surveillance (such as in imaging rooms in which 
patient dosages may be located). The hot lab is used to receive, store, and/or prepare 
radiopharmaceuticals that are administered to patients for nuclear radiology studies.  
An important component of the hot lab is the dose calibrator, which measures radioactivity in 
vials, syringes, capsules, etc. The calibrator is often placed behind a lead or leaded-glass 
shield to minimize radiation exposure to the individual while they are working with 
radioactivity. Patient dosages and shielded vials are also generally placed and/or stored 
behind this shield.  
40 
6.6.1.  Safe procedures 
Safety instruction 
A licensee shall provide radiation safety instruction, initially and at least annually, to 
personnel caring for patients or human research subjects who cannot be released. To satisfy 
this requirement, the instruction must include patient or human research subject control; 
visitor control, including routine visitation to hospitalized individuals; contamination and 
waste control; notification of the RSO or their designee; and an AU if the patient or the 
human research subject has a medical emergency or dies. A licensee shall retain a record of 
individuals receiving instruction. 
Safety precautions 
For each patient or human research subject who cannot be released, a licensee shall quarter 
the patient or the human research subject either in a private room with a private sanitary 
facility or with another individual who also has received therapy with unsealed byproduct 
material and who also cannot be released. Also, the licensee must visibly post the patient's or 
the human research subject's room with a “Radioactive Materials” sign, note on the door or in 
the patient's or human research subject's chart specifying where and how long visitors may 
stay in the patient's or the human research subject's room. The licensee must either monitor 
material and items removed from the patient's or the human research subject's room to 
determine that their radioactivity cannot be distinguished from the natural background 
radiation level or handle the material and items as radioactive waste. The licensee shall notify 
the RSO, or their designee, and the AU as soon as possible if the patient or human research 
subject has a medical emergency or dies. 
6.6.2.  Generator systems 
6.6.2.1. Elution 
Eluting the generator 
The procedures for elution are designed to provide a sterile, pyrogen-free product suitable for 
human injection or for compounding into other radiopharmaceutical preparations. Because 
the design of individual commercial generators varies, the precise methods used for their 
elution will also vary.  
6.6.2.2. Quality control 
Permissible molybdenum-99, strontium-82, and strontium-85 concentrations  
A licensee may not administer to humans a radiopharmaceutical that contains: 
• More than 0.15 kBq of 99Mo per MBq of 99mTc (0.15 uCi of 99Mo per mCi of 99mTc); 
or 
41 
• More than 0.02 kBq of 82Sr per MBq of 82Rb chloride injection (0.02 uCi of 82Sr per 
mCi of 82Rb chloride); or  
• More than 0.2 kBq of 85Sr per MBq of 82Rb chloride injection (0.2 uCi of 85Sr per 
mCi of 82Rb).  
The eluates from each generator should be measured to demonstrate compliance. For 
82Sr/82Rb generators, the concentration of radionuclides 82Sr and 85Sr should be measured 
before the first patient of the day. The licensee shall report by telephone any measurement 
within 7 calendar days after discovery that an eluate exceeded the permissible concentration 
listed. 
The licensee shall submit a written report to the NRC within 30 calendar days after discovery 
of an eluate exceeding the permissible concentration at the time of generator elution. The 
written report must include the action taken by the licensee, the patient dose assessment, the 
methodology used to make this dose assessment if the eluate was administered to a person, 
and the probable cause and an assessment of failure in the licensee's equipment, procedures 
or training that contributed to the excessive readings if an error occurred in the licensee's 
breakthrough determination. 
68Ga can be produced in a cyclotron or by the elution of a 68Ge/68Ga generator. 68Ge/68Ga 
generators are similar to conventional 99Mo/99mTc and 82Sr/82Rb generators. Like 99Mo/99mTc 
and 82Sr/82Rb generators, breakthrough of the parent radionuclide is possible when eluting the 
generator. This could lead to 68Ge contaminating the 68Ga radiopharmaceutical and 
potentially causing an unnecessarily high radiation exposure to patients. However, no similar 
limit of breakthrough is specified for 68Ge/68Ga generators and applicants must commit 
individually to safety protocols to the NRC.  
6.6.3.  Recordkeeping 
Each record required must be legible throughout the specified retention period. The record 
may be the original or a reproduced copy. The record may be stored in electronic media with 
the capability for producing legible, accurate, and complete records during the required 
retention period. Records, such as letters, drawings, and specifications, must include all 
pertinent information, such as stamps, initials, and signatures. The licensee shall maintain 
adequate safeguards against tampering with and loss of records. 
Each licensee shall report by telephone to the NRC any lost, stolen, or missing licensed 
material that becomes known to the licensee if it appears to the licensee that an exposure 
could result to persons in unrestricted areas. Each licensee is required to make a written 
report within 30 days after making the telephone report setting forth the following 
information:  
• A description of the licensed material involved, including kind, quantity, and 
chemical and physical form. 
• A description of the circumstances under which the loss or theft occurred. 
• A statement of disposition, or probable disposition, of the licensed material involved. 
42 
• Exposures of individuals to radiation, circumstances under which the exposures 
occurred, and the possible total effective dose equivalent to persons in unrestricted 
areas. 
• Actions that have been taken, or will be taken, to recover the material. 
• Procedures or measures that have been, or will be, adopted to ensure against a 
recurrence of the loss or theft of licensed material. 
Each licensee shall submit a written report within 30 days after learning of any of the 
following occurrences: doses in excess of any of the occupational dose limits for adults or 
minors, the limits for an embryo/fetus of a declared pregnant individual, or the limits for an 
individual member of the public.  
Each licensee shall submit a written report within 30 days after learning of excesses of 
radiation air emissions, or excessive radiation in a restricted space, or 10 times the limits of 
an unrestricted area.  
Reports should include individual dose estimates; levels of radiation involved; the cause of 
the elevated exposures, dose rates, or concentrations; and corrective steps taken or planned to 
ensure against a recurrence. For occupationally overexposed individuals, their name, Social 
Security account number, and date of birth should be included and clearly labeled with 
"Privacy Act Information: Not for Public Disclosure." 
Records of authority and responsibilities for radiation protection programs 
A licensee shall retain a record of actions for 5 years for the RSO and radiation program 
changes. The record must include a summary of the actions taken and a signature of licensee 
management. The licensee shall retain a copy of the duties and responsibilities of the RSO 
and must include a copy of the previous and current radiation safety procedures. 
Records of written directives 
A licensee shall retain a copy of each written directive for 3 years. 
Records of calibrations of instruments used to measure the activity of unsealed byproduct 
material 
A licensee shall maintain a record of instrument and radiation survey calibrations for 3 years. 
The records must include the model and serial number of the instrument, the date of the 
calibration, the results of the calibration, and the name of the person who performed the 
calibration.  
Records of dosages of unsealed byproduct material for medical use 
43 
A licensee shall maintain a record of dosage determinations for 3 years. The record must 
contain the radiopharmaceutical; the patient's name or identification number; the prescribed 
dosage; the determined dosage including date and time or a notation that the total activity is 
less than 1.1 MBq (30 µCi); and the name of the person who determined the dosage. 
Records of leaks tests and inventory of sealed sources and brachytherapy sources 
A licensee shall retain records of leak tests for 3 years. The records must include the model 
number and serial number if one has been assigned; the identity of each source by 
radionuclide and its estimated activity; the results of the test; and the name of the person who 
performed the test. A licensee shall retain records of the semi-annual physical inventory of 
sealed sources and brachytherapy sources for 3 years.  
Records of surveys for ambient radiation exposure rate 
A licensee shall retain a record of each survey required for 3 years. The record must include 
the date of the survey; the results of the survey; the instrument used to make the survey; and 
the name of the person who performed the survey. 
Records of the release of individuals containing unsealed byproduct material or implants 
containing byproduct material 
A licensee shall retain a record for 3 years of the basis for authorizing the release of an 
individual if the total effective dose equivalent is calculated by using the retained activity, 
rather than the activity administered, using an occupancy factor less than 0.25 at 1 meter, or 
using the biological or effective half-life. 
A licensee shall retain a record for 3 years that the instructions were provided to a 
breastfeeding individual if the radiation dose to the infant or child from continued 
breastfeeding could result in a total effective dose equivalent exceeding 5 mSv (0.5 rem). 