7. Emergency procedures, accidents/incidents, special circumstances 
This section covers medical/reportable events as defined by the NRC. It also addresses spills 
of radioactive materials and radiation accidents/incidents/disasters including “dirty bombs.”  
7.1 Medical events/reportable events 
The term “medical event” may sound alarming when used in nuclear radiology and radiation 
therapy. But it may not mean a patient has been harmed. It means there may have been a 
problem in a medical facility’s use of radioactive materials. These materials can help to 
diagnose and treat illnesses or be used in medical research. Small amounts can allow 
physicians to see certain organs. Images created using radioactive materials can help to find, 
identify, and measure tumors, or view problems in an organ’s structure or function. 
Radioactive materials can also kill cancerous tissue, shrink a tumor, or reduce pain.  
44 
NRC regulations aim to ensure that radioactive materials are used properly. This is also true 
when they are used in medical diagnosis, treatment, or research. The rules protect the safety 
of patients, medical workers, the public, and the environment. They define “medical event” in 
very specific terms. 
A “medical event” involving radioactive materials occurs if BOTH: 
1. The dosage given differs from the prescribed dose or dose that would have resulted 
from the prescribed dosage by more than 5 rem (0.05 Sv) effective dose equivalent, 50 
rem (0.5 Sv) to an organ or tissue, or 50 rem (0.5 Sv) shallow dose equivalent to the 
skin. AND 
2. One or more of the following incidents occur: 
• The dosage given is off by at least 20% from the prescribed dosage, either too 
high or too low. 
• The wrong drug is used. 
• The drug is given by the wrong route. 
• The wrong individual receives the dosage. 
• A dosage is administered to the wrong part of the body and exceeds by 50% or 
more the dosage that area should have received. 
• A sealed source used in the treatment leaks. 
The NRC requires reporting because a medical event shows the licensee had a problem in 
administering the physician’s (AU’s) prescription. The problem may have been technical or a 
quality assurance issue. Dosage errors may be a sign of problems in the medical facility’s 
operations. But there is no scientific basis to conclude that such an error results in harm to a 
patient. 
To know if a patient has been harmed, the physician (AU) must do more analysis. Harm may 
come from too high a dosage. But it could also result from inadequate treatment when a 
dosage is too low. 
The NRC also analyzes each event to see if further action is needed. If there is a violation of 
the regulations, the NRC might take enforcement action. The agency will also look for trends 
to see if something in NRC regulations or guidance may need to be clarified. 
Severe events are rare. An example would be a dosage error that is well over 20% too high or 
too low. In severe events, an independent medical consultant will assess the patient’s risk of 
harm. 
In all cases, a “medical event” indicates potential problems in a facility’s use of radioactive 
materials. It does not necessarily result in harm to a patient. But the NRC’s rules are designed 
so events are reported to the NRC and the public. Even when there is no harm to a patient, the 
NRC protects the public health and safety. 
45 
  
 
 
 
7.2 Radiation spills  
 
The decision to implement a major spill procedure instead of a minor spill procedure 
depends on many incident-specific variables, such as the number of individuals affected, 
other hazards present, likelihood of contamination spread, and types of surfaces contaminated 
as well as the radiotoxicity of the spilled material. For some spills of short-lived 
radionuclides, the best spill procedure may be restricted access pending complete decay.  
 
To determine whether a major or minor spill procedure should be implemented, take the 
following steps, using Table 8 for guidance:  
• Estimate the amount of radioactivity spilled. 
• Initiate a major or minor spill procedure based on the listed dividing line.  
• Spills above these millicurie amounts are considered major, below are considered 
minor. 
• Note that some spills require evacuation of the area. 
 
Table 8. Spill levels of common radioisotopes 
 
Unsealed Radionuclides 
in Clinical Nuclear 
Radiology 
Minor Spill 
(< mCi) 
Major Spill 
(>= mCi) 
Evacuate Level 
(mCi) 
Actinium-225 (225Ac) n/a Any n/a 
Lead-212 (212Pb) n/a Any n/a 
Radium-223 (223Ra) n/a Any n/a 
Xenon-133 (133Xe) [gas] n/a n/a Any 
Iodine-131 (131I) 1 1 n/a 
Yttrium-90 (90Y) 1 1 n/a 
Lutetium-177 (177Lu) 2 2 n/a 
Copper-64 (64Cu) 10 10 50 
Gallium-67 (67Ga) 10 10 n/a 
Indium-111 (111In) 10 10 n/a 
Iodine-123 (123I) 10 10 15 
Rubidium-82 (82Ru) 10 10 50 
Gallium-68 (68Ga) 20 20 100 
Fluorine-18 (18F) 100 100 250 
Technetium-99m (99mTc) 100 100 400 
Thallium-201 (201Tl) 100 100 n/a 
 
7.2.1 Major spill – response and handling  
 
A. CLEAR THE AREA: Notify all persons not involved in the spill to vacate the room. 
B. PREVENT THE SPREAD: Cover the spill with absorbent paper, but do not attempt to 
clean it up. To prevent the spread of contamination, limit the movement of all personnel who 
may be contaminated. 
C. SHIELD THE SOURCE: If possible, shield the spill. This should be done only if it can be 
done without further contamination or a significant increase in radiation exposure. 
D. CLOSE THE ROOM: Lock or otherwise secure the area to prevent entry. 
E. CALL FOR HELP: Notify the RSO immediately. 
F. PERSONNEL DECONTAMINATION: Remove contaminated clothing and flush 
contaminated skin with lukewarm water and then wash with mild soap. If contamination 
remains, induce perspiration by covering the area with plastic. Then wash the affected area 
again to remove any contamination that was released by the perspiration. 
G. CLEANUP: The RSO will supervise the cleanup of the spill and will complete the 
Radioactive Spill Report and the Radioactive Spill Contamination Survey report forms. 
7.2.2 Minor spill – response and handling 
A. NOTIFY: Notify persons in the area that a spill has occurred. 
B. PREVENT THE SPREAD: Cover the spill with absorbent paper. 
C. CLEAN UP: Use disposable gloves and absorbent paper. Carefully fold the absorbent 
paper with the clean side out and place in a labeled plastic bag for transfer to a radioactive 
waste container. Also put contaminated gloves and any other contaminated disposable 
material in the bag. 
D. SURVEY: Check the area around the spill with a low-range radiation detection survey 
meter. Also check your hands, clothing, and shoes for contamination. 
E. REPORT: Report the incident to the RSO. 
F. DOCUMENT: Complete the Radioactive Spill Report and the Radioactive Contamination 
Survey forms. 
7.2.3 Surface contamination limits 
The amount of removable radioactive material per 100 cm2 of surface area should be 
determined by wiping that area with a filter or soft absorbent paper, applying moderate 
pressure, and assessing the amount of radioactive material on the wipe with an appropriate 
instrument of known efficiency. When removable contamination on objects of less surface 
area is determined, the pertinent levels should be reduced proportionally, and the entire 
surface should be wiped. Table 9 lists the maximum allowable surface contamination for 
different radionuclides in a restricted area.  
Table 9. Surface contamination levels in restricted areas 
Unsealed Radionuclide 
All alpha emitters 
Level (dpm/100 cm2) 
111In, 123I, 131I, 177Lu, 90Y 
200 
2,000 
67Ga, 99mTc, 201Tl 
20,000 
47 
7.2.4 Medical/Nonmedical emergencies (e.g., “dirty bomb”)  
Primary Response:  
Always address life- or limb-threatening medical situations first and foremost.  
Background 
A "dirty bomb" is a type of "radiological dispersal device" (RDD) that combines a 
conventional explosive, such as dynamite, with radioactive material. The terms dirty bomb 
and RDD are often used interchangeably. Most RDDs would not release enough radiation to 
kill people or cause severe illness – the conventional explosive itself would be more harmful 
to people than the radioactive material. However, an RDD explosion could create fear and 
panic, contaminate property, and require potentially costly cleanup. 
A dirty bomb is not a nuclear bomb. A nuclear bomb creates an explosion that is millions of 
times more powerful than a dirty bomb. The cloud of radiation from a nuclear bomb could 
spread thousands of square miles, whereas a dirty bomb’s radiation could be dispersed within 
a few blocks or miles of the explosion. A dirty bomb is not a "weapon of mass destruction" 
but a "weapon of mass disruption," where contamination and anxiety are the major 
objectives. 
Impact of a Dirty Bomb 
The extent of local contamination would depend on a number of factors, including the size of 
the explosive, the amount and type of radioactive material used, the means of dispersal, and 
weather conditions. Those closest to the RDD would be most likely to be injured by the 
explosion. As radioactive material spreads, it becomes less concentrated and less harmful. 
Prompt detection of the type of radioactive material used will greatly assist local authorities 
in advising the community on protective measures, such as sheltering in place or quickly 
leaving the immediate area. Radiation can be readily detected with equipment already carried 
by many emergency responders. Subsequent decontamination of the affected area may 
involve considerable time and expense. 
Immediate health effects from exposure to the low radiation levels expected from an RDD 
would likely be minimal. The effects of radiation exposure would be determined by:  
• The amount of radiation absorbed by the body. 
• The type of radiation (gamma, beta, or alpha). 
• The distance from the source of radiation to an individual. 
• The means of exposure – external or internal (absorbed by the skin, inhaled, or 
ingested). 
• The length of time exposed. 
48 
The health effects of radiation tend to be directly proportional to radiation dose. The higher 
the radiation dose, the higher the risk and severity of injury. 
Protective Actions 
In general, protection from radiation is afforded by:  
• Minimizing the time exposed to radioactive materials. 
• Maximizing the distance from the source of radiation. 
• Shielding from external exposure and inhaling radioactive material. 
Control of Radioactive Material 
Radioactive materials are routinely used at hospitals, research facilities, and industrial and 
construction sites. These radioactive materials are used for such purposes as diagnosing and 
treating illnesses, sterilizing equipment, and inspecting welding seams. The NRC and its 
Agreement States, which also regulate radioactive material, administer more than 22,000 
licenses of such materials. The majority of these materials would not be useful in an RDD. 
The NRC and its Agreement States have in place a multi-layered, comprehensive security 
program to protect these sources. This program has been effective, keeping incidents to a 
minimum and their consequences low. Most lost or stolen sources are quickly found, with 
little or no radiation exposure or contamination. The NRC continues to work at home and 
abroad to make risk-significant radiation sources even more secure. The United States was 
the first country to require enhanced security measures for radioactive sources, and the NRC 
continues to lead the world in source security. 
Other Contact Information 
A number of federal agencies have responsibilities for dealing with RDDs, including the 
Department of Homeland Security, Environmental Protection Agency, and Federal 
Emergency Management Agency. Their public affairs offices can answer questions on the 
subject or provide access to experts in and out of government.  
Accidents Involving Personal Injury 
For any accident involving personal injury, medical treatment or assistance will always be the 
first priority. This may involve administering first aid and/or calling 911 for emergency 
medical assistance. For accidents involving radioactive materials, contamination control and 
exposure control are important but should never delay or impede medical assistance. If 
radioactive materials are involved, emergency personnel should be notified before treatment 
takes place, so they can take appropriate action to protect themselves as well as prevent the 
spread of contamination. After the injured person is treated and removed from the accident 
site, the previously described procedures should be followed as appropriate. 
49 
Personal Contamination 
In the event of any personal contamination, laboratory personnel should follow these steps: 
1. Remove all contaminated laboratory personal protective clothing (lab coat, gloves, 
etc.).  
2. Wash the contaminated area with mild soap and water if possible. 
3. Monitor the contaminated area; repeat washing as necessary. 
Decontamination Procedures  
If surfaces or equipment within the laboratory are suspected or determined to be 
contaminated with radioactive material, the radionuclide user must initiate and complete 
appropriate decontamination procedures. For most relatively minor contamination incidents, 
the following general steps should be taken upon discovery of the contamination: 
1. Mark the perimeter of the contaminated area. 
2. Notify the RSO of the contamination so that their staff can more accurately assess 
the extent of the contamination and advise and assist in the decontamination effort. 
3. Assemble cleaning supplies (paper towels, detergent in water, plastic bags, and 
plastic gloves); proceed with scrubbing the area from the borders to the center, 
cleaning small areas at a time. 
4. Periodically monitor the effectiveness of the decontamination effort with surface 
wipes and portable instrument surveys; place all contaminated cleaning materials, 
including paper towels, rags, and gloves, in a plastic bag and label as "radioactive 
waste." 
5. Notify Environmental Health and Safety upon completion of the decontamination 
effort so that a follow-up contamination survey can be made. 
Acute Radiation Syndrome 
Acute Radiation Syndrome (ARS) is defined as radiation exposures that involve the 
following: 
• Acute high dose (>0.7 Gy) radiation exposure.  
• High dose rate in a short time interval. 
• External dose of penetrating radiation. 
• Greater than 70% of the body is exposed to the radiation (whole body exposure). 
Patients with ARS develop classic signs and symptoms that run a typical time course, 
regardless of the exposure dose. Patients undergo four phases during that time course: 
prodromal phase, latent phase, manifest illness, and recovery or death. With increasing doses, 
the time interval for each phase is shortened and the symptoms worsen. The signs, symptoms, 
and considerations for each phase are found in Figure 5. 
50 
Figure 5. The phases of acute radiation syndrome 
In the manifest illness phase of ARS, patients will experience symptoms consistent with the 
dose of radiation they were exposed to. These symptoms can be grouped into subsyndromes 
of ARS that correspond with the organ system or cell type that has been critically injured. 
They are hematopoietic subsyndrome (bone marrow toxicity), gastrointestinal subsyndrome 
(gastrointestinal stem cell toxicity), and neurovascular subsyndrome (neurovascular 
endothelial cell toxicity). Figure 6 describes these subsyndromes in more detail, including the 
doses at which they manifest and patient symptoms. 
Figure 6. Acute radiation subsyndromes 
The estimated LD50/60 of acute, whole-body, low-LET irradiation is 3.5 to 4.0 Gy without 
medical intervention. However, swift medical intervention can increase the likelihood of 
survival. Administering antibiotics and supportive treatment can increase the LD50/60 to 4.5 to 
7 Gy, and intensive care, reverse isolation, and hematopoietic cell transplantation can 
potentially increase it to 7 to 9 Gy. 
51 
FDA-approved treatments generally target hematopoietic subsyndrome effects; however, new 
treatments are looking at gastrointestinal subsyndrome as well. The following colony 
stimulating factors (CSF) have been approved for ARS treatment: 
• Filgramostim (NeupogenⓇ) 
• PEGylated filgramostim (NeulastaⓇ) 
• Sargramostim (LeukineⓇ) 
These agents predominantly promote neutrophil recovery, while sargramostim also promotes 
additional bone marrow cell lineages. The FDA has also approved a thrombopoietin (TPO) 
receptor activator that promotes megakaryocytes and platelets for ARS treatment: 
romiplostim (NplateⓇ). 
A logical thought is that stem cell transplant would be an appropriate treatment for 
hematopoietic subsyndrome. Unfortunately, historical data on the use of stem cell transplants 
is limited and mixed with a very low and questionable success rate. 
In addition to these targeted therapies, treatment of ARS depends on careful management of 
patients susceptible to infection, bleeding, nutritional deficiencies, and electrolyte 
abnormalities. Consequently, treatment often involves IV fluids/electrolytes, blood products 
(irradiated and leukocyte-reduced to prevent infection and graft versus host disease), and 
antimicrobial prophylaxis. 