Embolization with N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate: Properties, Techniques, Applications, and PitfallsRadioGraphics
RadioGraphics | 2026-05-01 | Vol 46 | Issue 5
DOI: 10.1148/rg.250122
RadioGraphics URL: https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/10.1148/rg.250122

Authors: Hyo-Cheol Kim, Shiro Miyayama, Jin Woo Choi, Do Hoon Kim, Myungsu Lee, Saebeom Hur, Hwan Jun Jae, Jin Wook Chung

ARTICLE PROSE

Get full access to this article and get full access to this article. GET ACCESS ALREADY A SUBSCRIBER? SIGN IN AS AN INDIVIDUAL OR VIA YOUR INSTITUTION

FIGURE CAPTIONS

1.

2. Figure 1. Chemical structure of NBCA. The polymerization of NBCA is initiated by means of contact with the anion. This reaction involves the anionic polymerization mechanism, whereby the cyano group acts as an electron acceptor, initiating the chain reaction.

3. Figure 2. (A) Drawing illustrates the pressure-dependent injection of glue in a patient with arterial bleeding in the colon. A microcatheter is advanced until it is wedged within a small bleeding vessel. The glue effectively reaches the bleeding site, with partial spillage into the bowel lumen, leading to hemostasis. (B) Drawing illustrates the flow-dependent injection of glue in a patient with arterial bleeding in the colon. If blood flow is slow and a high concentration of glue (eg, mixed ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol, 1: 2) is used, the glue may not reach the bleeding point and thus reflux around the microcatheter tip. If blood flow is fast and a low concentration of glue (eg, mixed ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol, 1: 6) is used, the glue can reach the bleeding point. Movie 1 shows how blood flow and glue concentration affect the distribution of glue during flow-dependent injection.

4. Figure 3. (A) Drawing illustrates the flow-dependent injection of glue in a patient with variceal bleeding. Distribution of the glue mixture is largely dependent on blood flow speed, injection speed, and the NBCA-to-Lipiodol ratio. (B) Drawing illustrates flow-controlled injection with a microballoon catheter. Movie 1 illustrates the differences in glue distribution patterns achieved with the flow-dependent versus flow-controlled injection method. Movie 2 shows how to mix NBCA and Lipiodol and how to mix NBCA, Lipiodol, and ethanol (NLE).

5. Figure 4. Hematochezia in a 65-year-old man with gastric cancer. Dorsal pancreatic angiogram shows a large pseudoaneurysm (arrowhead). Movie 3 demonstrates glue embolization of the pseudoaneurysm and proximal artery after coil embolization of the distal vessel.

6. Figure 5. Arterial bleeding of the colon in a 70-year-old man. Superior mesenteric angiogram shows active bleeding (black arrowhead) from a small colonic branch (white arrowhead). The bleeding vessels were catheterized via the right colic artery (black arrow) rather than the mid-colic artery (white arrows) due to the acute angulation of the mid-colic vessel. Movie 4 shows glue embolization performed by using superselective catheterization to control the gastrointestinal bleeding.

7. Figure 6. Hemoptysis in a 76-year-old man with a history of pulmonary tuberculosis 50 years earlier. Chest CT (not shown) revealed bronchiectasis and a fibrotic lesion in the left upper lobe of the lung. (A) Bronchial angiogram shows mild hypertrophy of the left bronchial artery and opacification of a peripheral pulmonary artery (arrow). (B) Spot image after glue embolization of the left bronchial artery shows a glue cast in the left bronchial artery (arrowheads). Note the small glue cast (arrow) at the point of the shunt between the bronchial artery and pulmonary artery. The mixing ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol was 1:4.

8. Figure 7. Hemoptysis in an 82-year-old woman with alcohol misuse who had undergone radioembolization treatment for a 3-cm hepatocellular carcinoma 1 month earlier. Chest CT (not shown) did not show any thoracic abnormalities such as bronchiectasis, consolidation, pulmonary embolism, or bronchial artery hypertrophy. Bronchoscopy (not shown) revealed a small endobronchial lesion with active bleeding that was resistant to epinephrine spray. Bronchial angiogram shows an abnormally entangled vascular structure (arrows) around the left bronchus. Movie 5 shows glue embolization performed to treat an entangled vascular structure.

9. Figure 8. Postpartum bleeding in a 33-year-old woman. The left uterine artery was embolized with gelatin sponge particles. Note the contrast medium leakage in the uterine cavity (arrow). Movie 6 illustrates the technique of using the glue mixture in a bullet-like manner for embolization of an inaccessible vessel.

10. Figure 9. Pedal AVM in a 26-year-old woman. (A) Calf angiogram shows an AVM (arrow) and early draining tibial veins. (B) Selective angiogram of the posterior tibial artery shows an AVM with early draining veins. Note the microcatheter tip (arrow) near the nidus. (C) Spot image from fluoroscopy shows the NBCA-Lipiodol mixture injected into the feeder of the AVM. The mixing ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol was 1:4. Note the microcatheter tip (arrow) near the nidus. Two feeders were treated with NBCA; 5% ethanolamine oleate was then directly injected percutaneously into the venous sac with a 21-gauge needle (not shown). (D) Final angiogram of the posterior tibial artery (arrow) shows complete disappearance of the AVM. Note the intact dorsalis pedis artery (arrowhead).

11. Figure 10. Ten-centimeter radioembolization in a 49-year-old man who had undergone the first session of chemoembolization 1 month earlier. (A) Common hepatic angiogram shows multiple residual tumor blushes (curved arrows). Subsegmental portal vein invasion (arrowhead) led to an arterioportal (AP) shunt, which appeared as early opacification of the portal vein (straight arrows) during arterial phase angiography. (B) Selective angiogram shows subsegmental portal vein invasion (arrowhead) and early opacification of the portal vein (black arrows). Note the microcatheter tip (white arrow). (C) Fluoroscopic image obtained during injection of NBCA shows a microcatheter tip (arrow) and a glue cast in the AP shunt (arrowheads). (D) Angiogram after AP shunt embolization shows a dense tumor blush (arrows) and a subtraction artifact of NBCA cast (arrowhead). Movie 7 shows glue embolization performed to occlude the arteriovenous shunt before chemoembolization, leading to dense Lipiodol accumulation in the tumor.

12. Figure 11. Renal cell carcinoma in a 74-year-old man. (A) CT scan shows a large tumor (arrowheads) in the right kidney. (B) Right renal angiogram shows an extensive tumor blush (arrowheads). Note the early opacification of the inferior vena cava (arrow). (C) Spot image shows a glue cast in the right renal artery (arrowheads). The mixing ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol was 1:6.

13. Figure 12. Nineteen-centimeter hepatocellular carcinoma in a 63-year-old man. Radioembolization was rejected due to a high lung shunt fraction, and chemoembolization was requested. (A) Selective angiogram of hepatic artery segment VI shows a large tumor blush (arrowheads). (B) Selective angiogram of segment VI after particle embolization shows a vascular lake (arrowheads) that was not seen on the initial angiogram. Movie 8 illustrates the use of glue embolization to treat a vascular lake that could not be effectively managed with large gelatin sponge particles.

14. Figure 13. Cholangiocarcinoma in a 57-year-old man. (A) Portal venogram shows the normal portal vein. Note the drainage tube in the right biliary duct. (B) Spot image shows the right portal vein filled with NBCA. The right anterior and posterior portal veins were embolized by using 500–710-μm PVA particles until noticeably reduced blood flow was achieved. The right anterior portal vein was embolized with glue, and the right posterior portal vein was blocked with a 12-mm type II vascular plug (arrow). The right posterior portal vein and puncture tract (arrowheads) were then embolized with glue. The mixing ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol was 1:5.

15. Figure 14. Liver cirrhosis and duodenal varix in a 65-year-old woman. (A) Axial CT scan shows a duodenal varix (arrow) and patent paraumbilical vein (arrowhead). (B) Duodenal venogram obtained via access of the paraumbilical vein shows a sheath and 5F catheter (open arrowheads) inserted via the paraumbilical vein and a microcatheter (solid arrowhead) advanced into the duodenal vein. The duodenal varix (solid arrow) and efferent vein (ie, gonadal vein, open arrow) are draining into the inferior vena cava. Movie 9 demonstrates glue embolization of a duodenal varix accessed via the paraumbilical vein.

16. Figure 15. Liver cirrhosis and rectal varix in a 69-year-old woman. (A) Inferior mesenteric angiogram shows the rectal varix (arrow). Note the catheter tip (arrowhead) in the inferior mesenteric vein. (B) Inferior mesenteric angiogram shows the mixture of contrast medium, sclerosing agent (sodium tetradecyl sulfate), and gelatin sponge particles injected into the inferior mesenteric vein with an occlusion balloon catheter (arrowhead). The rectal varix (arrow) is filled with sclerosing agent. (C) Inferior mesenteric angiogram shows the NLE mixture (mixing ratio, 2:4:1) (black arrows) injected into the proximal inferior mesenteric vein. The far proximal inferior mesenteric vein was then embolized with coils (white arrow). The balloon catheter (arrowhead) was deflated and removed immediately after coil placement.

17. Figure 16. Type 2 endoleak after endovascular aneurysm repair in an 81-year-old man. (A) Axial CT scan shows an endoleak (arrow) in the abdominal aorta aneurysmal sac. Note the inferior mesenteric artery (arrowhead). (B) Selective angiogram of the left internal iliac artery shows a connecting channel between the lumbar artery (arrow) and internal iliac artery. Movie 11 shows endoleak embolization performed with superselective catheterization of the lumbar artery and the NLE mixture. (C) Axial CT scan 1 month after embolization of the endoleak shows the glue material in the abdominal aorta aneurysmal sac (solid arrow) and left lumbar artery (open arrow). Note the coil (arrowhead) in the inferior mesenteric artery.

18. Figure 17. Chylothorax in a 64-year-old man after lung cancer surgery. A microcatheter (open arrow) was inserted into the thoracic duct. Note the right (solid arrowhead) and left (open arrowhead) ampullae draining into the bilateral subclavian vein and the leakage of contrast medium (black arrow) from a small tributary (white arrow) of the thoracic duct. Movie 12 illustrates glue embolization following superselective catheterization of the small tributary.

19. Figure 18. Inguinal lymphatic leakage in a 72-year-old man after femorofemoral bypass surgery. Contrast medium was injected through a 24-gauge needle into the upstream lymph node (arrowhead). Contrast medium leakage (arrow) was noted. Movie 13 illustrates embolization of a lymphatic leak performed by injecting glue into a lymph node.

20. Figure 19. Gastric varix in a 60-year-old man. (A) Spot image obtained during balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration shows a mixture of contrast medium and sclerosing agent (sodium tetradecyl sulfate) in the gastric varix (arrowheads) and NLE (mixing ratio, 2:6:1) in the gastrorenal shunt (black arrows). Note the balloon catheter (white arrow). (B) Spot image after removal of the balloon catheter shows the contrast medium–sclerosing agent mixture (arrowheads) and NLE mixture (arrows). The balloon catheter was removed 15 minutes after injection of the NLE mixture.

21. Figure 20. Uterine cervical cancer in a 47-year-old woman with bloody drainage after undergoing wide pelvic excision and colectomy 7 days previously to treat recurrent tumor. Left inferior gluteal angiogram shows a very thin bleeding vessel (arrow) and extravasation of contrast medium (arrowhead). Movie 15 illustrates glue injection through a 1.7F microcatheter positioned at the orifice of the bleeding vessel.

22. Figure 21. Retroperitoneal hemorrhage from the left adrenal artery in a 74-year-old woman. (A) Coronal CT scan shows a pseudoaneurysm (arrow) of the left adrenal artery. Note the large retroperitoneal hematoma (H). (B) Selective angiogram of the left adrenal artery shows a pseudoaneurysm (arrow) caused by a tortuous vessel. Movie 16 illustrates a two-step glue injection for embolization when superselective catheterization cannot be performed.

23. Figure 22. Gastric cancer in a 65-year-old man who underwent gastrectomy 2 days previously and subsequently had a cardiac arrest. CT scan shows extravasation of contrast medium (arrows) from the splenic artery (arrowhead). Movie 17 illustrates prompt hemostasis with glue embolization in the setting of massive bleeding that necessitated urgent embolization.

24. Figure 23. Septic arthritis of the right hip in a 62-year-old woman. CT (not shown) showed a pseudoaneurysm within the iliacus muscle. Right internal iliac angiogram shows a large pseudoaneurysm (arrow) supplied by a bleeding branch (arrowhead). Movie 18 illustrates intermittent visualization of the culprit vessel of a large pseudoaneurysm at angiography, highlighting the importance of using a careful technique during glue embolization owing to the potential for reflux during diastole.

25. Figure 24. Cholangiocarcinoma in a 59-year-old man. (A) Portal venogram shows the intact left portal vein after the right anterior and right posterior portal veins were embolized with 355–500-μm PVA particles and the right anterior portal vein (arrowhead) was embolized with glue. Note the drainage tubes in the right and left biliary ducts (arrows). (B) Spot image immediately after embolization of the right posterior portal vein and puncture tract with glue shows washout of glue in the right posterior portal vein (arrows) and migration of glue into the main portal vein (white arrowhead). Note the retained glue in the right anterior portal vein (black arrowhead). The mixing ratio of NBCA to Lipiodol was 1:4. It was presumed that an iatrogenic anteroposterior shunt developed at the sheath insertion site and that arterial inflow into the portal vein following sheath removal contributed to the migration of glue into the main portal vein. (C) Spot image 1 minute after embolization of the right posterior portal vein and puncture tract with glue shows washout of glue in the right posterior portal vein (arrows) and migration of glue into the left portal vein (white arrowheads). Note the retained glue in the right anterior portal vein (black arrowhead). Movie 19 illustrates removal of the glue mixture that migrated into the left portal vein with use of a 7F guiding catheter, stone basket, and clot retrieval stent. (D) Photograph shows the glue mixture removed from the left portal vein. The left portal vein was fully recovered, and the patient underwent right hemihepatectomy 1 month later.

26. Figure 25. Common bile duct carcinoma in a 55-year-old man. (A) Axial CT scan 7 days after surgical resection shows a small pseudoaneurysm (arrow) in front of the pancreas body. Movie 20 illustrates how, in the presence of collateral inflow, contrast medium may reach the target, whereas high-viscosity glue may not, leading to incomplete embolization. (B) Angiogram shows a 1:3 mixture of NBCA and Lipiodol injected through a 21-gauge needle after percutaneous puncture of the pseudoaneurysm, resulting in embolization of the pseudoaneurysm (arrow) and adjacent vessels (arrowhead).
