Male breast disease 
Gynecomastia 



Gynecomastia: Bilateral MLO mammogram shows a flame-shaped density in the right breast (arrows) in the subareolar region representing gynecomastia. The left breast is 
normal. 
Ultrasound (top image) shows a fan-shaped geographic region of hypoechogenicity (arrows) surrounded by normal breast tissue. 
• 
Gynecomastia is the benign development of glandular tissue in a male. It is the most common diagnosis of males evaluated for a focal breast complaint and clinically presents with a subareolar palpable abnormality. 

• 
Gynecomastia may be idiopathic or be due to cirrhosis, drugs (e.g., antihypertensives and antidepressants), marijuana, pituitary hormone dysfunction, or a hormone-producing tumor. 

• 
The typical mammographic appearance is a flame-shaped or triangular subareolar density with interspersed fat. Mammography is usually diagnostic, but familiarity with the ultrasound appearance is also important as it may be the first exam performed in very young patients. Ultrasound often shows a hypoechoic or heterogeneous echotexture region centrally behind the nipple that is disc or fan shaped. 


Breast: 436 

Male breast cancer 


Male breast cancer: Left MLO and CC views to evaluate a palpable finding (marked cutaneously by the triangle) show a round mass (arrows) with obscured margins in the slightly upper 
outer breast. Ultrasound shows a round 
mass with an angular margin (red arrow) and heterogeneous echo pattern. 

• Male breast cancer accounts for less than 1% of all breast cancers. It tends to affect men greater than 60 years of age and clinically presents as a palpable mass or less commonly, nipple discharge. Because the male breast lacks lobules, invasive ductal carcinoma is the 
most common pathological diagnosis in men. 

• 
Risk factors include age, elevated estrogen levels (e.g., Klinefelter syndrome, liver disease, alcohol use, obesity), BRCA2 mutation, family history, and radiation exposure. 

• 
Most breast cancers in men present mammographically as a high density non-calcified irregular mass. They are typically eccentric to the nipple or associated with nipple retraction if retroareolar. In contrast to the more vague, ill-defined hypoechoic area behind the nipple seen on ultrasound with gynecomastia, breast cancers most often present as discrete irregular hypoechoic masses with angular, microlobulated or spiculated margins. 


Benign male breast masses 
• The most common benign breast mass in a male is a lipoma. Other very rare benign entities include myofibroblastoma, granular cell tumor, hemangioma and schwannoma. 
Breast: 437 


