Obstetrical Imaging Ellen X. Sun, Junzi Shi, Robin Perlmutter-Goldenson, Mary C. FratesFirst trimester pregnancy ......................325 Imaging of the early pregnancy ...................... 325 Pregnancy dating ............................................ 326 Early pregnancy prognosis .............................. 327 Ectopic pregnancy ........................................... 328 Miscellaneous first trimester disorders .......... 331 Multiple gestations and placentation............. 333 Complications of monochorionic twins .......... 336 Evaluation of the first trimester embryo ........ 338 Second and third trimesters..................339 Second and third trimester measurements .... 339 Evaluation of the cervix in second and third trimesters ....................................................... 341 Umbilical cord ................................................. 342 Amniotic fluid ................................................. 343 Placenta .......................................................... 344 Fetal hydrops .................................................. 347 Fetal brain ....................................................... 348 Fetal spine....................................................... 352 Fetal face ........................................................ 353 Fetal thorax..................................................... 354 Fetal heart ...................................................... 356 Fetal abdomen ................................................ 359 Fetal genitourinary ......................................... 361 Fetal musculoskeletal imaging ........................ 364 Trisomies and syndromes ............................... 365 First trimester pregnancy 
Imaging of the early pregnancy 
Gestational sac 
  
The gestational sac is first seen at 5 weeks of gestational age by transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS). A gestational sac is usually seen transvaginally if the  -hCG is greater than 2000 mIU/mL. However, use caution when using this discriminatory value as there are exceptions such as in multiple gestations. 

  
With a positive pregnancy test and normal adnexae, any round or oval fluid collection in the uterus is overwhelmingly likely to represent a very early intrauterine pregnancy (IUP). 

  
The mean sac diameter (MSD) is the average diameter of the gestational sac measured in three orthogonal planes (L x W x H)/3). The MSD is not routinely measured but may be 


helpful in assessing viability. 
If the MSD measures 8 mm by TVUS, a yolk sac should be visible. If a yolk sac is not present, the pregnancy 
is unlikely to be successful. 
If the MSD measures 16 mm, a live embryo should be visible. If an embryo is not seen when the MSD is 16 24 mm, the pregnancy is suspicious for but not diagnostic of failed pregnancy. If the MSD measures 25 mm or greater and no embryo is seen, it is diagnostic of failed pregnancy. 
 A subchorionic hematoma is a complication of early pregnancy caused by bleeding of the 
chorionic attachment. A small subchorionic hematoma adjacent to the gestational sac is of no clinical significance. In general, as size of the subchorionic hematoma increases, the risk of pregnancy loss increases. However, 
the extent of the gestational sac surrounded by hematoma is more predictive of pregnancy loss than 
volume of the hematoma. 
Yolk sac 
  
The yolk sac is normally seen by 5.5 weeks. 

  
An abnormally large (>5 mm) yolk sac increases the risk of failed pregnancy. 


Embryo and heartbeat 
  
The embryo is first visualized adjacent to the yolk sac by about 6 weeks, at which time the heartbeat is present as a flickering motion. 

  
It is unusual to see an embryo with a measurable crown-rump length (CRL) but without a heartbeat. No heartbeat with a CRL <7 mm is suspicious for, though not diagnostic of, failed pregnancy. 

  
No heartbeat with a CRL =7 mm is diagnostic of 


Normal embryo (measuring 3.7 mm) and yolk sac. 
failed pregnancy. This embryo had normal heart rate of 112 bpm. 
  If the early heart rate is less than 90 bpm, there is very little chance that the pregnancy will be successful. There is no such thing as a  too fast  heart rate. In fact, embryos with a faster 
heart rate have the highest chance of normal outcome. 
If the CRL is =4 mm, =90 bpm is considered slow and =100 is normal. If the CRL is =5 mm, =110 bpm is considered slow and =120 is normal. 

Embryo and heartbeat (continued) 
  Heart rate is measured using M-mode. 

Normal heart rate: 
M-mode shows a calculated heart rate of 112 bpm, which is normal in this 6-week embryo with a 3 mm crown-rump length. 
Amnion 
  The amnion is visible by TVUS beginning around 7 weeks. 

Pregnancy dating 
Dating convention 
  Gestational age is calculated from the first day of the last menstrual cycle, not from conception. Therefore, a  six week  pregnancy has really only existed for four weeks. For IVF patients with a precisely known implantation date, two weeks are added to be consistent with the dating of spontaneous pregnancies. 
Assigning gestational age 
  Between 5 and 6 weeks gestation, gestational age is determined based on three typical appearances of the early pregnancy. 
Gestational sac only: 5.0 weeks. Gestational sac with a yolk sac, but without an embryo: 5.5 weeks. Gestational sac with an embryo <3 mm and heartbeat: 6 weeks. 
  
For embryos =3 mm in length, the CRL is used to assign gestational age using established reference tables. The CRL can be used to estimate gestational age up to 12 weeks. After 12 weeks, dating is estimated using multiple fetal measurements. 

  
The only ways to reliably know a precise gestational age are if a previous ultrasound was performed to establish dating, or the patient underwent in vitro fertilization with a known 


embryo transfer date. 

Early pregnancy prognosis 
  The following sonographic findings are diagnostic of failed pregnancy: 
Crown rump length =7 mm with no heartbeat. Mean sac diameter =25 mm with no embryo. No embryo with heartbeat =2 weeks after a scan that showed a gestational sac without a yolk sac. No embryo with heartbeat =11 days after a scan that showed a gestational sac with a yolk sac. 
Sagittal grayscale ultrasound shows a flattened intrauterine gestational sac with yolk sac and a 7 mm embryo but no heartbeat in the lower uterine segment. These findings are diagnostic of failed pregnancy in this patient who presented with heavy vaginal bleeding. 
  The following findings are suspicious for, but not diagnostic of, failed pregnancy: 

Crown rump length <7 mm with no heartbeat. Mean sac diameter of 16 24 mm with a yolk sac but no embryo. An empty amnion with yolk sac and no embryo. Small gestational sac relative to the embryo (<5 mm difference between the MSD and CRL). 
  Other worrisome findings which increase the risk of a spontaneous pregnancy loss even in 
the presence of a heartbeat: 
Bradycardia <90 bpm. 
Irregular heartbeat. Enlarged yolk sac >5 mm. 
Lagging embryo size relative to gestational age. Sliding gestational sac. Subchorionic hematoma surrounding >50% the circumference of the gestational sac. 

Sagittal grayscale ultrasound shows an intrauterine gestational sac with an enlarged yolk sac, a worrisome finding. 

Ectopic pregnancy 
 rule-out ectopic  patient (newly positive pregnancy test and pain or bleeding) 

consider heterotopic pregnancy (very rare) 
no IUP 
any noncystic adnexal mass normal separate from adnexa the ovary 




5-33% risk of ectopic   if patient stable,   follow up US performed 
Overview of ectopic pregnancy 
  
Ectopic pregnancy is defined as pregnancy outside of the endometrial cavity. Hemorrhage and resultant hypovolemic shock may be life-threatening to the mother. 

  
The classic clinical presentation of ectopic pregnancy is a positive pregnancy test, vaginal bleeding, pelvic pain, and tender adnexal mass. This presentation is seen in less than 50% of patients. 


Risk stratification 
  
Any woman with a newly positive pregnancy test and either pain or bleeding is classified as a rule-out ectopic or clinically suspected ectopic patient. 

 A 
rule-out ectopic patient may have an intrauterine pregnancy (IUP), ectopic pregnancy, or spontaneous abortion. The IUP may be normal, abnormal, or too early to detect. 

  
The role of imaging is to determine if an IUP is present and to evaluate the common 


locations (especially the adnexae) where an ectopic may potentially be found. 

Definite diagnoses are the exception 
  
It is often not possible to definitively diagnose ectopic pregnancy, except when an extrauterine gestational sac containing either yolk sac or embryo is seen. 

  
Any extra-ovarian adnexal mass in the absence of an IUP is highly suspicious for ectopic pregnancy. 

  
A suspected ectopic pregnancy should prompt careful clinical management and close 


imaging follow-up. Meanwhile, any round or oval cystic space in the endometrium is likely to represent a gestational sac. 
Ectopic location 

abdominal interstitial, 

tubal: ~95%
(rare) including cornual 

  
Most (~95%) ectopic pregnancies occur in the fallopian tube, with the ampullary segment being the most common site. 

  
It is rare for an ectopic pregnancy to be in the ovary (<1% of all ectopics). 

  
An especially dangerous location for an ectopic pregnancy is the interstitial (intrauterine) portion of the fallopian tube, because of the lack of early symptoms. An interstitial ectopic 


carries an especially high risk of catastrophic hemorrhage due to its propensity for delayed 
uterine rupture and proximity to the ovarian vessels. Ultrasound of an interstitial ectopic shows absent myometrium along the lateral edge. The interstitial line sign represents a thin, echogenic line extending from the endometrial canal to the center of the interstitial ectopic mass. This echogenic line is thought to represent the medial, nondistended interstitial portion of 
the tube. 
  A heterotopic pregnancy is a simultaneous IUP and ectopic pregnancy. Patients undergoing assisted reproductive techniques are at increased risk for heterotopic pregnancy. In these patients, the adnexae must be carefully evaluated even in the presence of an IUP. 

Heterotopic pregnancy: Transverse grayscale ultrasound with Doppler overlay (left image) demonstrates a normal intrauterine pregnancy and a second, eccentrically located gestational sac (arrows) with live embryo abutting the left adnexa, possibly within a rudimentary uterine horn or cornua. This is better depicted on the 3D rendering on the right. A cornual pregnancy was confirmed on laparoscopy. 
  Ectopic pregnancy may also occur (rarely) in a prior myomectomy scar, in the cervix, or in the abdomen. When in the abdomen, the ectopic pregnancy can become large before causing symptoms. 
Imaging findings of tubal ectopic pregnancy 

Adnexal ectopic: Sagittal grayscale endovaginal ultrasound of the uterus (left image) shows a normal uterus, with no evidence of intrauterine pregnancy. Ultrasound of the adnexa (right image) shows an adnexal ring (yellow arrows), discrete from the normal ovary. In a patient with a suspected ectopic, the presence of an adnexal ring and no intrauterine pregnancy has a 95% positive predictive value of being an ectopic pregnancy. 
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women s Hospital. 
  
Tubal ectopic pregnancy can have the following imaging appearances: 

1.
 Absence of an IUP. 

2.
 Extrauterine gestational sac separate from the ovary which can present as a tubal ring or adnexal ring. The presence of yolk sac, embryo, and cardiac activity is variable. 

3.
 Ill-defined, inhomogeneous adnexal mass separate from the ovary. 

4.
 Pelvic free fluid only. 



  
In the absence of an IUP, an extrauterine gestational sac and tubal/adnexal ring have high positive predictive values for ectopic pregnancy (>95%). 

  
An extrauterine gestational sac with yolk sac or embryo (with or without heartbeat) has a 100% positive predictive value of being an ectopic. 

  
The nonspecific ring of fire sign describes increased peripheral color Doppler flow surrounding an adnexal mass. This sign is rarely helpful as it can be seen in both ectopic 


pregnancy and corpus luteum. 
  In a rule-out ectopic patient, an ovarian mass is almost always a corpus luteum rather than an ectopic pregnancy unless a definite embryo or yolk sac is identified. In contrast, an extra- ovarian mass is highly concerning for an ectopic. When an adnexal mass is seen, it is helpful to gently apply pressure with the ultrasound probe and assess for movement of the mass separate from the ovary to identify its true location. 
Following serial hCG 
intrauterine pregnancy: ectopic pregnancy: spontaneous abortion:  -hCG rises exponentially  -hCG plateaus  -hCG falls 

  The pattern of  -hCG levels over time may be a helpful adjunct to imaging in following-up the rule-out ectopic patient. 
Caesarian section scar implantation 
  
Caesarean section scar is typically located in the low anterior uterine segment. Implantation of the embryo at this location is not considered an ectopic pregnancy due to being within the uterus. However, this condition is life-threatening. 

  
Abnormal endometrium at the scar results in invasion of the myometrium by the 


trophoblastic tissue, leading to high risk of placenta accreta and associated uterine rupture. 

Sagittal grayscale ultrasound of the uterus demonstrates a gestational sac with yolk sac in the anterior lower uterine segment, centered at the site of a prior C-section scar. 


Miscellaneous first trimester disorders 
Gestational trophoblastic disease 
  
Gestational trophoblastic disease results from abnormal neoplastic overgrowth of the placental trophoblast and includes a spectrum of benign and malignant entities. 

  
There are three stages of gestational trophoblastic disease: complete hydatidiform mole, invasive mole, and choriocarcinoma. 

  
Complete hydatidiform mole does not contain any fetal parts. It is caused by loss of the 


egg s DNA prior to fertilization by the sperm and has a diploid karyotype of 46,XX (most commonly) or 46,XY. A complete mole may become invasive and progress to metastatic 
choriocarcinoma. 
  
The classic clinical presentation of molar pregnancy is hyperemesis, markedly elevated  -hCG, and an enlarged uterus. The patient may also present with painless vaginal bleeding. 

  
On ultrasound, molar disease causes uterine enlargement with a classic heterogeneous and multicystic bunch of grapes appearance. Visualization of fetal parts suggests a partial mole (see below). 



Sagittal grayscale ultrasound of the uterus demonstrates a large multicystic mass with internal vascularity (Doppler not shown) in the endometrial cavity. The appearance is consistent with gestational trophoblastic disease. 
  
Molar pregnancy is associated with theca lutein cysts in the ovaries, which arise in response to elevated  -hCG. 

  
Treatment of a molar pregnancy is endometrial suction curettage and close follow-up of serum hCG levels for 6 months. 


Gestational trophoblastic disease (continued) 
  
Invasive mole is characterized by trophoblastic proliferation invading into the myometrium or (rarely) beyond the uterus. Diagnosis is made with color Doppler showing abnormal blood flow in myometrium. 

  
Choriocarcinoma is a rare malignant trophoblastic disease which may occur after a hydatidiform mole, normal pregnancy, ectopic or failed pregnancy. Diagnosis is made based on the presence of metastatic disease. 

  
Partial hydatidiform mole is a triploid pregnancy. It is usually caused by two sperm fertilizing the same egg and results in the triploid karyotype of 69,XXX, 69,XXY, or 69,XYY. Partial mole is less likely to progress to choriocarcinoma. A triploid pregnancy has severe 


fetal anomalies and an abnormal placenta. The imaging appearance of the placenta mimics a complete mole. 
Retained products of conception (RPOC) 

Retained products of conception: Sagittal grayscale ultrasound through the uterus demonstrates an echogenic mass within the endometrial cavity (arrows). Color Doppler shows vascularity within the mass. These imaging findings are highly suggestive of RPOC. Retained products of conception were proven at curettage. 
Case courtesy Julie Ritner, MD, Brigham and Women s Hospital. 
  
Retained products of conception (RPOC) is placental or fetal tissue that remains in the uterus after delivery, miscarriage, or termination. 

  
Untreated RPOC can lead to continued maternal bleeding and endometritis. 

  
The sonographic findings of an endometrial blood clot and RPOC can overlap. However an endometrial mass, with or without Doppler flow, in the appropriate clinical context is strongly suggestive of RPOC. 

  
A linear endometrium without blood flow has a high negative predictive value and is highly unlikely to contain RPOC. 



Multiple gestations and placentation 
  
The placentation type (chorionicity and amnionicity) substantially affects the risk for pregnancy complications and influences how closely the pregnancy should be followed. The placentation should always be stated when first describing a multiple gestation. 

  
The zygosity (number of fertilized eggs) cannot be determined by ultrasound. Monozygotic twins can have any placentation type, depending on when the developing zygote splits. Dizygotic twins, however, are always diamniotic/dichorionic, and only dizygotic twins can be different sexes. 


Monozygotic ( identical ) twins arise from a single egg fertilized with a single sperm. Dizygotic ( fraternal ) twins arise from two individually fertilized eggs. 
  
For the purposes of imaging and pregnancy management, chorionicity and amnionicity are utilized rather than zygosity. 

  
Chorionicity is the number of placentas. 


Monochorionic twins share a single placenta. Dichorionic twins have separate placentas. 
  Amnionicity is the number of amnions. 
Monoamniotic twins share a single amniotic sac and must therefore share the placenta. Diamniotic twins each have a separate amniotic sac and may or may not share their placenta. The number of amniotic sacs usually correlates with the number of yolk sacs. 
  By convention, chorionicity is stated before the amnionicity when stating the placentation. For instance, the abbreviation mono/di refers to monochorionic/diamniotic twins. 
Overview of complications by placentation type 
  
The more that the twins share, the greater the risk of complications. 

  
Di/di twins have an increased risk of premature delivery and low birth weight compared to singleton gestations. 

  
Mono/di twins have an increased risk of complications related to a shared placenta, including twin-twin transfusion, acardiac twin syndrome, and twin embolization. 

  
In addition to being at risk for the same complications as mono/di twins, mono/mono twins are also at risk for cord entanglement and being conjoined. 


Early counting of multiple gestations 
  If two separate gestational sacs are identified, the placentation is di/di. The zygosity is indeterminate. 
Although dizygotic twins are always di/di, early splitting of a single fertilized egg can also lead to di/di monozygotic twins. 
  If a single gestational sac contains two yolk sacs, the placentation is mono/di, and the twins are monozygotic. 
Dizygotic ( fraternal ) twins dizygotic twins 
  
Dizygotic twins result when two eggs are each fertilized by a different sperm. 

  
Dizygotic twins are always dichorionic/diamniotic. 





dichorionic, diamniotic (100%) 
Monozygotic ( identical ) twins 
monozygotic twins (single egg fertilized with a single sperm) 




dichorionic 
split 0 4 days 
diamniotic 
(33% of all monozygotic twins) 
(dual placentas, 
embryo still in fallopian tube 

dual amnions) 
up to blastomere stage 

split 4 8 days 

monochorionic after implantation in uterus (66% of all monozygotic twins) 
diamniotic after di erentiation of 
(shared placenta, cytotrophoblast and 
dual amnions) syncytiotrophoblast (future placenta) 

split >8 days 

monochorionic (1% of all monozygotic twins) 

monoamniotic after development of 
(shared placenta, chorion and amnion shared amnion) 
  Monozygotic twins are the result of splitting of the blastocyst or embryo, formed by fertilization of a single egg by a single sperm. Although  identical  monozygotic twins are always the same sex, they may not be identical phenotypically due to local differences in the 
uterine and placental environment. 
  
33% split early (0 4 days), before formation of either the placenta or amnion, leading to dichorionic/diamniotic twins. 

  
66% split intermediate (4 8 days), after formation of the placenta but before the amnion has developed), leading to monochorionic/diamniotic twins. 

  
1% split late (>8 days), after formation of the chorion and amnion, leading to monochorionic/monoamniotic twins. Very late splitting may result in conjoined twins, which are always monochorionic/monoamniotic. 


Di/di (dichorionic/diamniotic) twins 
  
Di/di twins each have a separate placenta and amniotic sac. 

  
On ultrasound, two placentas can usually be separately identified in the second trimester. 

  
The inter-twin membrane will be relatively thick as there are two layers of chorion and two layers of amnion separating each twin. 

  
In the second and third trimesters, the thickness of the inter-twin membrane is less reliable to determine chorionicity because the membrane becomes thinner as gestation progresses. 

  
The twin peak sign (also called lambda sign) represents a triangle-shaped placental infolding at the interface of the placenta and the thick inter-twin membrane that is seen in di/di twins. The twin peak sign is most useful when it is difficult to distinguish two placentas. 

  
If the twins are different sexes, they must be dizygotic twins, which are always di/di. 



Grayscale ultrasound demonstrates the twin peak or lambda sign (arrow) seen with dichorionic/diamniotic twins, where the inter-twin membrane is thickened at the placental junction and tapers to a point, resulting in a 
triangular morphology. 
Mono/di (monochorionic/diamniotic) twins 
  
Mono/di twins share a placenta, but have separate amniotic sacs. 

  
The shared placenta is usually apparent on ultrasound in the second trimester. 

  
The inter-twin membrane is thin, as it is composed of only two layers of amnion. This membrane meets the placenta in a T-shape configuration. 



Grayscale ultrasound of monochorionic/ diamniotic twins shows a thin inter-twin membrane (yellow arrows) which 
inserts on the placenta in a T-shape 
configuration (red arrow). 
Mono/mono (monochorionic/monoamniotic) twins 
  
Mono/mono twins share both a placenta and a single amniotic sac with no intervening membrane between the twins. Intertwined cords are diagnostic of mono/mono placentation when seen. 

  
Isolated lack of visualization of an inter-twin membrane is not sufficient to diagnose mono/ mono twins. If no inter-twin membrane (or intertwining cord) is seen, then the amnionicity cannot be determined. Because mono/mono twins are so rare, it is more common to have mono/di twins with non-visualization of the inter-twin membrane. 


Conjoined twins 
  Conjoined twins are caused by late (>13 days) incomplete division of embryo. 

Complications of monochorionic twins 
Twin embolization syndrome 
  
When one monochorionic twin dies in utero, the surviving twin is at risk for twin embolization syndrome, which can cause CNS, gastrointestinal, or renal infarcts. 

  
In general, prognosis for a surviving monochorionic twin is very poor when one twin dies in utero. In contrast, prognosis is generally good for a surviving dichorionic twin when one twin 


dies in utero. 
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) 
  
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a complication of monochorionic twins (either mono- or diamniotic) and is the result of abnormal vascular communications in the single shared placenta, with disproportionate blood flow between the fetuses. 

  
The donor twin transfers excess blood flow to the recipient twin. The donor twin is small and has oligohydramnios. The recipient twin is larger and has polyhydramnios. 

  
There are three criteria to diagnose TTTS by ultrasound: 


1) Single shared placenta (monochorionic). 
2) Disproportionate fetal sizes, with at least 25% discrepancy. 
3) Disproportionate amniotic fluid, with the small twin having oligohydramnios and the large twin having 
polyhydramnios. 
  There is a spectrum of severities of TTTS. In the earliest stages, the donor twin s bladder is still visible and amniotic fluid discrepancy is mild. Later stages are marked by absent bladder, marked fluid discrepancy, fetal hydrops or death. 

Ultrasound of monochorionic/diamniotic twins: Grayscale image with Doppler overlay (left) of twin #1 at level of the pelvis shows normal appearance of two umbilical arteries, but no visualization of the bladder. Twin #1 also has moderate oligohydramnios with the amnionic membrane  stuck  to the body (yellow arrow), and size discrepancy by gestational age. Twin #2 (right image) has a large bladder (red arrow) and mild polyhydramnios. These findings are suggestive for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. 
 A 
stuck twin describes severe oligohydramnios in the donor (small) twin. A stuck twin has so little amniotic fluid that the amnion is wrapped around the twin like shrink wrap. 

  
Treatment options of TTTS include laser ablation of placental arteriovenous connections, therapeutic amniocentesis from the recipient (large, poly) twin, or selective coagulation of the umbilical cord of the less viable twin. 


Acardiac twin 

Acardiac twin: Grayscale ultrasound with Doppler overlay of monochorionic/diamniotic twins: Color Doppler and waveform (left image) demonstrates reversed flow in the umbilical vessels of the acardiac 
(recipient) twin, with arterial flow into the fetus (yellow arrows) and venous flow towards the placenta (not shown). Also note diffuse body wall edema (red arrows). Color Doppler of the donor twin (right image) shows normal umbilical arterial flow out of the fetus. 
  
Acardiac twinning, also called twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence, is a severe variant that occurs when there is arterial-arterial communication in the shared placenta, causing reversed umbilical arterial flow in the recipient, acardiac twin. Similar to TTTS, acardiac twinning is a complication of monochorionic twins (either mono- or diamniotic). 

  
In acardiac twins, the donor fetus supplies circulation to itself and an acardiac twin, which has rudimentary or no development of structures above the thorax. 

  
Doppler of the umbilical arteries and vein shows reversed direction of flow in the acardiac twin. 


Normally, the umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood out of the fetus, pumped by the fetal heart. In the acardiac twin, the umbilical arteries carry nutrient-depleted, poorly-oxygenated blood into the fetus, pumped by the donor twin s heart. Doppler of the acardiac twin s umbilical arteries show an arterial waveform going into the fetus. 
Normally, the umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood into the fetus, from the placenta. In the acardiac twin, the umbilical vein carries deoxygenated blood out of the fetus, still pumped by the donor heart. Doppler of the acardiac twin s umbilical vein shows a venous waveform going out of the fetus. 
The entire circulation of both twins is maintained by the single donor fetus. 
  Treatment is coagulation of the acardiac twin s umbilical cord. 

Evaluation of the first trimester embryo 
  The first trimester embryo is too small for a complete fetal survey; however, a few key anatomic structures can be identified and evaluated. 
Crown-rump length (CRL) 
  The crown-rump length (CRL) is used to assign gestational age from 6 12 weeks. Measuring the CRL is straightforward in the first trimester as the fetus cannot flex or extend the neck. 
Nuchal translucency 
high-contrast nuchal setting 



  
Increased thickness of the nuchal translucency is associated with increased risk of Down syndrome and other chromosomal abnormalities. With a fixed false-positive rate of 5%, nuchal translucency alone can detect approximately 2/3 of cases of trisomy 21. 

  
The nuchal translucency must be measured properly to obtain an accurate value. 

  
Nuchal translucency is measured at 11 14 weeks, when CRL is between 45 and 85 mm. Measurement is adjusted for gestational age and combined with maternal serum testing to 


calculate an overall risk of aneuploidy. 
  
Regardless of gestational age correction, a nuchal translucency =3 mm is associated with a 6-fold increased risk of aneuploidy and alone warrants further diagnostic workup. 

  
An abnormally thickened nuchal translucency can also indicate congenital heart disease in an euploid fetus. 


Prosencephalon and rhombencephalon 
  By 8 weeks, the forebrain (prosencephalon) can be distinguished from the hindbrain (rhombencephalon). Both prosencephalon and rhombencephalon are hypoechoic, although 
the rhombencephalon is much more prominent. Absence of these structures may be the 
earliest finding of anencephaly. 

Grayscale ultrasound of an embryo (calipers) show a normal hypoechoic/ anechoic rhombencephalon (arrow). 


