Patterns of lung disease 
Essential anatomy 
Secondary pulmonary lobule (SPL) 
acinus, not visible on CT (approximately 12 per secondary lobule) 


1 cm 
2 cm 
3 cm 
approximate scale 

• 
The secondary pulmonary lobule (SPL) is the elemental unit of lung function. 

• 
Each SPL contains a central artery (the aptly named centrilobular artery) and a central bronchus, each branching many times to ultimately produce acinar arteries and respiratory bronchioles. 


On CT, the centrilobular artery is often visible as a faint dot. The centrilobular bronchus is not normally 
visible. The acinus is the basic unit of gas exchange, containing several generations of branching respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli. 
There are generally 12 or fewer acini per secondary lobule. 
• 
Pulmonary veins and lymphatics collect in the periphery of each SPL. 

• 
Connective tissue, called interlobular septa, encases each SPL. 


Thickening of the interlobular septa can be seen on CT and suggests pathologic enlargement of either the venous or lymphatic spaces, as discussed on subsequent pages. 
• Each SPL is between 1 and 2.5 cm in diameter. 


Abnormalities of the secondary pulmonary lobule 
Consolidation and ground glass 
• 
Consolidation and ground glass opacification are two very commonly seen patterns of lung disease caused by abnormal alveoli. The alveolar abnormality may represent either filling of the alveoli with fluid or incomplete alveolar aeration. 

• 
Consolidation can be described on either a chest radiograph or CT, while ground glass is generally reserved for CT. 

• 
Although consolidation often implies pneumonia, both consolidation and ground glass are nonspecific findings with a broad differential depending on chronicity (acute versus chronic) and distribution (focal versus patchy or diffuse). 


Consolidation 

Consolidation: Contrast-enhanced CT shows bilateral consolidative opacities, more densely consolidated on the left. There are bilateral air bronchograms. Although these imaging findings are nonspecific, this was a case of multifocal consolidative adenocarcinoma. 

• 
Consolidation is histologically due to complete filling of affected alveoli (commonly remembered as blood, pus, water, or cells). 

• 
Pulmonary vessels are not visible through the consolidation on an unenhanced CT. 

• 
Air bronchograms are often present if the airway is patent. An air bronchogram represents a lucent air-filled bronchus (or bronchiole) seen within a consolidation. 

• 
Consolidation causes silhouetting of adjacent structures on conventional radiography. 

• 
Acute consolidation is most commonly due to pneumonia, but the differential includes: 


Pneumonia (by far the most common cause of acute consolidation). Aspiration, consolidation may appear heterogeneous from mucus plugging. Pulmonary hemorrhage (primary pulmonary hemorrhage or aspiration of hemorrhage). Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is noncardiogenic pulmonary edema seen in critically 
ill patients and thought to be due to increased capillary permeability. Pulmonary edema may cause consolidation if severe. 
• The differential diagnosis of chronic consolidation includes: 
Adenocarcinoma, previously bronchioloalveolar carcinoma Lymphoma. Organizing pneumonia, which is a nonspecific response to injury characterized by granulation polyps 
which fill the distal airways, producing peripheral rounded and nodular consolidation. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, an inflammatory process characterized by eosinophils causing alveolar filling in an upper-lobe distribution. 


Ground glass opacification (GGO) 

Ground glass opacification: Noncontrast CT shows diffuse ground glass opacification (GGO). The pulmonary architecture, including vasculature and bronchi, can be still seen, which is characteristic for GGO. Although these imaging findings are nonspecific, this was a case of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). 

• 
Ground glass opacification is histologically due to either partial filling of the alveoli (by blood, pus, water, or cells), alveolar wall thickening, or reduced aeration of alveoli (atelectasis). 

• 
Ground glass is usually a term reserved for CT. CT shows a hazy, gauze-like opacity, through which pulmonary vessels are still visible. 

• 
Acute ground glass opacification has a similar differential to acute consolidation, since many of the entities that initially cause partial airspace filling can progress to completely fill the airspaces later in the disease. The differential of acute ground glass includes: 


Pulmonary edema, which is usually central or dependent. 
Pneumonia. Unlike consolidation, ground glass is more commonly seen in atypical pneumonia such as viral or Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia. Pulmonary hemorrhage, seen as pure ground glass in acute phase, but subacute phase shows peripheral 
sparing and crazy paving. Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). 
• Chronic ground glass opacification has a similar but broader differential diagnosis compared to chronic consolidation. In addition to all of the entities which may cause chronic consolidation, the differential diagnosis of chronic ground glass also includes: 
Lung adenocarcinoma, which can be focal or multifocal. Organizing pneumonia, typically presenting as rounded, peripheral opacities. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, usually with an upper-lobe predominance. Interstitial lung disease, including desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP), nonspecific interstitial 
pneumonia (NSIP), and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is a type III hypersensitivity reaction to inhaled organic antigens. In the subacute phase there is ground glass, centrilobular nodules, and mosaic attenuation. 
Peripheral ground glass or consolidation 


Coronal schematic demonstrates peripheral ground glass. 


• The differential diagnosis for peripheral consolidation or ground glass includes: 
Organizing pneumonia. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, typically with an upper lobe predominance. Pulmonary infarction. 
Interlobular septal thickening – smooth 

Schematic demonstrates smooth interlobular septal thickening. 
• 
Conditions that dilate the pulmonary veins cause smooth interlobular septal thickening. 

• 
By far the most common cause of smooth interlobular septal thickening is pulmonary edema; however, the differential diagnosis for smooth interlobular septal thickening is: 



Pulmonary edema. Lymphangitis carcinomatosis. 

Interlobular septal thickening – nodular, irregular, or asymmetric 


• Nodular, irregular, or asymmetric septal thickening tends to be caused by processes that infiltrate the peripheral lymphatics, most commonly by lymphangitic carcinomatosis and sarcoidosis: 
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis is tumor spread through the lymphatics. Sarcoidosis rarely causes septal thickening. 
Crazy paving 

Schematic demonstrates interlobular septal thickening and ground glass opacification. 
• 
Crazy paving describes interlobular septal thickening with superimposed ground glass opacification, which is thought to resemble the appearance of a stone path. 

• 
Although nonspecific, this pattern was first described for alveolar proteinosis, where the ground glass opacification is caused by filling of alveoli by proteinaceous material and the interlobular septal thickening is caused by lymphatics taking up the same material. 



• The differential diagnosis for crazy paving includes: 
Pulmonary edema, by far the most common cause. Pulmonary hemorrhage. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), an idiopathic disease characterized by alveolar filling by a 
proteinaceous substance. PAP is almost always seen with a crazy paving pattern. 
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia. 

Adenocarcinoma, uncommon cause Lipoid pneumonia, an inflammatory pneumonia caused by reaction to aspirated lipids, uncommon cause. 



Approach to multiple micronodules 
Centrilobular  Tree-in-Bud (Form of centrilobular)  Perilymphatic  Random  


Viral pneumonia Hypersensitivity pneumonitis Aspiration Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis Metastatic calcification 
Occasionally, pulmonary edema 
Infectious bronchiolitis:  Sarcoidosis  Hematogenous metastases  
Mycobacterial infections  Pneumoconiosis  Disseminated mycobacteria  
Viral infections  Lymphangitic carcinomatosis  Disseminated fungal infections  
Bacterial pneumonia  
Aspiration  
Rarely, lymphangitic  
carcinomatosis and vascular  
abnormalities (endovascular  
metastases and pulmonary  
arterial aneurysms)  


Centrilobular nodules 


• 
Centrilobular nodules represent opacification of and around the centrilobular bronchiole (or less commonly the centrilobular artery) at the center of each secondary pulmonary lobule. 

• 
On CT, multiple small nodules are seen in the centers of secondary pulmonary lobules. Centrilobular nodules never extend to the pleural surface. The nodules may be solid or of ground glass attenuation, and range in size from tiny up to a centimeter. 

• 
Centrilobular nodules may be caused by infectious or inflammatory conditions. 

• 
Infectious causes of centrilobular nodules include viral pneumonias. 

• 
The most common inflammatory cause of centrilobular nodules is hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), an exposure-related lung disease. 


HP is a type III hypersensitivity reaction to an inhaled organic antigen. The acute or subacute 
presentation of HP is primarily characterized by centrilobular nodules. Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis is a vascular pathology characterized by abnormal capillary proliferation leading to pulmonary hypertension. 
Viral pneumonias. 
Aspiration is dependent. 

Metastatic calcification most commonly occurs in the lung apices, typically in patients with renal failure. 
Perilymphatic nodules 

Perilymphatic nodules: Schematic of the secondary pulmonary lobule (left image) demonstrates gray nodules located along the bronchovascular bundle and white nodules located along the interlobular septa. 
Axial CT (right image) demonstrates multiple subpleural nodules and nodules along the bronchovascular bundles (arrows). This was a case of sarcoidosis. 
• 
Perilymphatic nodules follow the anatomic locations of pulmonary lymphatics, which can be seen in three locations in the lung: 

1.
 Subpleural. 

2.
 Peribronchovascular. 


3.
 Septal (within the interlobular septa separating the secondary pulmonary lobules). 



• 
Sarcoidosis is the most common cause of perilymphatic nodules, typically with an upper-lobe distribution. The nodules may become confluent creating the galaxy sign in which many tiny nodules surround a central lesion. 



Pulmonary sarcoidosis with galaxy sign: Axial and coronal CT images demonstrate extensive upper-lobe predominant confluent perilymphatic nodules. The galaxy sign is most apparent on the axial image, where the confluent nodules appear like the confluence of stars forming a galaxy. 
• The differential of perilymphatic nodules includes: 

Sarcoidosis. 

Pneumoconioses (silicosis and coal workers’ pneumoconiosis) are reactions to inorganic dust inhalation. The imaging may look identical to sarcoidosis with perilymphatic nodules, but there is usually a history of exposure (e.g., a sandblaster who develops silicosis). 

Lymphangitic carcinomatosis. 

Random nodules 


Random nodules: 
Schematic of the secondary pulmonary lobule (top left image) demonstrates nodules distributed randomly throughout the SPL. 
Schematic of the lungs (bottom left image) demonstrates nodules scattered randomly. Some of the nodules are in close contact with the pleural surface. 
Axial CT (top right image) demonstrates multiple random nodules. Some of the nodules abut the pleural surface. This was a case of metastatic colon cancer. 
• Randomly distributed nodules usually occur via hematogenous spread. The differential of random nodules includes: 
Hematogenous metastases. Disseminated mycobacteria. Disseminated fungal infection. 

• A miliary pattern is innumerable tiny random nodules the size of millet seeds. 

Miliary nodules: Axial CT shows innumerable tiny nodules distributed randomly throughout both lungs in a miliary pattern. This was a case of miliary tuberculosis. 
Case courtesy Ritu R. Gill, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women’s Hospital 

Tree-in-bud nodules 

Schematic shows several nodules centered on an opacified small airway. 
Tree-in-bud nodularity: Axial CT shows numerous small nodules (arrows) “budding” off of linear branching structures in the right middle lobe. This case was secondary to atypical mycobacteria. 
• 
Tree-in-bud nodules are multiple small nodules connected to linear branching structures, which resemble a budding tree branch in springtime. The linear branching structures represent mucus-impacted bronchioles, which are normally invisible on CT, and the nodules represent impacted terminal bronchioles. Tree-in-bud nodules are due to mucus, pus, or fluid impacting bronchioles and terminal bronchioles. 

• 
Tree-in-bud nodules are almost always associated with small airways infection or inflammation, such as endobronchial spread of tuberculosis. 

• 
The differential of tree-in-bud nodules includes: 


Mycobacterium tuberculosis and atypical mycobacteria. Viral pneumonia. Aspiration pneumonia. Rarely, lymphangitic carcinomatosis and vascular abnormalities (endovascular metastases and 
pulmonary arterial aneurysms). 



Cavitary and cystic lung disease 
Solitary cavitary nodule/mass 



Coronal schematic demonstrates a single cavitary lesion. 
• 
A cavitary lesion represents development of air within a pre-existing lesion (nodule, mass, or consolidation). It typically has a thick, irregular wall, often with a solid mural component. Although the findings of benign and malignant cavitary nodules overlap, a maximum wall thickness of =4 mm is usually benign and a wall thickness >15 mm is usually malignant. Spiculated margins also suggest malignancy. 

• 
A solitary cavitary lesion is most likely cancer or infection. 


Primary bronchogenic carcinoma. While both squamous cell and adenocarcinoma can cavitate, squamous cell cavitates more frequently. Small cell carcinoma is never known to cavitate. Tuberculosis classically produces an upper-lobe cavitary consolidation. Fungal pneumonia. Cavitary bacterial pneumonia. 
Multiple cavitary nodules 



Coronal schematic shows numerous cavitary lesions bilaterally. 
• The differential diagnosis for multiple cavitary lesions includes: 
Septic emboli, typically peripheral. Vasculitis, including granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA). Metastases, classically squamous cell carcinoma but any metastatic lesion can cavitate. 
Cystic lung diseases 

Coronal schematic shows numerous thin-walled cystic lesions bilaterally. 
• A cyst is an air-containing space with a thin wall. The differential diagnosis for multiple lung cysts includes: 


Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), a diffuse cystic lung disease due to smooth muscle proliferation of the distal airways. LAM causes uniformly distributed, thin-walled cysts in a diffuse distribution. It may be associated with chylous effusion, as demonstrated in the above right case. 
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis, which features irregular cysts and nodules predominantly in the upper lungs. 
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia (LIP), a rare disease usually associated with Sjögren syndrome and characterized by lymphocytic infiltrate and multiple cysts. 
Amyloid which appears similar to LIP. 

Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome which is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized by renal tumors (most commonly chromophobe renal carcinoma and renal oncocytoma), and renal and pulmonary cysts. Spontaneous pneumothoraxes can occur as a sequela of pulmonary cysts. 
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, which features cysts in late-stage disease. 
• 
Of note, it is important to distinguish cysts from emphysema. The latter typically does not have walls and may have central vessels, whereas cysts classically do not have anything inside. 

• 
The differential for a single cyst includes: 


Bulla. A bulla is an air-filled emphysematous space measuring >1 cm. A giant bulla occupies at least 30% of the volume of the thorax. 
Bleb. A bleb is an air-filled cystic structure contiguous with the pleura measuring <1 cm. Rupture of a bleb is the most common cause of spontaneous pneumothorax. 
Pneumatocele, which is an air-filled space caused by prior lung trauma or infection. 

Fibrotic changes 
Lower lobe fibrotic changes 
Coronal schematic shows basal-predominant Coronal CT shows bibasilar fibrosis and honeycombing 
fibrotic changes. (arrows), with relative sparing of the upper lobes. This was a case of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. 
• The differential diagnosis of basal-predominant fibrotic change includes: 
Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a clinical syndrome of progressive pulmonary fibrosis of unknown etiology and is the most common cause of basilar fibrosis. It almost always features basilar honeycombing. 
Other causes of UIP pattern, including rheumatoid arthritis and asbestosis. 
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) is a lung response to injury commonly associated with collagen vascular disease and drug reaction. NSIP typically produces peribronchial reticulation and traction bronchiectasis. Ground glass may be present. 
Upper lobe fibrotic changes 
Coronal schematic shows fibrotic changes in the Coronal CT shows upper-lobe predominant subpleural upper lobes. fibrosis and traction bronchiectasis. A pathologic diagnosis was not established in this case. 
• Although IPF is the most common cause of pulmonary fibrosis, fibrosis primarily affecting the upper lobes is typically caused by an alternative diagnosis, such as: End-stage sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis is a disease that primarily affects the upper lobes. The late stage of sarcoidosis leads to upper-lobe predominant fibrosis. 
Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. End-stage silicosis. The late stage of silicosis may lead to fibrosis with an upper lobe predominance. 


